GSU-TMINTRODUCTORY
PHYSICS II (1112)
Taha Mzoughi
Georgia State University

Georgia State University
GSU-TM-Introductory Physics II (1112)
Taha Mzoughi

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 02/11/2026

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/85442TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introductory Physics II Book
Licensing
Libre Texts
Licensing
1: Introduction to Physics and Measurements
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist
1.3: Measurements Uncertainty and Significant Figures
1.4: Units and Standards
1.5: Unit Conversion
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course
1.E: Practice
2: Math Review
2.1: Introduction
2.2: Geometrical Shapes
2.3: Triangles
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
2.5: Finding Angle Measurements
2.6: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
2.7: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities
2.7.1: Solving Linera Equations
2.7.2: Solving Inequalities
2.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations
2.7.4: Solving a System of Linear Equations
2.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer's Rule
2.8: Functions
2.8.1: Basic Functions
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
2.8.4: Properties_of_Logarithms
2.8.5: Exponential and Logarithmic Models
2.9: Vectors
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
2.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
2.9.5: Algebra of Vectors
2.9.6: Products of Vectors
2.9.7: Further Topics

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/854422.9.E: Practice
2.10: Vectors
3: Electric Charge and Electric Field
3.1: Introduction
3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation of Charge
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
3.4: Coulomb's Law
3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited
3.6: Electric Field Lines
3.7: Electric Forces in Biology
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
3.10: Practice
4: Electric Potential Energy, Electrical Potential or Voltage, and
Capacitance
4.1: Introduction to Electric Potential and Electric Energy
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical Potential Difference
4.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
4.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
4.5: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
4.6: Equipotential Lines
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
4.9: Energy Stored in Capacitors
4.E: Exercises
5: Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
5.1: Introduction
5.2: Current
5.3: Electrical Current
5.4: Model of Conduction in Metals
5.5: Resistance and Resistivity
5.6: Resistivity and Resistance
5.7: Ohm's Law
5.8: Electric Power and Energy
5.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
5.11: Superconductors
5.12: Practice
5.A: Current and Resistance (Answers)
5.E: Heat and Heat Transfer Methods (Exercise)
5.S: Summary
6: Resistive Networks
6.1: Electromotive Force
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/854426.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
6.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
6.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
6.6: RC Circuits
6.7: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments
6.7.1: Prelude to Circuits and DC Instruments
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal Voltage
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
6.7.5: DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
6.7.6: Null Measurements
6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors
6.7.E: Circuits and DC Instruments (Exercise)
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
6.9: Practice
6.S: Summary
7: Magnetism
7.1: Introduction
7.2: Magnets
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
7.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field
7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field- Examples and Applications
7.7: The Hall Effect
7.8: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
7.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents- Ampere’s Law
7.11: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
7.E: Magnetism (Exercises)
8: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
8.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits and Electrical Technologies
8.2: RL Circuits
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
8.4: RLC Series AC Circuits
8.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
8.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law
8.7: Motional Emf
8.8: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
8.9: Electric Generators
8.10: Back Emf
8.11: Transformers
8.12: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices
8.13: Inductance
8.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies (Exercise)

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/854429: Electromagnetic Waves
9.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Waves
9.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
9.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves
9.4: Polarization
9.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
9.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer)
9.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises)
9.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary)
10: Geometrical Optics
10.1: Prelude to The Nature of Light
10.2: Prelude to Geometric Optics and Image Formation
10.3: The Propagation of Light
10.4: The Law of Reflection
10.5: Refraction
10.6: Total Internal Reflection
10.7: Dispersion
10.8: Huygens’s Principle
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction
10.12: Thin Lenses
10.13: The Simple Magnifier
10.14: The Camera
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
10.16: The Eye
10.17: A_Vision
10.18: Processing_Visual_Information
10.19: Chemistry_of_Vision
10.20: Vision_-_Anatomy_of_the_Eye
10.21: Vision_-_Transduction_of_Light
10.22: Visual_Processing
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
10.24: Vision
10.25: Physics_of_the_Eye
10.26: Vision_Correction
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
10.28: The_Human_Eye
10.29: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light
10.A: The Nature of Light (Answers)
1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers)
10.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises)
1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises)
10.S: The Nature of Light (Summary)
1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary)

5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8544211: Physical Optics
11.1: Introduction to Interference
11.2: Wave Interference
11.3: The Wave Aspect of Light- Interference
11.4: Polarization
11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference
11.6: Mathematics of Interference
11.7: Single-Slit Diffraction
11.8: Double-Slit Diffraction
11.9: Multiple-Slit Interference
11.10: Diffraction Gratings
11.11: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction
11.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution
11.13: Interference in Thin Films
11.14: Thin Film Interference
11.15: X-Ray Diffraction
11.16: Holography
11.17: The Michelson Interferometer
11.18: Interference (Answers)
11.18.A: Diffraction (Answers)
11.E: Interference (Exercises)
1.E: Diffraction (Exercises)
11.S: Interference (Summary)
1.S: Diffraction (Summary)
12: Nuclear Physics
12.1: Introduction to Nuclear Physics
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy
12.4: Radioactive Decay
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
12.6: Fission
12.7: Nuclear Fusion
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
12.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers)
12.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises)
12.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary)

6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8544214: Appendix A- Units
13.1: Appendix B- Conversion Factors
13.1: Appendix C- Fundamental Constants
13.1: Appendix D- Periodic Table of the Elements
13.1: Appendix E - Half-Lives for Several Isotopes
13.1: Appendix F- Mathematical Formulas
13.1: Appendix G- The Greek Alphabet
13.1: Appendix H- Astronomical Data
13.B: Appendix I- Some Equations and Constants
13.1: Appendix J- Physics Formulas (Wevers)
1.1: Mechanics
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
1.3: Relativity
1.4: Oscillations
1.5: Waves
1.6: Optics
1.7: Statistical Physics
1.8: Thermodynamics
1.9: Transport Phenomena
1.10: Quantum Physics
1.11: Plasma physics
1.12: Solid State Physics
1.13: Theory of Groups
1.14: Nuclear Physics
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
1.16: Astrophysics
1.17: Physical Constants, Units, Del Operator
1.17.1: Physical Constants
1.17.2: Prefixes for Powers of 10
1.17.3: SI Units
1.17.4: The Del-operator
Index
Glossary
13.1: Detailed Licensing
Detailed Licensing

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83849Introductory Physics II Book
This book is currently being developed by adapting co ntent from the https://libretexts.org library of books and resources by Taha
Mzoughi. Its first version is being put to use on June 2023. Please expect numerous errors in the presentatio n of the material and
feel free to report them.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88045Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 02/11/2026

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/85443Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

GSU-TM-Introductory Physics II (1112)

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: Introduction to Physics and Measurements
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist
1.3: Measurements Uncertainty and Significant Figures
1.4: Units and Standards
1.5: Unit Conversion
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course
1.E: Practice
1: Introduction to Physics and Measurements is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838551.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
Describe the scope of physics.
Calculate the order of magnitude of a quantity.
Compare measurable length, mass, and timescales quantitati vely.
Describe the relationships among models, theories, and la ws.
Like all sciences, physics is devoted to the understan ding natural phenomena. In particular, in physics, we try to understand all
physical phenomena from the world of the very small invisible subatomic particles to stars, galaxies and the entire universe.
Scientific findings whether they are just verified obse rvations, laws or theories are just attempts to describ e nature. Anyone can and
should challenge and improve these findings by performing experiments and collecting evidence.
1.1.1 The Scope of Physics
Figure: One of the first images captured by the James W ebb Space Telescope (JWST), shows a group of five galaxi es called
the Stephan's Quintet. The image reveals that two of t he galaxies are currently merging with each other, g iving us insights into
galactic interactions.
Take another look at the image of Stephan's Quintet. Each of the Galaxies contains billions of individual stars as well as huge
clouds of gas and dust. This pair of galaxies lies a s taggering 290 million light-years away (1.7 x 10 mi) fr om our own galaxy
(which is called the Milky Way). The stars and planets that make up each of these g alaxies might seem to be the furthest thing
from most people’s everyday lives, but the forces that cause the Galaxies to act as they do are thought to be the same forces we
contend with here on Earth. The gravity that causes the stars of a Galaxy to rotate and revolve is thought to be the same as what
causes water to flow over hydroelectric dams here on Ea rth. Through a study of physics, you gain a greater u nderstanding of the
interconnectedness of everything we can see and know in t his universe.
Think, now, about all the technological devices you u se on a regular basis. Computers, smartphones, global pos itioning systems
(GPSs), MP3 players, and satellite radio might come to mi nd. Then, think about the most exciting modern technol ogies you have
heard about in the news, such as trains that levitate a bove tracks, “invisibility cloaks” that bend light ar ound them, and microscopic
robots that fight cancer cells in our bodies. All these groundbreaking advances, commonplace or unbelievabl e, rely on the
principles of physics. Aside from playing a significant role in technology, professionals such as engineers, pilots, physicians,
physical therapists, electricians, and computer pro grammers apply physics concepts in their daily work. For example, a pilot must
understand how wind forces affect a flight path; a phy sical therapist must understand how the muscles in the body experience
forces as they move and bend. As you will learn in this t ext, the principles of physics are propelling new, ex citing technologies, and
these principles are applied in a wide range of careers.
The underlying order of nature makes science in gene ral, and physics in particular, interesting and enjo yable to study. For example,
what do a bag of chips and a car battery have in com mon? Both contain energy that can be converted to o ther forms. The law of
conservation of energy (which says that energy can cha nge form but is never lost) ties together such topic s as food calories,
batteries, heat, light, and watch springs. Understandi ng this law makes it easier to learn about the various forms energy takes andLearning Objectives

1.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83855how they relate to one another. Apparently unrelated topics are connected through broadly applicable phy sical laws, permitting an
understanding beyond just the memorization of lists of facts.
Science consists of theories and laws that are the gener al truths of nature, as well as the body of knowledge they encompass.
Scientists are continuously trying to expand this bo dy of knowledge and to perfect the expression of the laws that describe it.
Physics, which comes from the Greek phúsis, meaning “nature,” is concerned with describing the interactions of energy, matter,
space, and time to uncover the fundamental mechanis ms that underlie every phenomenon. This concern for d escribing the basic
phenomena in nature essentially defines the scope of physics.
Physics aims to understand the world around us at the most basic level. It emphasizes the use of a small n umber of quantitative
laws to do this, which can be useful to other fields pu shing the performance boundaries of existing technol ogies. Consider a
smartphone (Figure). Physics describes how electricity interacts with the various circuits inside the devic e. This knowledge
helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when building a smartphone. Knowledge of the physics
underlying these devices is required to shrink their size or increase their processing speed. Or, think about a GPS. Physics describes
the relationship between the speed of an object, the distance over which it travels, and the time it takes t o travel that distance. When
you use a GPS in a vehicle, it relies on physics equations to determine the travel time from one location to another.
Figure: The Apple iPhone is a common smartphone with a GPS function. Physics describes the way that electricity flows
through the circuits of this device. Engineers use thei r knowledge of physics to construct an iPhone with fea tures that consumers
will enjoy. One specific feature of an iPhone is the GPS function. A GPS uses physics equations to determine th e drive time
between two locations on a map.
Figure: (a) Using a scanning tunneling microscope, scie ntists can see the individual atoms (diameters around 10 m) that
compose this sheet of gold. (b) Tiny phytoplankton swim among crystals of ice in the Antarctic Sea. They ran ge from a few
micrometers (1 μm is 10 m) to as much as 2 mm (1 mm is 1 0 m) in length. (c) These two colliding galaxies, kno wn as NGC
4676A (right) and NGC 4676B (left), are nicknamed “ The Mice” because of the tail of gas emanating from e ach one. They are
located 300 million light-years from Earth in the co nstellation Coma Berenices. Eventually, these two gala xies will merge into one.
(credit a: modification of work by Erwinrossen; credi t b: modification of work by Prof. Gordon T. Taylor, Stony Brook University;
NOAA Corps Collections; credit c: modification of wor k by NASA, H. Ford (JHU), G. Illingworth (UCSC/LO), M. Clampin
(STScI), G. Hartig (STScI), the ACS Science Team, and E SA)
Knowledge of physics is useful in everyday situations as well as in nonscientific professions. It can help you understand how
microwave ovens work, why metals should not be put into t hem, and why they might affect pacemakers. Physics all ows you to
understand the hazards of radiation and to evaluate these hazards rationally and more easily. Physics al so explains the reason why a
black car radiator helps remove heat in a car engine, and it explains why a white roof helps keep the insid e of a house cool.
Similarly, the operation of a car’s ignition system as well as the transmission of electrical signals throug hout our body’s nervous
system are much easier to understand when you think about them in terms of basic physics.–10
–6 –2

1.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83855Physics is a key element of many important discipline s and contributes directly to others. Chemistry, for example—since it deals
with the interactions of atoms and molecules—has clo se ties to atomic and molecular physics. Most branches o f engineering are
concerned with designing new technologies, processes, or s tructures within the constraints set by the laws of p hysics. In
architecture, physics is at the heart of structural st ability and is involved in the acoustics, heating, l ighting, and cooling of buildings.
Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, such as radi oactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, and heat transfer within Earth.
Some disciplines, such as biophysics and geophysics, are hyb rids of physics and other disciplines.
Physics has many applications in the biological scienc es. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the prop erties of cells and their
environments. On the macroscopic level, it explains the heat, work, and power associated with the human body a nd its various
organ systems. Physics is involved in medical diagnosti cs, such as radiographs, magnetic resonance imaging, an d ultrasonic blood
flow measurements. Medical therapy sometimes involves p hysics directly; for example, cancer radiotherapy use s ionizing
radiation. Physics also explains sensory phenomena, s uch as how musical instruments make sound, how the eye detects color, and
how lasers transmit information.
It is not necessary to study all applications of phys ics formally. What is most useful is knowing the basic laws of physics and
developing skills in the analytical methods for appl ying them. The study of physics also can improve your problem-solving skills.
Furthermore, physics retains the most basic aspects of s cience, so it is used by all the sciences, and the stu dy of physics makes
other sciences easier to understand.
To accomplish your goals in any of the various field s within the natural sciences and engineering, a thoro ugh grounding in the laws
of physics is necessary. The reason for this is simply that the laws of physics govern everything in the obse rvable universe at all
measurable scales of length, mass, and time. Now, that is easy enough to say, but to come to grips with what it really means, we
need to get a little bit quantitative.
1.1.2 Laws, Models and Theories
In science discussions, you will encounter terms lik e hypothesis, law, model and theory. These are tools th at humans have
developed in our quest to understand nature. Laws and theories are human statements of the underlying laws or rules that all natural
processes follow. Laws and theories are intrinsic to th e universe; humans did not create them and cannot cha nge them. We can only
discover and understand them. Their discovery is a v ery human endeavor, with all the elements of mystery, imagination, struggle,
triumph, and disappointment inherent in any creative effort. The cornerstone of discovering natural laws or theories is
observation and data; scientists must describe the universe as it is, not as we imagine it to be.
A hypothesis is an educated guess about an observation, finding, or data that that can be tested. It can be a propos ed answer to a
scientific question, a prediction about the outcome of a n experiment or an explanation for a natural phenomeno n.
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pat tern in nature supported by scientific evidence and repeated experiments.
Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single ma thematical equation. Laws and theories are similar in that they are both
scientific statements that result from a tested hyp othesis and are supported by scientific evidence. Howe ver, the designation law is
usually reserved for a concise and very general stat ement that describes phenomena in nature, such as th e law that energy is
conserved during any process, or Newton’s second law of m otion, which relates force (F), mass (m), and accelerati on (a) by the
simple equation F = ma. More limited statements are usually called principles (such as Pascal’s principle, which is
applicable only in fluids), but the distinction between la ws and principles often is not made carefully.
The word theory means something different to scientists than what is o ften meant when the word is used in everyday conversa tion.
In particular, to a scientist a theory is not the s ame as a “guess” or an “idea” or even a “hypothesis.” The phrase “it’s just a theory”
seems meaningless and silly to scientists because scien ce is founded on the notion of theories. To a scienti st, a theory is a testable
explanation for patterns in nature supported by scie ntific evidence and verified multiple times by vari ous groups of researchers.
Some theories include models to help visualize pheno mena whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of gravity, for example, does
not require a model or mental image, because we can observe the objects directly with our own senses. The kinetic theory of gases,
on the other hand, is a model in which a gas is viewed as being composed of atoms and molecules. Atoms and mol ecules are too
small to be observed directly with our senses—thus, we picture them mentally to understand what the instrume nts tell us about the
behavior of gases. A theory should describe all aspe cts of any system that falls within its domain of app licability. In particular, any
experimentally testable implication of a theory shou ld be verified. If an experiment ever shows an implic ation of a theory to be

1.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83855false, then the theory is either thrown out or modifie d suitably (for example, by limiting its domain of ap plicability). The biggest
difference between a law and a theory is that a theor y is much more complex and dynamic. A law describes a single action whereas
a theory explains an entire group of related phenomena.
A model is a representation of something that is often too difficult (or impossible) to display directly. Althou gh a model is justified
by experimental tests, it is only accurate in describing ce rtain aspects of a physical system. An example is the Bohr model of singleelectron atoms, in which the electron is pictured as o rbiting the nucleus, analogous to the way planets or bit the Sun (Figure).
We cannot observe electron orbits directly, but the m ental image helps explain some of the observations we can make, such as the
emission of light from hot gases (atomic spectra). Howeve r, other observations show that the picture in the Bo hr model is not really
what atoms look like. The model is “wrong,” but is still useful for some purposes. Physicists use models for a v ariety of purposes.
For example, models can help physicists analyze a scenari o and perform a calculation or models can be used t o represent a situation
in the form of a computer simulation. Ultimately, howe ver, the results of these calculations and simulations need to be doublechecked by other means—namely, observation and experi mentation. Moreover, due to various types of limitati ons or requirements,
we often use simple models to help describe intricate phenomena. For example, when investigating the traject ory of a basket ball,
for most practical purposes, it is sufficient to use a model that ignores the effects of air resistance.
Figure: What is a model? The Bohr model of a single-e lectron atom shows the electron orbiting the nucleus i n one of several
possible circular orbits. Like all models, it captures so me, but not all, aspects of the physical system.
The models, theories, and laws we devise sometimes imply t he existence of objects or phenomena that are as yet unobserved.
These predictions are remarkable triumphs and tribut es to the power of science. It is the underlying ord er in the universe that
enables scientists to make such spectacular predictio ns. However, if experimentation does not verify our pr edictions, then the
theory or law is wrong, no matter how elegant or conven ient it is. Laws can never be known with absolute certa inty because it is
impossible to perform every imaginable experiment to confirm a law for every possible scenario. Physicists operate under the
assumption that all scientific laws and theories are valid until a counterexample is observed. If a good- quality, verifiable
experiment contradicts a well-established law or theory, then the law or theory must be modified or overthr own completely. The
study of science in general, and physics in particul ar, is an adventure much like the exploration of an uncharted ocean. Discoveries
are made; models, theories, and laws are formulated; an d the beauty of the physical universe is made more su blime for the insights
gained.
Read the following statement then determine whether or n ot it is scientific.
Heaven is Hotter than Hell!
Published in Applied Optics II, A14 (1972) & Random Walk in Science
The temperature of Heaven can be rather accurately c omputed from available data. Our authority is the Bibl e: Isaiah 30:26
reads, Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the l ight of the Sun and the light of the Sun shall be seve nfold, as the light of
seven days. Thus Heaven receives from the Moon as much radiation as we do from the Sun and in addition seven times seven
(forty-nine) times as much as the Earth does from the Sun, or fifty times in all. The light we receive from t he Moon is a tenthousandth of the light we receive from the Sun, so we c an ignore that. With these data we can compute the t emperature of
Heaven. The radiation falling on Heaven will heat it t o the point where the heat lost by radiation is just e qual to the heat
received by radiation. In other words, Heaven loses fi fty times as much heat as the Earth by radiation. Using the StefanBoltzmann fourth-power law for radiationExample

1.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83855where E is the absolute temperature of the Earth-300K. This gives H as 798 K (525º C).
The exact temperature of Hell cannot be computed but it must be less than 444.6º C, the temperature at whic h brimstone or
sulfur changes from a liquid to a gas. Revelations 2 1: 8: But the fearful, and unbelieving... shall have t heir part in the lake
which burneth with fire and brimstone. A lake of molten brimstone means that its temperature must be below t he boiling point,
which is 444.60C. (Above this point it would be a vapor, not a lake.)
We have, then, temperature of Heaven, 525º C. Temperature of Hell, less than 445º C. Therefore, Heaven is hotter than He ll.
Solution
Think of the sources and data discussed in the article. Is any of them available for anyone, at anytime to verif y?
Answer: No, it is not scientific since it does nto rely on data that can easily be verified.
1.1.3 Major Characteristics of scientific knowledge
Science is what humanity has developed and continue to develop in its quest to understand nature. Here are some of the
characteristics of science:
Verifiable – Based on data
Objective – avoid biases, prejudices, wishes, and beliefs
Reproducible/Reliable – the same results/findings can be reproduced.
Precise and Accurate – as apposed to social sciences which are not as easily quantifiable leading to less precise resu lts
Universally Replicable
Universally observable
Malleable – evolves and changes based on new evidence
1.1.4 How Science Evolves
What was once believed to be true in science can be adjusted o r rejected based on new evidence.
New findings cannot be rejected because it does not conf orm to current knowledge
A new finding is deemed valid only after thorough assessm ent.
Additional studies are needed following new to provide for a broad assessment of where the weight of evidence falls.
Over time, as additional data is gathered and verified,
Theories don't become laws and laws don't become theories
The following two images were posted in the media duri ng the Covid epidemic. They are accusing Dr. Anthony Fau ci of flipflopping when discussing preventive measures to avoid Covid.Example

1.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83855
Solution
The red line goes through the points C and F, so the li ne is.
Answer:
1.1.5 Science is a Collective Human Endeavor
Science evolves - new technologies allow for new data t hat can confirm or dispute prior knowledge. New knowledge also allows us
to revisit some of our current understanding.
Scientific knowledge is a collective human endeavor. Individual scientist contributions cannot happen (wou ld have not happened)
without the contribution of contemporary and prior s cientists. In other words, Newton's findings or Einstein's f indings would have
been found even if Einstein and Newton did not exist. While both were exceptional scientists, the evolutio n of scientific knowledge
would have happened with or without them.
Science is based on data and only data. Both laws and theories are supported by extensive reproducible da ta. If you cannot test it, it
is not science.
This page titled 1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.2: The Scope and Scale of Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.
1.1: Science and the Scientific Method by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0.
Original source: https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.

1.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838561.2: Thinking Like a Scientist
Fighting Intuition
It is important to remember to fight one’s intuition when applying the scientific method. Certain theori es, such as Quantum
Mechanics, are very counter-intuitive. For example, in Qu antum Mechanics, an object can be described as bein g in two locations at
the same time. In the Theory of Special Relativity, i t is possible for two people to disagree on whether two events occurred at the
same time. These particular predictions from these t heories have not been invalidated by any experiment.
There is no requirement in science that a theory be “pretty” or intuitive. The only requirement is that a theory describe experimental
data. One should then take care in not forcing one’s p reconceived notions into interpreting a theory. For example, Quantum
Mechanics does not actually predict that objects can be in two locations at once, only that objects behav e as if they were in two
locations at once. A famous example is Schrödinger’s ca t, which can be modeled as being both alive and dead at the same time.
However, just because we model it that way does not mean that it really is alive and dead at the same time.
Thinking Like a Physicist
In a sense, physics can be thought of as the most funda mental of the sciences, as it describes the interactio ns of the smallest
constituents of matter. In principle, if one can prec isely describe how protons, neutrons, and electrons intera ct, then one can
completely describe how a human brain thinks. In prac tice, the theories of particle physics lead to equat ions that are too difficult to
solve for systems that include as many particles as a human brain. In fact, they are too difficult to sol ve exactly for even rather
small systems of particles such as atoms bigger than helium (containing several protons, neutrons and electrons).
We have a number of other fields of science to cover complex systems of particles interacting. Chemistry c an be used to describe
what happens to systems consisting of many atoms and molecules. In a living being, it is too difficult to k eep track of systems of
atoms and molecules, so we use Biology to describe livin g systems.
One of the key qualities required to be an effective physicist is an ability to understand how to apply a theory and develop a model
to describe a phenomenon. Just like any other skill, it takes practice to become good at developing mod els. Students that graduate
with a physics degree are thus often sought for jobs t hat require critical thinking and the ability to de velop quantitative models,
which covers many fields from outside of physics such as fi nance or Big Data.
This page titled 1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Howard
Martin revised by Alan Ng.
1.2: The Scope and Scale of Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.
1.3: Fighting Intuition by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.
1.5: Thinking Like a Physicist by Ryan D. Martin, Emma Neary, Joshua Rinaldo, and O livia Woodman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original
source: https://github.com/OSTP/PhysicsArtofModelling/blob/master /README.md.

1.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838571.3: Measurements Uncertainty and Significant Figures
Determine the correct number of significant figures for the resul t of a computation.
Describe the relationship between the concepts of accuracy, precision, uncertainty, and discrepancy.
Calculate the percent uncertainty of a measurement, given it s value and its uncertainty.
Determine the uncertainty of the result of a computation invol ving quantities with given uncertainties.
Science is based on data. That is evidence obtained from observation and experiments. Thus, it is important to have a clear, universal, thorough process and rules that we use when
collecting data —that is, when making measurements and whe n reporting those results.
1.3.1 Accuracy and Precision of a Measurement
Accuracy is how close a measurement is to the accepted reference v alue for that measurement. For example, let’s say we want t o measure the length of standard printer paper. The
packaging in which we purchased the paper states that it is 11.0 in. long. We then measure the length of the paper three times and obtain the following measurements: 1 1.1 in., 11.2 in.,
and 10.9 in. These measurements are quite accurate bec ause they are very close to the reference value of 11.0 in. In contrast, if we had obtained a measurement of 12 in., our
measurement would not be very accurate. Notice that the conce pt of accuracy requires that an accepted reference value be given.
Figure: A GPS attempts to locate a restaurant at the ce nter of the bull’s-eye. The red dots represent each at tempt to pinpoint the location of the restaurant. For the image on the left,
the dots are spread out quite far apart from one anot her, but they are rather close to the actual location of the restaurant, indicating high accuracy. For the image on the right dots are
spread out rather far away from the actual location o f the restaurant, indicating low accuracy.
Let’s consider an example of a GPS attempting to locate the position of a restaurant in a city. Think of the res taurant location as existing at the center of a bull’ s-eye target and think of
each GPS attempt to locate the restaurant as a red dot. On th e left of Figure, we see the GPS measurements are spread out fa r apart from each other, but they are all relatively clos e
to the actual location of the restaurant at the center of the target. This indicates a high-accuracy measuremen t. However, in the image on the right, the GPS measurement s are
concentrated closer to one another, but they are far away fro m the target location. This indicates a low-accuracy meas uring system.
The precision of measurements refers to how close the agreement is between repeated independent measurements (which are repeated un der the same conditions). Consider the example
of the paper measurements. The precision of the measuremen ts refers to the spread of the measured values. One way to analyze the precision of the measurements is to determi ne the
range, or difference, between the lowest and the highest measured values. In this case, the lowest value was 10.9 in. and the highest value was 11.2 in. Thus, the mea sured values
deviated from each other by, at most, 0.3 in. These measure ments were relatively precise because they did not vary too much in value. However, if the measured values had been 10.9
in., 11.1 in., and 11.9 in., then the measurements would no t be very precise because there would be significant varia tion from one measurement to another. Notice that the c oncept of
precision depends only on the actual measurements acquired and does not depend on an accepted reference value.
The measurements in the paper example are both accurate and precise, but in some cases, measurements are accura te but not precise, or they are precise but not accurate. Referring back
to the GPS example, on the left of Figure in this case, we see the GPS measurements clustered close to each other, whi le far away from the target location. This indicates a hi ghprecision measurement even though the accuracy is low. For the image on the right, the GPS measurements are spread fu rther apart from one another, they are still far away from th e
target location. This indicates a low-precision and also a l ow-accuracy measurement.
Figure: A GPS attempts to locate a restaurant at the ce nter of the bull’s-eye. The red dots represent each at tempt to pinpoint the location of the restaurant. For the image on the left,
the dots are spread out quite close to one another, ind icating high precision. For the image on the right, the dots are spread out apart to one another, indicating l ow precision.
The precision of a measuring system is related to the uncertainty in the measurements whereas the accuracy is related to th e discrepancy from the accepted reference value. uncertainty
is a quantitative measure of how much your measured valu es deviate from one another. Discrepancy is the differenc e between the measured value and a given standard or expected
value. If the measurements are not very precise, then the uncert ainty of the values is high. If the measurements are not very accu rate, then the discrepancy of the values is high.
Recall our example of measuring paper length; we obtain ed measurements of 11.1 in., 11.2 in., and 10.9 in., and the accepted value was 11.0 in. We might average the thre e
measurements to say our best guess is 11.1 in.; in this case, our discrepancy is 11.1 – 11.0 = 0.1 in., which prov ides a quantitative measure of accuracy. We might calcu late the
uncertainty in our best guess by using the range of our measured values: 0.3 in. Then we would say the length of t he paper is 11.1 in. plus or minus 0.3 in. The uncertai nty in a
measurement, A, is often denoted as A (read “delta A”), so th e measurement result would be recorded as A ± A. Returnin g to our paper example, the measured length of the p aper
could be expressed as 11.1 ± 0.3 in. Since the discrep ancy of 0.1 in. is less than the uncertainty of 0.3 in., we might say the measured value agrees with the accepted reference value to
within experimental uncertainty.Learning Objectives

1.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83857Some factors that contribute to uncertainty in a measureme nt include the following:
Limitations of the measuring device
The skill of the person taking the measurement
Irregularities in the object being measured
Any other factors that affect the outcome (highly dependent on the situation)
In our example, such factors contributing to the uncertai nty could be the smallest division on the ruler is 1/ 16 in., the person using the ruler has bad eyesight, the ruler is worn down on
one end, or one side of the paper is slightly longer tha n the other. At any rate, the uncertainty in a measureme nt must be calculated to quantify its precision. If a reference value is known,
it makes sense to calculate the discrepancy as well to q uantify its accuracy.
1.3.2 Significant Figures
When we express measured values, we can only list as man y digits as we measured initially with our measuring to ol. For example, if we use a standard ruler to measure the length of a
stick, we may measure it to be 36.7 cm. We can’t express t his value as 36.71 cm because our measuring tool is no t precise enough to measure a hundredth of a centimeter. It should be
noted that the last digit in a measured value has bee n estimated in some way by the person performing the mea surement. For example, the person measuring the length of a stick with a
ruler notices the stick length seems to be somewhere in between 36.6 cm and 36.7 cm, and he or she must estimat e the value of the last digit. Using the method of significant figures,
the rule is that the last digit written down in a measurement is the first digit with some unc ertainty. To determine the number of significant digits in a va lue, start with the first
measured value at the left and count the number of digits through the last digit written on the right. For example, t he measured value 36.7 cm has three digits, or three signi ficant figures.
Rules for Determining the number of significant figures
Here are some general rules for determining the number of signifi cant figures:
For experimental data the uncertainty in a quantity defi nes how many figures are significant.
In general, the uncertainty in a measurement is equal to the estimated standard deviation for that measurement.
The reading uncertainty is an estimate made by the exp erimenter
In the case where the reading uncertainty in a measurement is larger than the estimated standard deviation, the read ing uncertainty is the uncertainty in each individual
measurement.
The reading uncertainty almost by definition has one and o nly one significant figure.
Thus uncertainties are specified to one or at most two digits.
Express the following quantities to the correct number of si gnificant figures:
(a) 29.625 ± 2.345
(b) 74 ± 7.136
(c) 84.26351 ± 3
Strategy
First, remember that the uncertainty should be specified to one or at the most two digits.
Second, express the quantity with the same precision as the uncerta inty.
Solution
Rounding the uncertainty to one digit:
(a) 29.625 ± 2
(b) 74 ± 7
(c) 84.26351 ± 3
Rounding the quantity to the same precision as the uncer tainty:
(a) 30 ± 2
(b) 74 ± 7
(c) 84 ± 3
Rules for Zeroes
Special consideration is given to zeros when counting significant figures. The zeros in 0.053 are not significa nt because they are placeholders that locate the deci mal point. There
are two significant figures in 0.053. The zeros in 10.053 a re not placeholders; they are significant. This number h as five significant figures. The zeros in 1300 may or ma y not be
significant, depending on the style of writing numbers. T hey could mean the number is known to the last digit or they could be placeholders. So 1300 could have two, t hree, or four
significant figures. To avoid this ambiguity, we should wri te 1300 in scientific notation as 1.3 x 10, 1.30 x 10, or 1.300 x 10, depending on whether it has two, three, or four
significant figures. Zeros are significant except when they serve only as placeholders
When combining measurements with different degrees of p recision, the number of significant digits in the final answer can be no greater than the number of significant digits in
the least-precise measured value. Here are the rules:
Rules for Manipulating Numbers
Rule 1: When multiplying or dividing, report the result with the same number of significant figures as the least certain va lue. For example:
11.5 x 2.1 = 24
11.5 ÷ 2.1 = 5.5 Example
3 3 3

1.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83857because 2.1 has only two significant figures.
Rule 2: When adding or subtracting, the number of decimal places in the result should equal the smallest number of decimal places in any of the given terms. For example:
12.34+2.006-8.9=5.4
because 8.9 has only one decimal place.
Rule 3: Numbers that are not measured may be considered exact. Irra tional numbers such as π and e are known to many signifi cant figures and do not limit your results. For
example:
(1/3)(4.56 π) = 4.78
is reported to three significant figures because neither 3 nor π is measured, and our answer is limited only by the th ree significant figures of 4.56.
Rule 4: It is best to use scientific notation because a zero t hat acts as a placeholder is not necessarily a significa nt figure. For example, h = 120 m may have two or three s ignificant
figures. To avoid that ambiguity, you may add a decim al point; for example, h = 120. m has three significa nt figures. A better way to clarify the number of signific ant figures is to
use scientific notation: h = 1.20 x 10 m has three signific ant figures, and h = 1.2 x 10 m has two significant figures.
Rule 5: You should keep extra significant figures in intermed iate steps when making a calculation, but you should ro und the final answer to the correct number of significant
figures. The extra significant figures in an intermediate result help avoid introducing an error due to rounding a number up or down. This step is particularly important if an
intermediate result is a number ending in 5
1.3.3 Precision of Measuring Tools and Significant Figures
As mentioned in the previous sections, an important fa ctor in the precision of measurements involves the p recision of the measuring tool. In general, a precise measuring tool is one that
can measure values in very small increments. For example, a standard ruler can measure length to the nearest millime ter whereas a caliper can measure length to the nearest 0.01 mm.
The caliper is a more precise measuring tool because it can m easure extremely small differences in length. The more pre cise the measuring tool, the more precise the measuremen ts.
The result of a single measurement should be reported in th e format
The estimate is your best guess for the true value, while the measurement uncertainty states the range where the true value might lie. By co nvention, the estimate and measurement
uncertainty follow these rules:
1. The measurement uncertainty has one or two significant figures. We will use just one for the rest o f this chapter.
2. The estimate has the same precision as the measuremen t uncertainty.
Suppose you use a digital multimeter to measure the current in a circuit, and the readout is stable (i.e., not fluctuating). Then you should report a result like this:

Why? According to the readout, the value is between (rou nded up to) and (which is rounded down). So the measuremen t uncertainty is. Note that
the estimate is reported as to have the same precision as the u ncertainty.
When using a device with hatch marks, such as a ruler or analog oscilloscope display, the measurement uncertai nty is determined by the smallest markings. For example, if the smallest
markings on a ruler have spacing, the measurement uncertainty is, so a reading should be reported like this:
In more complicated situations, you must exercise you r judgment. For instance, suppose you have a digital mu ltimeter reading that is not stable: the last digit cha nges constantly, so that
the reading fluctuates between,, and. The value is between and, which is a range of. Since we use one signi ficant figure for uncertainty, the
result is reported like this:
Alternatively, suppose the last digit is changing so fast that you can’t make out its values at all. Then you can report the result like this:
Measurement uncertainties can also come from other aspect s of an experiment. Suppose you use a ruler to measure th e distance to an object, but the object wobbles by, larger
than the hatch marks of the ruler. In that case, you should report a measurement uncertainty of, not.
1.3.4 Uncertainties in Calculations/Propagation of uncertainty of Precision
Often we have two or more measured quantities that we combi ne arithmetically to get some result. Examples includ e dividing a distance by a time to get a speed, or ad ding two lengths
to get a total length. Now that we have learned how to d etermine the uncertainty in the directly measured quanti ties we need to learn how these uncertainty propagate to an uncertainty
in the result.
We assume that the two directly measured quantities are and Y, with uncertainty and respectively.
The measurements and must be independent of each other.
The fractional uncertainty is the value of the uncertainty divided by the value of the quantity:. The fractional uncertaint y multiplied by 100 is the percentage uncertainty. Everything
is this section assumes that the uncertainty is "small" comp ared to the value itself, i.e. that the fractional uncertain ty is much less than one.
For many situations, we can find the uncertainty in the result using three simple rules:
1.3.4.1 Rule 1
If: or
then:2 2

1.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83857In words, this says that the uncertainty in the result of an addition or subtraction is the square root of the su m of the squares of the uncertainty in the quantities bei ng added or subtracted.
This mathematical procedure, also used in Pythagoras' th eorem about right triangles, is called quadrature.
1.3.4.2 Rule 2
If: or
then:
In this case also the uncertainty are combined in qu adrature, but this time it is the fractional uncertainty, i.e. the uncertainty in the quantity divided by th e value of the quantity, that are
combined. Sometimes the fractional uncertainty is called the relative uncertainty.
1.3.4.3 Rule 3
If:
then:
or equivalently:
For the square of a quantity,, you might reason that thi s is just times and use Rule 2. This is wrong because Rules 1 and 2 are only for when the two quantities being combined,
and, are independent of each other. Here there is only one measurement of one quan tity.
Calculate (1.23 ± 0.03) +. (is the irrational number 3.1 4159265…)
Strategy
Rational numbers are considered precise. Thus, they don't affe ct the uncertainty in the reading.
Solution
(1.23 ± 0.03) + =((1.23+) ± 0.03)=((1.23+3.14159265) ± 0.03)=((4. 37159265) ± 0.03)=(4.37 ± 0.03)
Calculate (1.23 ± 0.03) ×.
Strategy
We are essentially multiplying by a constant.
Solution
(1.23 ± 0.03) =((1.23) ± 0.03))=((3.864) ± 0.0942)=(3.86 ± 0.09)
You may have noticed a useful property of quadrature whil e doing the above questions. Say one quantity has an uncertainty of 2 and the other quantity has an uncertai nty of 1. Then the
uncertainty in the combination is the square root of 4 + 1 = 5, which to one significant figure is just 2. Thus if any uncertainty is equal to or less than one half of some other uncertainty,
it may be ignored in all uncertainty calculations. This a pplies for both direct uncertainty such as used in Rule 1 and for fractional or relative uncertainty such as in Rule 2.
Thus in many situations you do not have to do any uncertainty calculations at all if you take a look at the data and its uncertainty first.
1.3.5 Using Derivatives to Calculate Uncertainty
The three rules above handle most simple cases. The gene ral case is where. For Rule 1 the function is addition or subtraction, while for Rule 2 it is mult iplication or division.
Regardless of what is, the uncertainty in is given by:
In the next example, we look at how differentials can be used to estimate the uncertainty in calculating the volume of a box if we assume the measurement of the side length is made
with a certain amount of accuracy.
Suppose the side length of a cube is measured to be cm with an accuracy of cm.
a. Use differentials to estimate the uncertainty in the c omputed volume of the cube.
b. Compute the volume of the cube if the side length is (i) cm and (ii) cm to compare the estimated uncertainty wit h the actual potential uncertainty.
Solution
a. The measurement of the side length is accurate to within cm. T herefore,
The volume of a cube is given by, which leads toExample
Example
Example: Volume of a Cube

1.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83857Using the measured side length of cm, we can estimate that
Therefore,
b. If the side length is actually cm, then the volume of th e cube is
If the side length is actually cm, then the volume of the cu be is
Therefore, the actual volume of the cube is between and. Since the side length is measured to be 5 cm, the c omputed volume is Therefore,
the uncertainty in the computed volume is
That is,
We see the estimated uncertainty is relatively close to the actual potential uncertainty in the computed volume.
Estimate the uncertainty in the computed volume of a cu be if the side length is measured to be cm with an accurac y of cm.
Hint
Answer
The volume measurement is accurate to within.
The above formula is also used to find the uncertainty for transce ndental functions. For example:
Find the uncertainty for:
Answer
Find the uncertainty for:
Answer
Note that in the above example must be in radian s.
The measurement uncertainty and the propagated uncertainty are absolute uncertainty.
Sometimes, we are interested in the size of an uncertainty relative to the size of the quantity being measured or calculated. Given an absolute uncertainty for a partic ular quantity, we
define the relative uncertainty as, where is the actual value of the quant ity. The percentage uncertainty is the relative uncertainty expressed as a percentage. For example, if we
measure the height of a ladder to be in. when the actua l height is in., the absolute uncertainty is 1 in. but the relative uncertainty is, or. By comparison, if we
measure the width of a piece of cardboard to be in. when the actual width is in., our absolute uncertainty is in., whereas the relative uncertainty is, or Therefore,
the percentage uncertainty in the measurement of the cardboa rd is larger, even though in. is less than in.
An astronaut using a camera measures the radius of Earth as mi with an uncertainty of mi. Let’s use different ials to estimate the relative and percentage uncertain ty of
using this radius measurement to calculate the volume of Eart h, assuming the planet is a perfect sphere.
Solution:
If the measurement of the radius is accurate to within we have
Since the volume of a sphere is given by we haveExample
Example
Example
Example: Relative and Percentage uncertainty

1.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83857Using the measured radius of mi, we can estimate
To estimate the relative uncertainty, consider. Since we do not know the exact value of the volume, use the measured radius mi to estimate. We obtain
. Therefore the relative uncertainty satisfies
which simplifies to
The relative uncertainty is and the percentage uncerta inty is.
Determine the percentage uncertainty if the radius of Earth is measured to be mi with an uncertainty of mi.
Hint
Use the fact that to find.
Answer
When, the uncertainty in is given by:
If is a function of three or more variables,, then:
1.3.6 The uncertainty in the Mean
We have seen that when the data have uncertainty of precisio n we may only estimate the value of the mean. We are now ready to fi nd the uncertainty in this estimate of the mean.
Recall that to calculate the estimated mean we use:
Each individual measurement has the same uncertainty,, which is usually the estimated standard deviation.
To calculate the uncertainty in the numerator of the abo ve equation, we use Rule 1 to write:
In words, we are combining quantities in quadrature, whose resu lt is the square root of times.
When we divide the numerator by the denominator, Rule 2 tells us how to propagate those uncertainty. The denom inator has an uncertainty of zero, and we have just calc ulated the
uncertainty in the numerator. Applying Rule 2, then, giv es:
In words, the uncertainty in the estimated mean is e qual to the uncertainty in each individual measuremen t divided by the square root of the number of times th e measurement
was repeated. Sometimes is called the standard uncertainty of the mean.
Here is an example. We repeat the measurement of some quan tity 4 times and get:
The estimated mean of these measurements is numerically 1.4950000 and the estimated standard deviation is numerically 0.0903696 (by numerically we mean the number that is
displayed by the calculator). Thus the uncertainty in th e estimated mean is 0.0903696 divided by the square root of the number of repeated me asurements, the square root of 4, which is
numerically 0.0451848. So we get:
Value = 1.495 ± 0.045
or:
Value = 1.50 ± 0.05
The fact that the uncertainty in the estimated mean go es down as we repeat the measurements is exactly what s hould happen. If the uncertainty did not go down as N increases there is
no point in repeating the measurements at all since we are not learning anything about X, i.e. we are not reducing its uncertainty.
If you repeat a measurement 4 times, you reduce the uncert ainty by a factor of two. Repeating the measurement 9 times reduces the uncertainty by a factor of three. To re duce the
uncertainty by a factor of four you would have to repeat t he measurement 16 times. Thus there is a point of "diminish ing returns" in repeating measurements. In simple situation s,
repeating a measurement 5 or 10 times is usually sufficie nt.Example
est

1.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83857You are determining the period of oscillation of a pendu lum. One procedure would be to measure the time for 20 osc illations, t20, and repeat the measurement 5 times. Ano ther
procedure would be to measure the time for 5 oscillations, t5, and repeat the measurement 20 times. Assume, reason ably, that the uncertainty in the determination of the time for 20
oscillations is the same as the uncertainty in the det ermination of the time for 5 oscillations. Calculate th e uncertainty in the period for both procedures to det ermine which will give
the smallest uncertainty in the value of the period?
Strategy
First, observe that the average value of the bag’s weight, A, is 5.1 lb. The uncertainty in this value, A, is 0.3 lb. W e can use the following equation to determine the perce nt
uncertainty of the weight:
Solution
Substitute the values into the equation:
1.3: Measurements Uncertainty and Significant Figures is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Li breTexts.
1.7: Significant Figures by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
1.1: Measurement Error by Y. D. Chong is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: http://www1.spms.ntu.edu.sg/~ydchong/teaching.html.
4.2: Linear Approximations and Differentials by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.Example

1.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838581.4: Units and Standards
Describe how SI base units are defined.
Describe how derived units are created from base units.
Express quantities given in SI units using metric prefixes.
1.4.1 Order of Magnitude
The order of magnitude of a number is the power of 10 that most closely app roximates it. Thus, the order of magnitude refers to
the scale (or size) of a value. Each power of 10 repre sents a different order of magnitude. For example, 10, 1 0, 10, and so forth,
are all different orders of magnitude, as are 10 = 1, 10, 10, and 10. To find the order of magnitude of a number, take the
base-10 logarithm of the number and round it to the nearest integer, then the order of magnitude of th e number is simply the
resulting power of 10. For example, the order of magnit ude of 800 is 10 because log 800 ≈ 2.903, which rounds to 3. Similarly,
the order of magnitude of 450 is 10 because log 450 ≈ 2.653, which rounds to 3 as well. Thus, we say the num bers 800 and 450
are of the same order of magnitude: 10. However, the order of magnitude of 250 is 10 because log 250 ≈ 2.3 97, which rounds to
2.
An equivalent but quicker way to find the order of ma gnitude of a number is first to write it in scientific notation and then check to
see whether the first factor is greater than or less than = 10 ≈ 3. The idea is that = 10 is halfway bet ween 1 = 10 and
10 = 10 on a log base-10 scale. Thus, if the first f actor is less than, then we round it down to 1 and the order of magnitude is
simply whatever power of 10 is required to write the n umber in scientific notation. On the other hand, if t he first factor is greater
than, then we round it up to 10 and the order of ma gnitude is one power of 10 higher than the power need ed to write the
number in scientific notation. For example, the number 800 can be written in scientific notation as 8 x 10. Because 8 is bigger than
≈ 3, we say the order of magnitude of 800 is 10 = 1 0. The number 450 can be written as 4.5 x 10, so its order of
magnitude is also 10 because 4.5 is greater than 3. Howe ver, 250 written in scientific notation is 2.5 x 10 a nd 2.5 is less than 3, so
its order of magnitude is 10.
The order of magnitude of a number is designed to be a ballpark estimate for the scale (or size) of its value. It is simply a way of
rounding numbers consistently to the nearest power o f 10. This makes doing rough mental math with very big and very small
numbers easier. For example, the diameter of a hydrogen atom is on the order of 10 m, whereas the diameter o f the Sun is on the
order of 10 m, so it would take roughly 10 /10 = 10 hyd rogen atoms to stretch across the diameter of the Su n. This is much
easier to do in your head than using the more precis e values of 1.06 x 10 m for a hydrogen atom diameter a nd 1.39 x 10 m for
the Sun’s diameter, to find that it would take 1.31 x 1 0 hydrogen atoms to stretch across the Sun’s diameter. In addition to being
easier, the rough estimate is also nearly as informative as the precise calculation.
1.4.2 Known Ranges of Length, Mass, and Time
The vastness of the universe and the breadth over wh ich physics applies are illustrated by the wide range of examples of known
lengths, masses, and times (given as orders of magnitu de) in Figure. Examining this table will give you a feeling for the range
of possible topics in physics and numerical values. A good way to appreciate the vastness of the ranges o f values in Figure is
to try to answer some simple comparative questions, such as t he following:
a. How many hydrogen atoms does it take to stretch across th e diameter of the Sun?
b. How many protons are there in a bacterium?
c. How many floating-point operations can a supercompute r do in 1 day?
Answer a
10 m/10 m = 10 hydrogen atoms
Answer bLearning Objectives
1 2 3
0 −1 −2 −3
3 210
0.5 0.5 0
2 + 1 3 2
3 2
−10
9 9 −10 19
−10 9
Exercise
9 –10 19

1.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8385810 kg/10 kg = 10 protons
Answer c
10 s/10 s = 10 floating-point operations
In studying Figure, take some time to come up with si milar questions that interest you and then try answer ing them. Doing
this can breathe some life into almost any table of number s.
Figure: This table shows the orders of magnitude of len gth, mass, and time.
The range of objects and phenomena studied in physic s is immense. From the incredibly short lifetime of a nucleus to the age of
Earth, from the tiny sizes of subnuclear particles to the vast distance to the edges of the known universe, from the force exerted by
a jumping flea to the force between Earth and the Sun, there are enough factors of 10 to challenge the ima gination of even the most
experienced scientist. Giving numerical values for phy sical quantities and equations for physical principl es allows us to understand
nature much more deeply than qualitative descriptio ns alone. To comprehend these vast ranges, we must also have accepted units in
which to express them. We shall find that even in th e potentially mundane discussion of meters, kilogram s, and seconds, a profound
simplicity of nature appears: all physical quantities can be expressed as combinations of only seven base physical qu antities.
1.4.3 Units and Standards
We define a physical quantity either by specifying how it is measured or by stating how it is calculated from other measurements.
For example, we might define distance and time by speci fying methods for measuring them, such as using a met er stick and a
stopwatch. Then, we could define average speed by sta ting that it is calculated as the total distance trav eled divided by time of
travel.
Measurements of physical quantities are expressed in terms of units, which are standardized values. For example, the length of a
race, which is a physical quantity, can be expressed i n units of meters (for sprinters) or kilometers (for distance runners). Without
standardized units, it would be extremely difficult for scientists to express and compare measured values i n a meaningful way
(Figure).–15 –27 12
5 –17 22

1.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83858
Figure: Distances given in unknown units are maddening ly useless.
Two major systems of units are used in the world: SI units (for the French Système International d’Unités), also known as the
metric system, and English units (also known as the customary or imperial system). English units were historically used in
nations once ruled by the British Empire and are st ill widely used in the United States. English units may a lso be referred to as the
foot–pound–second (fps) system, as opposed to the centimeter–gram–second (cgs) system. You may also encounter the term
SAE units, named after the Society of Automotive Engineers. Produ cts such as fasteners and automotive tools (for exampl e,
wrenches) that are measured in inches rather than metric units are referred to as SAE fasteners or SAE wrenches.
Virtually every other country in the world (except t he United States) now uses SI units as the standard. The m etric system is also
the standard system agreed on by scientists and mathem aticians.
1.4.4 SI Units: Base and Derived Units
In any system of units, the units for some physical qu antities must be defined through a measurement proce ss. These are called the
base quantities for that system and their units are the system’s base units. All other physical quantities can then be expressed as
algebraic combinations of the base quantities. Each of these physical quantities is then known as a derived quantity and each unit
is called a derived unit. The choice of base quantities is somewhat arbitrary, as long as they are independent of each other and all
other quantities can be derived from them. Typically, the goal is to choose physical quantities that can be measured accurately to a
high precision as the base quantities. The reason for this is simple. Since the derived units can be expresse d as algebraic
combinations of the base units, they can only be as accurat e and precise as the base units from which they are der ived.
Based on such considerations, the International Standa rds Organization recommends using seven base quantiti es, which form the
International System of Quantities (ISQ). These are the ba se quantities used to define the SI base units. Table l ists these seven
ISQ base quantities and the corresponding SI base units.
Table: ISQ Base Quantities and Their SI Units
ISQ Base Quantity SI Base Unit
Length meter (m)
Mass kilogram (kg)
Time second (s)
Electrical Current ampere (A)
Thermodynamic Temperature kelvin (K)
Amount of Substance mole (mol)
Luminous Intensity candela (cd)
You are probably already familiar with some derived quantities that can be formed from the base quantiti es in Table. For
example, the geometric concept of area is always cal culated as the product of two lengths. Thus, area is a derived quantity that can
be expressed in terms of SI base units using square me ters (m x m = m). Similarly, volume is a derived quant ity that can be
expressed in cubic meters (m). Speed is length per tim e; so in terms of SI base units, we could measure it in meters per second
(m/s). V olume mass density (or just density) is mass p er volume, which is expressed in terms of SI base units s uch as kilograms per2

1.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83858cubic meter (kg/m). Angles can also be thought of as derived quantities because they can be defined as the ratio of the arc length
subtended by two radii of a circle to the radius of the circle. This is how the radian is defined. Dependi ng on your background and
interests, you may be able to come up with other deriv ed quantities, such as the mass flow rate (kg/s) or vo lume flow rate (m /s) of
a fluid, electric charge (A • s), mass flux density [k g/(m • s)], and so on. We will see many more examples thr oughout this text. For
now, the point is that every physical quantity can be derived from the seven base quantities in Table, and the units of every
physical quantity can be derived from the seven SI base u nits.
For the most part, we use SI units in this text. Non-SI un its are used in a few applications in which they are in very common use,
such as the measurement of temperature in degrees Ce lsius (°C), the measurement of fluid volume in liter s (L), and the
measurement of energies of elementary particles in electron-volts (eV). Whenever non-SI units are discusse d, they are tied to SI
units through conversions. For example, 1 L is 10 m.
Check out a comprehensive source of information on SI units at the National Institute of Standards and Tec hnology (NIST)
Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty.
1.4.5 Units of Time, Length, and Mass: The Second, Meter, and Kilogram
The initial chapters in this textmap are concerned with mechanics, fluids, and waves. In these subjects all pertinent physical
quantities can be expressed in terms of the base uni ts of length, mass, and time. Therefore, we now turn t o a discussion of these
three base units, leaving discussion of the others until th ey are needed later.
1.4.5.1 The Second
The SI unit for time, the second (abbreviated s), has a long history. For many years i t was defined as 1/86,400 of a mean solar day.
More recently, a new standard was adopted to gain grea ter accuracy and to define the second in terms of a nonvarying or constant
physical phenomenon (because the solar day is getti ng longer as a result of the very gradual slowing of Earth’s rotation). Cesium
atoms can be made to vibrate in a very steady way, a nd these vibrations can be readily observed and coun ted. In 1967, the second
was redefined as the time required for 9,192,631,770 of these vibrations to occur (Figure). Note that this may seem like more
precision than you would ever need, but it isn’t—GPSs rel y on the precision of atomic clocks to be able to gi ve you turn-by-turn
directions on the surface of Earth, far from the satellit es broadcasting their location.
Figure: An atomic clock such as this one uses the vibrat ions of cesium atoms to keep time to a precision of bet ter than a
microsecond per year. The fundamental unit of time, the second, is based on such clocks. This image looks down from the top of an
atomic fountain nearly 30 feet tall. (credit: Steve Jurvetson)
1.4.5.2 The Meter
The SI unit for length is the meter (abbreviated m); its definition has also changed ove r time to become more precise. The meter
was first defined in 1791 as 1/10,000,000 of the dista nce from the equator to the North Pole. This measuremen t was improved in
1889 by redefining the meter to be the distance bet ween two engraved lines on a platinum–iridium bar now k ept near Paris. By
1960, it had become possible to define the meter eve n more accurately in terms of the wavelength of light, so it was again redefined
as 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of orange light emitted by krypton atoms. In 1983, the meter was given its curren t definition (in part
for greater accuracy) as the distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second (Figure). T his change came after
knowing the speed of light to be exactly 299,792,458 m/s. The length of the meter will change if the spee d of light is someday
measured with greater accuracy.3
−3 3

1.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83858
Figure: The meter is defined to be the distance light travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second in a vacuum. Di stance traveled is
speed multiplied by time.
1.4.5.3 The Kilogram
The SI unit for mass is the kilogram (abbreviated kg); From 1795–2018 it was defined to b e the mass of a platinum–iridium
cylinder kept with the old meter standard at the Int ernational Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris. Howeve r, this cylinder
has lost roughly 50 micrograms since it was created. B ecause this is the standard, this has shifted how we defi ned a kilogram.
Therefore, a new definition was adopted in May 2019 bas ed on the Planck constant and other constants which will never change in
value. We will study Planck’s constant in quantum mecha nics, which is an area of physics that describes how t he smallest pieces of
the universe work. The kilogram is measured on a Kibbl e balance (see). When a weight is placed on a Kibble balance, an
electrical current is produced that is proportional to Planck’s constant. Since Planck’s constant is defined, the exact current
measurements in the balance define the kilogram.
Figure: Redefining the SI unit of mass. The U.S. Nati onal Institute of Standards and Technology’s Kibble ba lance is a
machine that balances the weight of a test mass with th e resulting electrical current needed for a force to balance it.
1.4.6 Metric Prefixes
SI units are part of the metric system, which is convenient for scientific and engineering calculations because the units are
categorized by factors of 10. Table lists the metri c prefixes and symbols used to denote various factor s of 10 in SI units. For
example, a centimeter is one-hundredth of a meter (in symbols, 1 cm = 10 m) and a kilometer is a thousa nd meters (1 km = 10
m). Similarly, a megagram is a million grams (1 Mg = 10 g), a nanosecond is a billionth of a second (1 ns = 1 0 s), and a
terameter is a trillion meters (1 Tm = 10 m).
Table: Metric Prefixes for Powers of 10 and Their Sy mbols–2 3
6 –9

1.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83858Prefix Symbol Meaning Prefix Symbol Meaning
yotta- Y 10 yocto- Y 10
zetta- Z 10 zepto- Z 10
exa- E 10 atto- E 10
peta- P 10 femto- P 10
tera- T 10 pico- T 10
giga- G 10 nano- G 10
mega- M 10 micro- M 10
kilo- k 10 milli- k 10
hecto- h 10 centi- h 10
deka- da 10 deci- da 10
The only rule when using metric prefixes is that you ca nnot “double them up.” For example, if you have measur ements in
petameters (1 Pm = 10 m), it is not proper to talk ab out megagigameters, although 10 x 10 = 10. In pract ice, the only time this
becomes a bit confusing is when discussing masses. As we have seen, the base SI unit of mass is the kilogram (kg), but metric
prefixes need to be applied to the gram (g), because we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes. Thus, a thousand kilograms (10
kg) is written as a megagram (1 Mg) since
Incidentally, 10 kg is also called a metric ton, abbreviated t. This is one of the units outside t he SI system considered acceptable
for use with SI units.
As we see in the next section, metric systems have the a dvantage that conversions of units involve only powe rs of 10. There are
100 cm in 1 m, 1000 m in 1 km, and so on. In nonmetri c systems, such as the English system of units, the rela tionships are not as
simple—there are 12 in in 1 ft, 5280 ft in 1 mi, and so o n.
Another advantage of metric systems is that the same unit can be used over extremely large ranges of val ues simply by scaling it
with an appropriate metric prefix. The prefix is chose n by the order of magnitude of physical quantities c ommonly found in the task
at hand. For example, distances in meters are suitable in construction, whereas distances in kilometers are ap propriate for air travel,
and nanometers are convenient in optical design. With the metric system there is no need to invent new uni ts for particular
applications. Instead, we rescale the units with which we ar e already familiar.
Restate the mass 1.93 x 10 kg using a metric prefix such that the resulting numerical value is bigger th an one but less than
1000.
Strategy
Since we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes, we fi rst need to restate the mass in grams by replacing the prefix symbol k
with a factor of 10 (Table). Then, we should see which two prefixes in Table are closest to the resulting power of 10
when the number is written in scientific notation. We use whichever of these two prefixes gives us a number b etween one and
1000.
Solution
Replacing the k in kilogram with a factor of 10, we find tha t24 -24
21 -21
18 -18
15 -15
12 -12
9 -9
6 -6
3 -3
2 -2
1 -1
15 6 9 15
Example: Using Metric Prefixes

1.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83858From Table, we see that 10 is between “peta-” (10) an d “exa-” (10). If we use the “peta-” prefix, then we f ind
that 1.93 × 10 g = 1.93 × 10 Pg, since 16 = 1 + 15. Alt ernatively, if we use the “exa-” prefix we find that 1.93 x 10 g =
1.93 x 10 Eg, since 16 = −2 + 18. Because the problem asks for the numerical value between one and 1000, we u se the
“peta-” prefix and the answer is 19.3 Pg.
Significance
It is easy to make silly arithmetic errors when switchi ng from one prefix to another, so it is always a good idea to check that
our final answer matches the number we started with. An ea sy way to do this is to put both numbers in scientific notation
and count powers of 10, including the ones hidden in prefixes. If we did not make a mistake, the powers of 1 0 should match
up. In this problem, we started with 1.93 x 10 kg, so we have 13 + 3 = 16 powers of 10. Our final answer in sci entific
notation is 1.93 x 10 Pg, so we have 1 + 15 = 16 powers of 10. So, everything checks out.
If this mass arose from a calculation, we would also wan t to check to determine whether a mass this large mak es any sense
in the context of the problem. For this, Figure 1.4 might be he lpful.
Restate 4.79 x 10 kg using a metric prefix such that the r esulting number is bigger than one but less than 1000.
Answer
Add texts here. Do not delete this text first.
This page titled 1.4: Units and Standards is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.3: Units and Standards by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.
1.2: The Scope and Scale of Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.16 15 18
16 1 16
−2
Exercises

1.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838591.5: Unit Conversion
Use conversion factors to express the value of a given q uantity in different units.
It is often necessary to convert from one unit to ano ther. For example, if you are reading a European cookb ook, some quantities
may be expressed in units of liters and you need to c onvert them to cups. Or perhaps you are reading walkin g directions from one
location to another and you are interested in how man y miles you will be walking. In this case, you may need to convert units of
feet or meters to miles.
1.5.1 Dimensional Homogeneity
All theoretically derived equations that describe phys ical phenomena must be dimensionally homogeneous. An equation is
dimensionally homogeneous if the dimensions of both sides of the equation are t he same and all additive terms have the same
dimensions.
1.5.2 Converting Units
The most common errors in using units occur when conver ting a physical quantity from one set of units to an other set. When you
convert units you are not changing the size of the physical quantity, only the numerical value associa ted with the units in which it is
measured.
The relationship between two units for the same dimen sion are typically found in a handbook as an equivalence relation, such as
. Note again that the unit symbols are mathematical entit ies and cannot be neglected.
The key to converting units is to recall that multi plying a mathematical expression by unity (1) does not change the magnitude of
the mathematical expression. A unit conversion factor equals unity and can be constructed from an equival ence relation. Example
B.1 shows how to convert equivalence statements into unit c onversion factors.
Convert the given equivalence relations into unit conve rsion factors.
The left-hand column shows the equivalence relations f rom a handbook and the right-hand column shows the re sulting unit
conversion factors. Notice how it would be mathematically in correct to just drop the unit symbols.
The following Example illustrates how to perform a si mple unit conversion for pressure, now that we have the unit conversion
factors.
Given a pressure of, convert the pressure to.
AnswerLearning Objectives
Example
Example

1.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83859Now convert the pressure value to.
Answer
If done, correctly the intermediate units should cancel. Check this out by drawing lines through the units that ca ncel.
Let’s consider a simple example of how to convert uni ts. Suppose we want to convert 80 m to kilometers. The first thing to do is to
list the units you have and the units to which you wan t to convert. In this case, we have units in meters and we want to convert to
kilometers. Next, we need to determine a conversion f actor relating meters to kilometers. A conversion factor is a ratio that
expresses how many of one unit are equal to another u nit. For example, there are 12 in. in 1 ft, 1609 m in 1 mi, 100 cm in 1 m, 60 s
in 1 min, and so on. In this case, we know that there ar e 1000 m in 1 km. Now we can set up our unit conversion. We write the units
we have and then multiply them by the conversion factor so the units cancel out, as shown:
Note that the unwanted meter unit cancels, leaving onl y the desired kilometer unit. You can use this method to convert between any
type of unit. Now, the conversion of 80 m to kilomete rs is simply the use of a metric prefix, as we saw in the preceding section, so
we can get the same answer just as easily by noting that
since “kilo-” means 10 and 1 = −2 + 3. However, using c onversion factors is handy when converting between uni ts that are not
metric or when converting between derived units, as the following examples illustrate.
The distance from the university to home is 10 mi an d it usually takes 20 min to drive this distance. C alculate the average
speed in meters per second (m/s). (Note: Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel.)
Strategy
First we calculate the average speed using the given units, then we can get the average speed into the desi red units by picking
the correct conversion factors and multiplying by th em. The correct conversion factors are those that ca ncel the unwanted units
and leave the desired units in their place. In this case, we want to convert miles to meters, so we need to kn ow the fact that
there are 1609 m in 1 mi. We also want to convert minutes to seconds, so we use the conversion of 60 s in 1 min.
Strategy
First we calculate the average speed using the given u nits, then we can get the average speed into the desi red units by
picking the correct conversion factors and multiplyi ng by them. The correct conversion factors are those th at cancel the
unwanted units and leave the desired units in their place. In this case, we want to convert miles to meters, so we need to
know the fact that there are 1609 m in 1 mi. We also want to convert minutes to seconds, so we use the conver sion of 60 s
in 1 min.
Solution
1. Calculate average speed. Average speed is distance trav eled divided by time of travel. (Take this definition a s a given for
now. Average speed and other motion concepts are covered i n later chapters.) In equation form, $Average\; speed =
\frac{Distance}{Time} \ldotp \nonumber $
2. Substitute the given values for distance and time: $Avera ge\; speed = \frac{10\; mi}{20\; min} = 0.50\; \frac{mi}{ min}
\ldotp \nonumber $
3. Convert miles per minute to meters per second by multiplyi ng by the conversion factor that cancels miles and leav e meters,
and also by the conversion factor that cancels minutes an d leave seconds: $0.50\; \frac{\cancel{mile}}{\cancel {min}}
\times \frac{1609\; m}{1\; \cancel{mile}} \times \frac {\cancel{1\; min}}{60\; s} = \frac{(0.50)(1609)}{60}\; m/ s = 13\;3
Example: Converting Nonmetric Units to Metric

1.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83859m/s \ldotp \nonumber$
Significance
Check the answer in the following ways:
1. Be sure the units in the unit conversion cancel corre ctly. If the unit conversion factor was written upside down, the u nits do
not cancel correctly in the equation. We see the “mil es” in the numerator in 0.50 mi/min cancels the “mile ” in the
denominator in the first conversion factor. Also, the “ min” in the denominator in 0.50 mi/min cancels the “min ” in the
numerator in the second conversion factor.
2. Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The problem asked us to solve for average speed in units of
meters per second and, after the cancelations, the onl y units left are a meter (m) in the numerator and a seco nd (s) in the
denominator, so we have indeed obtained these units.
Light travels about 9 Pm in a year. Given that a year is ab out 3 x 10 s, what is the speed of light in meters per second?
Answer
Add texts here. Do not delete this text first.
The density of iron is 7.86 g/cm under standard conditio ns. Convert this to kg/m.
Strategy
We need to convert grams to kilograms and cubic cen timeters to cubic meters. The conversion factors we n eed are 1 kg = 10 g
and 1 cm = 10 m. However, we are dealing with cubic centim eters (cm = cm x cm x cm), so we have to use the secon d
conversion factor three times (that is, we need to cube it). The idea is still to multiply by the conversion f actors in such a way
that they cancel the units we want to get rid of and introdu ce the units we want to keep.
Solution
Significance
Remember, it’s always important to check the answer.
1. Be sure to cancel the units in the unit conversion corr ectly. We see that the gram (“g”) in the numerator in 7. 86 g/cm
cancels the “g” in the denominator in the first conversi on factor. Also, the three factors of “cm” in the denominat or in 7.86
g/cm cancel with the three factors of “cm” in the numerato r that we get by cubing the second conversion factor.
2. Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The problem asked for us to convert to kilograms per cubic
meter. After the cancelations just described, we see the on ly units we have left are “kg” in the numerator and thr ee factors
of “m” in the denominator (that is, one factor of “m” cu bed, or “m ”). Therefore, the units on the final answer are cor rect.
We know from Figure 1.4 that the diameter of Earth is o n the order of 10 m, so the order of magnitude of its surface area is
10 m. What is that in square kilometers (that is, km)? (Try doing this both by converting 10 m to km and t hen squaring it
and then by converting 10 m directly to square kilometers. You should get the same answer both ways.)
Answer
Add texts here. Do not delete this text first.Exercise
Example: Converting between Metric Units
3 3
−2 3
Exercise
14 2 2 7
14 2

1.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83859Unit conversions may not seem very interesting, but n ot doing them can be costly. One famous example of thi s situation was seen
with the Mars Climate Orbiter. This probe was launched by NASA on December 11, 1998. On September 23, 1999, while
attempting to guide the probe into its planned orbi t around Mars, NASA lost contact with it. Subsequent invest igations showed a
piece of software called SM_FORCES (or “small forces”) was r ecording thruster performance data in the English unit s of poundseconds (lb • s). However, other pieces of software that u sed these values for course corrections expected them to be recorded in the
SI units of newton-seconds (N • s), as dictated in the so ftware interface protocols. This error caused the probe to follow a very
different trajectory from what NASA thought it was follo wing, which most likely caused the probe either to burn up in the Martian
atmosphere or to shoot out into space. This failure to pay attention to unit conversions cost hundreds of millions of dollars, not to
mention all the time invested by the scientists and engin eers who worked on the project.
Given that 1 lb (pound) is 4.45 N, were the numbers being outpu t by SM_FORCES too big or too small?
A tank contains of an ideal gas. The pressure in th e tank is and the volume of the tank is. The idea l gas
constant is. Determine the temperature of the gas in th e tank.
Again, the check is to see if the appropriate units cancel o ut.
1.5.3 Weight and Mass
People frequently confuse the terms weight and mass. Th e weight of an object is the force exerted by the ear th's gravitational field
on the object. Mathematically,, where is the mass of the object and is the local gravitational field st rength. The local
gravitational field strength is also referred to as th e local acceleration of gravity.
Standard values for the local gravitational field stre ngth are
Standard values for the local acceleration of gravity a re
TEST YOURSELF: Why do these two interpretations for come up wi th similar numbers but different units?
Much of the confusion about mass and weight can be dir ectly attributed to the fact that the mass and force units in the American
Engineering System are both called "pounds." To elimin ate this problem, it is highly recommended that you only talk about poundforce or a pound-mass. You would never confuse a ne wton with a kilogram, but then they have different nam es.
Unfortunately, you will still find "pound" and " " used frequently to mean both mass and weight. Always approac h "pounds" with
caution when doing calculations. Remember that the wei ght of an object is always a function of the local gr avitational field
strength, but its mass is independent of the gravitatio nal field.
This page titled 1.5: Unit Conversion is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.4: Unit Conversion by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
9.2: Appendix B- Dimensions and Units has no license indicated.Exercise
Example

1.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838601.6: Dimensional Analysis
Find the dimensions of a mathematical expression involving physical quantities.
Determine whether an equation involving physical quantit ies is dimensionally consistent.
The dimension of any physical quantity expresses its dependence on the base quantities as a product of symbols (or powers of
symbols) representing the base quantities. Table li sts the base quantities and the symbols used for thei r dimension. For
example, a measurement of length is said to have dim ension L or L, a measurement of mass has dimension M or M, and a
measurement of time has dimension T or T. Like unit s, dimensions obey the rules of algebra. Thus, area is t he product of two
lengths and so has dimension L, or length squared. Sim ilarly, volume is the product of three lengths and ha s dimension L, or
length cubed. Speed has dimension length over time, L/ T or LT. V olumetric mass density has dimension M/L or ML, or mass
over length cubed. In general, the dimension of any phys ical quantity can be written as
for some powers a, b, c, d, e, f, and g. We can write t he dimensions of a length in this form with a = 1 an d the remaining six powers
all set equal to zero:
Any quantity with a dimension that can be written so t hat all seven powers are zero (that is, its dimension is) is
called dimensionless (or sometimes “of dimension 1,” because anything rais ed to the zero power is one). Physicists often call
dimensionless quantities pure numbers.
Table: Base Quantities and Their Dimensions
Base Quantity Symbol for Dimension
Length L
Mass M
Time T
Current I
Thermodynamic Temperature
Amount of Substance N
Luminous Intensity J
Physicists often use square brackets around the symbol for a physical quantity to represent the dimensions o f that quantity. For
example, if r is the radius of a cylinder and h is it s height, then we write [r] = L and [h] = L to indicat e the dimensions of the radius
and height are both those of length, or L. Similarly, if we use the symbol A for the surface area of a cyli nder and V for its volume,
then [A] = L and [V] = L. If we use the symbol m for th e mass of the cylinder and for the density of the ma terial from which the
cylinder is made, then [m] = M and [] = ML.
The importance of the concept of dimension arises f rom the fact that any mathematical equation relatin g physical quantities must
be dimensionally consistent, which means the equation must obey the following rules:
Every term in an expression must have the same dimensions; it does not make sense to add or subtract quantities of d iffering
dimension (think of the old saying: “You can’t add appl es and oranges”). In particular, the expressions on each side o f the
equality in an equation must have the same dimensions.
The arguments of any of the standard mathematical funct ions such as trigonometric functions (such as sine and cosine),
logarithms, or exponential functions that appear in the equa tion must be dimensionless. These functions require pure n umbersLearning Objectives
1 1
2 3
–1 3 –3
2 3
−3

1.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83860as inputs and give pure numbers as outputs.
If either of these rules is violated, an equation is not dimensionally consistent and cannot possibly be a correc t statement of physical
law. This simple fact can be used to check for typos or algebra mistakes, to help remember the various laws of physics, and even to
suggest the form that new laws of physics might take. This last use of dimensions is beyond the scope of th is text, but is something
you will undoubtedly learn later in your academic career.
Suppose we need the formula for the area of a circle fo r some computation. Like many people who learned geo metry too long
ago to recall with any certainty, two expressions may pop into our mind when we think of circles: and. On e expression
is the circumference of a circle of radius r and the othe r is its area. But which is which?
Strategy
One natural strategy is to look it up, but this could take time to find information from a reputable sou rce. Besides, even if we
think the source is reputable, we shouldn’t trust ev erything we read. It is nice to have a way to double-c heck just by thinking
about it. Also, we might be in a situation in which we ca nnot look things up (such as during a test). Thus, the s trategy is to find
the dimensions of both expressions by making use of the fact that dimensions follow the rules of algebra. If either expression
does not have the same dimensions as area, then it cannot p ossibly be the correct equation for the area of a circle.
Solution
We know the dimension of area is L. Now, the dimension of the ex pression is
since the constant is a pure number and the radius r is a length. Therefore, has the dimension of area. Similarly, the
dimension of the expression is
since the constants 2 and are both dimensionless and the radius r is a length. We see that has the dime nsion of length,
which means it cannot possibly be an area.
We rule out because it is not dimensionally consis tent with being an area. We see that is dimensionall y consistent with
being an area, so if we have to choose between these two exp ressions, is the one to choose.
Significance
This may seem like kind of a silly example, but the i deas are very general. As long as we know the dimension s of the
individual physical quantities that appear in an equa tion, we can check to see whether the equation is dim ensionally consistent.
On the other hand, knowing that true equations are di mensionally consistent, we can match expressions from our imperfect
memories to the quantities for which they might be ex pressions. Doing this will not help us remember dimension less factors
that appear in the equations (for example, if you ha d accidentally conflated the two expressions from the example into,
then dimensional analysis is no help), but it does help us remember the correct basic form of equations.
Suppose we want the formula for the volume of a sphere. The two expressions commonly mentioned in elementary d iscussions
of spheres are and. One is the volume of a sphere o f radius r and the other is its surface area. Which o ne is the
volume?
Answer
Add texts here. Do not delete this text first.Example: Using Dimensions to Remember an Equation
Exercise

1.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83860Consider the physical quantities s, v, a, and t with di mensions [s] = L, [v] = LT, [a] = LT, and [t] = T. Determ ine whether
each of the following equations is dimensionally consiste nt:
a. s = vt + 0.5at;
b. s = vt + 0.5at; and
c. v = sin ().
Strategy
By the definition of dimensional consistency, we nee d to check that each term in a given equation has th e same dimensions as
the other terms in that equation and that the arguments of any standard mathematical functions are dimensionle ss.
Solution
a. There are no trigonometric, logarithmic, or exponentia l functions to worry about in this equation, so we need onl y look at
the dimensions of each term appearing in the equation. There are three terms, one in the left expression and two i n the
expression on the right, so we look at each in turn:
b. Again, there are no trigonometric, exponential, or logar ithmic functions, so we only need to look at the dimensions of each
of the three terms appearing in the equation:
None of the three terms has the same dimension as any ot her, so this is about as far from being dimensionally c onsistent as you
can get. The technical term for an equation like this is nonsense.
c. This equation has a trigonometric function in it, so f irst we should check that the argument of the sine functio n is
dimensionless:
The argument is dimensionless. So far, so good. Now we need to check the dimensions of each of the two terms (t hat is, the left
expression and the right expression) in the equation:
The two terms have different dimensions—meaning, the e quation is not dimensionally consistent. This equation i s another
example of “nonsense.”
Significance
If we are trusting people, these types of dimensional checks might seem unnecessary. But, rest assured, any textbook on a
quantitative subject such as physics (including this one) almost certainly contains some equations with t ypos. Checking
equations routinely by dimensional analysis save us th e embarrassment of using an incorrect equation. Also, checking the
dimensions of an equation we obtain through algebrai c manipulation is a great way to make sure we did not make a mistake (or
to spot a mistake, if we made one).Example: Checking Equations for Dimensional Consistency
−1 −2

1.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83860Is the equation v = at dimensionally consistent?
Answer
Add texts here. Do not delete this text first.
This page titled 1.6: Dimensional Analysis is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.5: Dimensional Analysis by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.Exercise

1.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838611.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course
Describe the process for developing a problem-solving strategy.
Explain how to find the numerical solution to a problem.
Summarize the process for assessing the significance of t he numerical solution to a problem.
Problem-solving skills are clearly essential to success in a quantitative course in physics. More important, th e ability to apply broad
physical principles—usually represented by equations— to specific situations is a very powerful form of knowl edge. It is much
more powerful than memorizing a list of facts. Analyti cal skills and problem-solving abilities can be appli ed to new situations
whereas a list of facts cannot be made long enough to contai n every possible circumstance. Such analytical skills are u seful both for
solving problems in this text and for applying physics in e veryday life.
As you are probably well aware, a certain amount of cre ativity and insight is required to solve problems. No rigid procedure works
every time. Creativity and insight grow with experien ce. With practice, the basics of problem solving beco me almost automatic.
One way to get practice is to work out the text’s exam ples for yourself as you read. Another is to work as m any end-of-section
problems as possible, starting with the easiest to build confidence and then progressing to the more difficu lt. After you become
involved in physics, you will see it all around you, and you can begin to apply it to situations you enc ounter outside the classroom,
just as is done in many of the applications in this text.
Although there is no simple step-by-step method that works for every problem, the following processes facil itates problem solving
and make it more meaningful. Two approaches are provided:
Physics Approach
For this approach, a three-stage process is usedl. The three stages are strategy, solution, and significan ce. This process is used in
examples throughout the book. Here, we look at each stage of the process in turn.
1.7.1 Strategy
Strategy is the beginning stage of solving a problem. The idea is to figure out exactly what the problem i s and then develop a
strategy for solving it. Some general advice for this stage is as follows:
Examine the situation to determine which physical principles are involve d. It often helps to draw a simple sketch at the
outset. You often need to decide which direction is posit ive and note that on your sketch. When you have identifi ed the physical
principles, it is much easier to find and apply the equatio ns representing those principles. Although finding the correct equation
is essential, keep in mind that equations represent phys ical principles, laws of nature, and relationships among phy sical
quantities. Without a conceptual understanding of a pr oblem, a numerical solution is meaningless.
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as state d (identify the “knowns”). Many problems are
stated very succinctly and require some inspection to det ermine what is known. Drawing a sketch be very useful at thi s point as
well. Formally identifying the knowns is of particular impo rtance in applying physics to real-world situations. For exam ple, the
word stopped means the velocity is zero at that instant. Also, we can often take initial time and position as zero by the
appropriate choice of coordinate system.
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). In complex problems, especially, it
is not always obvious what needs to be found or in what seque nce. Making a list can help identify the unknowns.
Determine which physical principles can help you solve the problem. Since physical principles tend to be expressed in the
form of mathematical equations, a list of knowns and unkn owns can help here. It is easiest if you can find equations that contain
only one unknown—that is, all the other variables are known—so you can solve for the unknown easily. If the equation
contains more than one unknown, then additional equations ar e needed to solve the problem. In some problems, several
unknowns must be determined to get at the one needed most. In such problems it is especially important to keep phy sical
principles in mind to avoid going astray in a sea of equation s. You may have to use two (or more) different equations to get the
final answer.Learning Objectives

1.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838611.7.2 Solution
The solution stage is when you do the math. Substitute the knowns (along with their units) into the appropriate equation a nd
obtain numerical solutions complete with units. That is, do the algebra, calculus, geometry, or arith metic necessary to find the
unknown from the knowns, being sure to carry the units through the calculations. This step is clearly impor tant because it produces
the numerical answer, along with its units. Notice, however, tha t this stage is only one-third of the overall problem-sol ving process.
1.7.3 Significance
After having done the math in the solution stage of problem solving, it is tempting to think you are don e. But, always remember
that physics is not math. Rather, in doing physics, we use mathematics as a tool to help us understand natu re. So, after you obtain a
numerical answer, you should always assess its significance:
Check your units. If the units of the answer are incorrect, then an error ha s been made and you should go back over your
previous steps to find it. One way to find the mistake is to check all the equations you derived for dimensional consi stency.
However, be warned that correct units do not guarantee the n umerical part of the answer is also correct.
Check the answer to see whether it is reasonable. Does it make sense? This step is extremely important: –the goal of physic s
is to describe nature accurately. To determine whether the answer is reasonable, check both its magnitude and its sign, in
addition to its units. The magnitude should be consisten t with a rough estimate of what it should be. It should also compare
reasonably with magnitudes of other quantities of the sa me type. The sign usually tells you about direction and should be
consistent with your prior expectations. Your judgment will improve as you solve more physics problems, and it will b ecome
possible for you to make finer judgments regarding whethe r nature is described adequately by the answer to a problem. This
step brings the problem back to its conceptual meaning. If you can judge whether the answer is reasonable, you hav e a deeper
understanding of physics than just being able to solve a problem mechanically.
Check to see whether the answer tells you something interesting. What does it mean? This is the flip side of the question:
Does it make sense? Ultimately, physics is about understand ing nature, and we solve physics problems to learn a litt le
something about how nature operates. Therefore, assuming the answer does make sense, you should always take a moment t o
see if it tells you something about the world that you find interesting. Even if the answer to this particular problem is not very
interesting to you, what about the method you used to solv e it? Could the method be adapted to answer a question tha t you do
find interesting? In many ways, it is in answering question s such as these science that progresses.
Engineering Approach
The engineering approach is not fundamentally diffe rent from the approach described above. In other wor ds, either approach
works.
Engineering problem solving is based on the study of m odels that describe real systems. In every case, the r eal system must be
modeled by making simplifying assumptions before any mathematical or empirical analysis can be performed. Realistic and useful
answers can only be obtained if the modeling assumpti ons "catch" the important features of the problem. T he behavior of any
model is constrained by the physical laws it incorporat es and the modeling assumptions used in its developme nt. Two different
models for the same system may behave in entirely di fferent ways. The engineers' job is to develop the " best" model for the
problem at hand.
Because most mistakes are made in the process of deve loping the model it is essential that you learn to solve problems in a
methodical fashion that documents your solution proce ss including your modeling assumptions. Engineering ca lculations are part
of the archival record of any engineering project a nd are frequently referred to years after the origin al work is completed. Many a
junior engineer begins a new job by reviewing engineering calculations performed by others.
To help you develop your engineering problem solving skills, a multi-step process is proposed to help you (1) organize your
thoughts, (2) document your solution, and (3) improve your ability to solve new problems. A summary of the steps is presented in
Figure A-1. A sample problem showing the format can be found at the end of this appendix. As with any heurist ic, this one does not
guarantee a solution; however, its usefulness has been pro ven so frequently that we want you to use it in this cour se.
Figure A-1

1.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83861SUMMARY OF PROBLEM SOLVING STEPS
KNOWN: In your own words, state briefly what is known. (Step #1)
FIND: State concisely what you are trying to find. (Step #2)
GIVEN: Translate the problem word statement into sketch es and symbolic notation. All pertinent information g iven explicitly in the
problem statement should be listed here. (Step #3)
ANALYSIS: Develop a model and solve for desired informati on.
Develop a strategy. (STRATEGY) (Step #4)
Make modeling assumptions. (Clearly identified.) (Step #5)
Develop and solve the model. (Step #6)
Develop symbolic solutions.
Calculate numerical values.
Check the reasonableness of your answers.
COMMENT: Discuss your results. (Step #7)
A more detailed discussion of each step is presented i n the following sections. (Based on material in Fundamentals of Engineering
Thermodynamics by M. J. Moran and H. N. Shapiro, J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1988.)
KNOWN: In your own words, state briefly what is known. Read the problem statement and think about what it says. Do not j ust
blindly copy the problem statement over again or li st every detail of the problem. Construct a short s entence that summarizes the
situation.
FIND: State concisely what you are trying to find. (If you don't know what you are looking for, how do you know when you've
found it?) Do not just copy (a)...., (b)...., etc. from t he problem and do not assume that you must find thi ngs in the order implied in
the problem statement.
GIVEN: Translate the word statement of the problem into en gineering sketches and symbolic notation. When complet ed, you
should be able to throw away the original problem stateme nt because you have recorded all of the pertinent informat ion.
Draw and label a sketch of the physical system or device. (If you cannot visualize the problem, you probably c an't solve it!) If you
anticipate using a conservation or accounting princi ple, identify the boundaries (control surfaces) of th e system you select for your
analysis and identify the interactions between this system and the surroundings, e.g. forces, work, mass flow, etc.
Define symbols for the important variables and param eters of the problem. Record the numerical values giv en for the important
variables and parameters.
Label the diagram with all relevant information from the problem statement. This is where you record all of the information
explicitly given in the problem statement.
Be especially wary of making implicit assumptions as you prepare this section. Recognize the difference between information that
is given explicitly in the problem and your interpretatio n of the information.
ANALYSIS: It is in this section that an appropriate mathemati cal model is developed and used to find the desired information. As
you prepare this section, carefully annotate your sol ution with words that describe what you are doing. This commentary is
invaluable in exposing your thought processes and if nee d be in recreating it at a later time.
Develop a strategy. Every solution should include some initial statements t hat reveal your plan for solving the problem. As a
starting point, clearly state what you believe to be the phy sical laws or concepts that will be important in solving this pro blem.
What's the property to be counted? What’s the appropr iate system? What's the appropriate time period? What co nstitutive
relationships may be required?
Your initial strategy may not be the best approach or th e only approach. It may not even be correct approach, bu t as you proceed
through the analysis process your plans may change. As t hey do just document them.
To stress the importance of consciously thinking about th e problem, every analysis section should start with a brief subsection
labeled STRATEGY.
Make modeling assumptions. Every problem solution requires that you make modelin g assumptions. These assumptions are
based on the information given in the problem statement, y our interpretation of the given information, and your understanding

1.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83861of the underlying phenomena. Every model begins with un iversally accepted natural laws, and the assumptions provid e the
traceable link between the fundamental laws and problem-sp ecific model you have developed. All assumptions should be
clearly identified as they are applied. You should be able to give a logical reason for every m odeling assumption you make. If
you cannot, it probably is an incorrect assumption.
Some problem solving formats call for a separate section li sting all assumptions before you begin your analysis. T here are two
problems with this approach. First, experience shows that it i s often difficult to know exactly what assumptions to make until
you are building the model. Secondly, separating the ass umptions from their application in the model tends to hide how they
influence the modeling process. If a summary list is desired, it should be prepared after the analysis is completed.
Develop symbolic solutions. Symbolic solutions are critical in engineering analysi s and should always be developed and
examined before you insert numerical values. The physics is in the s ymbolic solution, not the numerical answer. If the symbol ic
solution is incorrect, there’s no hope for the numbers. If po ssible, solve an equation for the unknown quantity and isola te it on
one side of the equal sign. It is desirable to work with symbolic equations as long as possib le before substituting in numbers for
many reasons. Symbolic solutions are especially useful when you are lookin g for errors, for solving parametric problems where
certain parameters change, and are much easier to modify as your model develops. Look for groups of terms or ways t o
rearrange you symbolic answer that simplify the equation a nd allow you to check for dimensional consistency. Groups of terms
with physical meaning or logical intermediate values shou ld be assigned a unique symbol. Numerical values for the se
intermediate answers can then be calculated and checked separately.
Calculate numerical values. Examine your symbolic solution and see if it makes sense. Once you are satisfied with the
symbolic solution, substitute in the numbers and calculate th e numerical answer. It is good practice to identify the source, e.g.
table, chart, or book, of all numerical data used in the solu tion, especially if it is not common knowledge. It is also good
practice to calculate intermediate or partial numerica l answers when you are faced with a very long computation or complicated
equation. This prevents calculator errors from creeping i nto a problem and gives you an opportunity to check the answers
against your physical intuition.
Check the reasonableness of your answers. Once you have a numerical answer, consider the magnitude and sign of all values
and decide whether they are reasonable. One way to do this i s to compare your answer against the results of a simpler mode l or
models that would be expected to bracket your answer. T ry different units for the answer, say gallons per minute in stead of liters
per second, to match your experience.
As you prepare the analysis, do not waste time recopying the solution over again if you reach a dead end or make a mistake. Just
cross out the error, clearly identify the mistake, a nd keep going. Textbook examples and professors' note s give the mistaken
impression that problem solving is a linear process t hat follows a single path with no mistakes and no side trips. Everyone makes
mistakes, takes unexpected side trips, and forgets to make an important assumption.
Successful problem solvers acknowledge these diversions and learn from them. You should never start a problem more than once;
however, your solution may take several turns before y ou are satisfied with the answer. The record of your j ourney is important.
Don't "clean up" the solution. Clean up your standar d problem solving method because a sloppy solution i s usually the result of
sloppy thinking. Get in the habit of attacking every problem in the same way. Scrap paper is meant for dood les, not engineering
calculations.
COMMENTS: Discuss your results briefly. Comment on what you learn ed, identify key aspects of the solution, and indicate how
your model might be improved by changing assumption s. Consciously check the validity of your answer by consi dering simpler
models. Don't wait for someone else (like your boss or instructor) to find an error in your work by performin g a five-minute "backof-the-envelope" calculation you could have performe d before submitting your answer.
This page titled 1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.8: Solving Problems in Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.

1.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838619.1: Appendix A- Solving Engineering Problems - A Problem- Solving Heuristic has no license indicated.

1.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838621.E: Practice
1.E.1 Conceptual Questions
1.E.1.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics
1. What is physics?
2. Some have described physics as a “search for simplicity.” Explain why this might be an appropriate description.
3. If two different theories describe experimental obse rvations equally well, can one be said to be more valid than the other
(assuming both use accepted rules of logic)?
4. What determines the validity of a theory?
5. Certain criteria must be satisfied if a measurement or observation is to be believed. Will the criteria necessaril y be as strict for
an expected result as for an unexpected result?
6. Can the validity of a model be limited or must it be u niversally valid? How does this compare with the required v alidity of a
theory or a law?
1.E.1.2 Units and Standards
7. Identify some advantages of metric units.
8. What are the SI base units of length, mass, and time?
9. What is the difference between a base unit and a derived unit? (b) What is the difference between a base quantity and a derived
quantity? (c) What is the difference between a base qua ntity and a base unit?
10. For each of the following scenarios, refer to Figure 1.4 and Table 1.2 to determine which metric prefix on the mete r is most
appropriate for each of the following scenarios. (a) Yo u want to tabulate the mean distance from the Sun for each planet in the
solar system. (b) You want to compare the sizes of some common v iruses to design a mechanical filter capable of blocki ng the
pathogenic ones. (c) You want to list the diameters of al l the elements on the periodic table. (d) You want to list th e distances to
all the stars that have now received any radio broadcasts se nt from Earth 10 years ago.
1.E.1.3 Significant Figures
11. (a) What is the relationship between the precision a nd the uncertainty of a measurement? (b) What is the relati onship between
the accuracy and the discrepancy of a measurement?
1.E.1.4 Solving Problems in Physics
12. What information do you need to choose which equation or equations to use to solve a problem?
13. What should you do after obtaining a numerical answer wh en solving a problem?
1.E.2 Problems
1.E.2.1 The Scope and Scale of Physics
14. Find the order of magnitude of the following physical quantities.
a. The mass of Earth’s atmosphere: 5.1 × 10 kg;
b. The mass of the Moon’s atmosphere: 25,000 kg;
c. The mass of Earth’s hydrosphere: 1.4 × 10 kg;
d. The mass of Earth: 5.97 × 10 kg;
e. The mass of the Moon: 7.34 × 10 kg;
f. The Earth–Moon distance (semi-major axis): 3.84 × 10 m;
g. The mean Earth–Sun distance: 1.5 × 10 m;
h. The equatorial radius of Earth: 6.38 × 10 m;
i. The mass of an electron: 9.11 × 10 kg;
j. The mass of a proton: 1.67 × 10 kg;
k. The mass of the Sun: 1.99 × 10 kg.
15. Use the orders of magnitude you found in the previous pr oblem to answer the following questions to within an order of
magnitude.
f18
−31
−27

1.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83862a. How many electrons would it take to equal the mass of a proton? b. How many Earths would it take to equal the mass of the Sun?
c. How many Earth–Moon distances would it take to cover the d istance from Earth to the Sun?
d. How many Moon atmospheres would it take to equal the mass of Earth’s atmosphere?
e. How many moons would it take to equal the mass of Earth?
f. How many protons would it take to equal the mass of the Su n?
For the remaining questions, you need to use Figure 1.4 to ob tain the necessary orders of magnitude of lengths, masses, and times.
16. Roughly how many heartbeats are there in a lifetime?
17. A generation is about one-third of a lifetime. Appro ximately how many generations have passed since the yea r 0 AD?
18. Roughly how many times longer than the mean life of an extremely unstable atomic nucleus is the lifetime of a human?
19. Calculate the approximate number of atoms in a bacte rium. Assume the average mass of an atom in the bacterium is 1 0 times
the mass of a proton.
20. (a) Calculate the number of cells in a hummingbird as suming the mass of an average cell is 10 times the mass of a ba cterium.
(b) Making the same assumption, how many cells are there in a human?
21. Assuming one nerve impulse must end before another ca n begin, what is the maximum firing rate of a nerve in imp ulses per
second?
22. About how many floating-point operations can a super computer perform each year?
23. Roughly how many floating-point operations can a su percomputer perform in a human lifetime?
1.E.2.2 Units and Standards
24. The following times are given using metric prefixes on the base SI unit of time: the second. Rewrite them in sc ientific notation
without the prefix. For example, 47 Ts would be rewritten as 4.7 × 10 s.
a. 980 Ps;
b. 980 fs;
c. 17 ns;
d. 577 µs.
25. The following times are given in seconds. Use metric p refixes to rewrite them so the numerical value is greater than one but less
than 1000. For example, 7.9 × 10 s could be written as either 7.9 cs or 79 ms.
a. 9.57 × 10 s;
b. 0.045 s;
c. 5.5 × 10 s;
d. 3.16 × 10 s.
26. The following lengths are given using metric prefixe s on the base SI unit of length: the meter. Rewrite them in s cientific
notation without the prefix. For example, 4.2 Pm would be rewr itten as 4.2 × 10 m.
a. 89 Tm;
b. 89 pm;
c. 711 mm;
d. 0.45 µm.
27. The following lengths are given in meters. Use metric prefixes to rewrite them so the numerical value is bigger tha n one but less
than 1000. For example, 7.9 × 10 m could be written eithe r as 7.9 cm or 79 mm.
a. 7.59 × 10 m;
b. 0.0074 m;
c. 8.8 × 10 m;
d. 1.63 × 10 m.
28. The following masses are written using metric prefixe s on the gram. Rewrite them in scientific notation in ter ms of the SI base
unit of mass: the kilogram. For example, 40 Mg would be writt en as 4 × 10 kg.
a. 23 mg;
b. 320 Tg;
c. 42 ng;13
−2
−7
−2
−11

1.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83862d. 7 g;
e. 9 Pg.
29. The following masses are given in kilograms. Use metr ic prefixes on the gram to rewrite them so the numerical v alue is bigger
than one but less than 1000. For example, 7 × 10−4 kg could be written as 70 cg or 700 mg.
a. 3.8 × 10−5 kg;
b. 2.3 × 1017 kg;
c. 2.4 × 10−11 kg;
d. 8 × 1015 kg;
e. 4.2 × 10−3 kg.
1.E.2.3 Unit Conversion
30. The volume of Earth is on the order of 10 m. (a) Wha t is this in cubic kilometers (km)? (b) What is it in cubic m iles (mi)?
(c) What is it in cubic centimeters (cm)?
31. The speed limit on some interstate highways is roughly 100 km/h. (a) What is this in meters per second? (b) How many miles
per hour is this?
32. A car is traveling at a speed of 33 m/s. (a) What is its speed in kilometers per hour? (b) Is it exceeding the 90 km/ h speed limit?
33. In SI units, speeds are measured in meters per second (m/ s). But, depending on where you live, you’re probably more
comfortable of thinking of speeds in terms of either kilom eters per hour (km/h) or miles per hour (mi/h). In this problem, you
will see that 1 m/s is roughly 4 km/h or 2 mi/h, which is h andy to use when developing your physical intuition. More precisely,
show that (a) 1.0 m/s = 3.6 km/h and (b) 1.0 m/s = 2.2 mi/h.
34. American football is played on a 100-yd-long field, excluding the end zones. How long is the field in meters? (Assume that 1 m
= 3.281 ft.)
35. Soccer fields vary in size. A large soccer field is 1 15 m long and 85.0 m wide. What is its area in square feet? (As sume that 1 m
= 3.281 ft.)
36. What is the height in meters of a person who is 6 ft 1.0 in. tall?
37. Mount Everest, at 29,028 ft, is the tallest mountain on Ea rth. What is its height in kilometers? (Assume that 1 m = 3. 281 ft.)
38. The speed of sound is measured to be 342 m/s on a certa in day. What is this measurement in kilometers per hour?
39. Tectonic plates are large segments of Earth’s crust t hat move slowly. Suppose one such plate has an average speed of 4.0 cm/yr.
(a) What distance does it move in 1.0 s at this speed? (b) What is its speed in kilometers per million years?
40. The average distance between Earth and the Sun is 1. 5 × 10 m. (a) Calculate the average speed of Earth in it s orbit (assumed
to be circular) in meters per second. (b) What is this sp eed in miles per hour?
41. The density of nuclear matter is about 10 kg/m. Given t hat 1 mL is equal in volume to cm, what is the density of nu clear
matter in megagrams per microliter (that is, Mg/µL)?
42. The density of aluminum is 2.7 g/cm. What is the densi ty in kilograms per cubic meter?
43. A commonly used unit of mass in the English system is t he pound-mass, abbreviated lbm, where 1 lbm = 0.454 kg. Wha t is the
density of water in pound-mass per cubic foot?
44. A furlong is 220 yd. A fortnight is 2 weeks. Convert a speed of one furlong per fortnight to millimeters per s econd.
45. It takes radians (rad) to get around a circle, which i s the same as 360°. How many radians are in 1°?
46. Light travels a distance of about 3 × 10 m/s. A light-m inute is the distance light travels in 1 min. If the Sun i s 1.5 × 10 m from
Earth, how far away is it in lightminutes?
47. A light-nanosecond is the distance light travels in 1 ns. Convert 1 ft to light-nanoseconds.
48. An electron has a mass of 9.11 × 10 kg. A proton has a mass of 1.67 × 10 kg. What is the mass of a proton in electronmasses?
49. A fluid ounce is about 30 mL. What is the volume of a 12 fl-oz can of soda pop in cubic meters?
1.E.2.4 Dimensional Analysis
50. A student is trying to remember some formulas from geometry. In what follows, assume A is area, V is volume, and all other
variables are lengths. Determine which formulas are dime nsionally consistent. (a) V =; (b) A =; (c) V = 0.5bh;
(d) V =; (e) V = 21 3 3 3
18 3 3
8 11
−31 −27

1.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386251. Consider the physical quantities s, v, a, and t with dimen sions [s] = L, [v] = LT, [a] = LT, and [t] = T. Determine whether
each of the following equations is dimensionally consiste nt. (a) v = 2as; (b) s = vt + 0.5at; (c) v = s/t; (d) a = v/t.
52. Consider the physical quantities m, s, v, a, and t with di mensions [m] = M, [s] = L, [v] = LT, [a] = LT, and [t] = T. Assumi ng
each of the following equations is dimensionally consiste nt, find the dimension of the quantity on the left-hand side of the
equation: (a) F = ma; (b) K = 0.5mv; (c) p = mv; (d) W = m as; (e) L = mvr.
53. Suppose quantity s is a length and quantity t is a tim e. Suppose the quantities v and a are defined by v = ds/dt and a = dv/dt. (a)
What is the dimension of v? (b) What is the dimension of the quantity a? What are the dimensions of (c) vdt, (d) adt, and (e)
da/dt?
54. Suppose [V] = L3, [ρ] = ML, and [t] = T. (a) What is the d imension of dV? (b) What is the dimension of dV/dt? (c) What
is the dimension of (dV/dt)?
55. The arc length formula says the length s of arc subt ended by angle in a circle of radius r is given by the equ ation s = r. What
are the dimensions of (a) s, (b) r, and (c)?
1.E.2.5 Significant Figures
66. Consider the equation 4000/400 = 10.0. Assuming the numb er of significant figures in the answer is correct, what can you say
about the number of significant figures in 4000 and 4 00?
67. Suppose your bathroom scale reads your mass as 65 kg with a 3% uncertainty. What is the uncertainty in your mass (in
kilograms)?
68. A good-quality measuring tape can be off by 0.50 c m over a distance of 20 m. What is its percent uncertai nty?
69. An infant’s pulse rate is measured to be 130 ± 5 beats / min. What is the percent uncertainty in this measuremen t?
70. (a) Suppose that a person has an average heart rate of 7 2.0 beats/min. How many beats does he or she have in 2.0 years? (b) In
2.00 years? (c) In 2.000 years?
71. A can contains 375 mL of soda. How much is left after 30 8 mL is removed?
72. State how many significant figures are proper in the results of the following calculations: (a) (106.7)(98.2) / (46.210)(1.01); (b)
(18.7); (c) (1.60 × 10)(3712)
73. (a) How many significant figures are in the numbers 99 and 100.? (b) If the uncertainty in each number is 1, what is the percent
uncertainty in each? (c) Which is a more meaningful way to express the accuracy of these two numbers: significant f igures or
percent uncertainties?
74. (a) If your speedometer has an uncertainty of 2.0 km/ h at a speed of 90 km/h, what is the percent uncertainty? (b) If it has the
same percent uncertainty when it reads 60 km/ h, what is the range of speeds you could be going?
75. (a) A person’s blood pressure is measured to be 12 0 ± 2 mm Hg. What is its percent uncertainty? (b) Assuming t he same percent
uncertainty, what is the uncertainty in a blood pressure measurement of 80 mm Hg?
76. A person measures his or her heart rate by counting the number of beats in 30 s. If 40 ± 1 beats are counted in 30.0 ± 0.5 s, what
is the heart rate and its uncertainty in beats per minut e?
77. What is the area of a circle 3.102 cm in diameter?
78. Determine the number of significant figures in th e following measurements: (a) 0.0009, (b) 15,450.0, (c) 6×1 03, (d) 87.990,
and (e) 30.42.
79. Perform the following calculations and express your answer using the correct number of significant digits. (a) A woman has two
bags weighing 13.5 lb and one bag with a weight of 10.2 lb. Wh at is the total weight of the bags? (b) The force F on an object is
equal to its mass m multiplied by its acceleration a. If a wag on with mass 55 kg accelerates at a rate of 0.0255 m/s, what is the
force on the wagon? (The unit of force is called the newton an d it is expressed with the symbol N.)
1.E.3 Additional Problems
80. Consider the equation y = mt +b, where the dimension of y is length and the dimension of t is time, and m and b a re constants.
What are the dimensions and SI units of (a) m and (b) b?
81. Consider the equation, where s is a length and t is a tim e. What are the dimensions and SI
units of (a) s, (b) v, (c) a, (d) j, (e) S, and (f) c?
82. (a) A car speedometer has a 5% uncertainty. What i s the range of possible speeds when it reads 90 km/h? (b) Con vert this range
to miles per hour. Note 1 km = 0.6214 mi.−1 −2
2 2 2
–1 –2
–3
2 −19
0 0 0 0 0

1.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386283. A marathon runner completes a 42.188-km course in 2 h, 30 min, and 12 s. There is an uncertainty of 25 m in t he distance
traveled and an uncertainty of 1 s in the elapsed time. (a) C alculate the percent uncertainty in the distance. (b) Ca lculate the
percent uncertainty in the elapsed time. (c) What is the average speed in meters per second? (d) What is the uncerta inty in the
average speed?
84. The sides of a small rectangular box are measured to be 1.80 ± 0.1 cm, 2.05 ± 0.02 cm, and 3.1 ± 0.1 cm long. Calc ulate its
volume and uncertainty in cubic centimeters.
85. When nonmetric units were used in the United Kingdom, a unit of mass called the pound-mass (lbm) was used, where 1 l bm =
0.4539 kg. (a) If there is an uncertainty of 0.0001 kg in t he pound-mass unit, what is its percent uncertainty? (b) B ased on that
percent uncertainty, what mass in pound-mass has an uncert ainty of 1 kg when converted to kilograms?
86. The length and width of a rectangular room are measur ed to be 3.955 ± 0.005 m and 3.050 ± 0.005 m. Calculate the ar ea of the
room and its uncertainty in square meters.
87. A car engine moves a piston with a circular cross-secti on of 7.500 ± 0.002 cm in diameter a distance of 3.250 ± 0.00 1 cm to
compress the gas in the cylinder. (a) By what amount is the gas decreased in volume in cubic centimeters? (b) Find t he
uncertainty in this volume.
1.E.4 Challenge Problems
88. The first atomic bomb was detonated on July 16, 1945, at the Trinity test site about 200 mi south of Los Alamos. In 1947, the
U.S. government declassified a film reel of the explosion. From this film reel, British physicist G. I. Taylor was able t o
determine the rate at which the radius of the fireball fro m the blast grew. Using dimensional analysis, he was then a ble to
deduce the amount of energy released in the explosion, which wa s a closely guarded secret at the time. Because of this, T aylor
did not publish his results until 1950. This problem chall enges you to recreate this famous calculation.
a. Using keen physical insight developed from years of exp erience, Taylor decided the radius r of the fireball sho uld depend
only on time since the explosion, t, the density of the ai r, ρ, and the energy of the initial explosion, E. Thus, he m ade the
educated guess that for some dimensionless constant k a nd some unknown exponents a, b, and c. Given that [E]
= ML T, determine the values of the exponents necessary to ma ke this equation dimensionally consistent. (Hint: Notice
the equation implies that and that [k] = 1.)
b. By analyzing data from high-energy conventional exp losives, Taylor found the formula he derived seemed to be valid as
long as the constant k had the value 1.03. From the film re el, he was able to determine many values of r and the
corresponding values of t. For example, he found that aft er 25.0 ms, the fireball had a radius of 130.0 m. Use these val ues,
along with an average air density of 1.25 kg/m, to calcula te the initial energy release of the Trinity detonation in joules (J).
(Hint: To get energy in joules, you need to make sure all the numbers you substitute in are expressed in terms of SI base
units.) (c) The energy released in large explosions is ofte n cited in units of “tons of TNT” (abbreviated “t TNT”), wh ere 1 t
TNT is about 4.2 GJ. Convert your answer to (b) into kilotons o f TNT (that is, kt TNT). Compare your answer with the
quick-and-dirty estimate of 10 kt TNT made by physicist Enr ico Fermi shortly after witnessing the explosion from what was
thought to be a safe distance. (Reportedly, Fermi made his est imate by dropping some shredded bits of paper right before the
remnants of the shock wave hit him and looked to see how far they were carried by it.)
89. The purpose of this problem is to show the entire c oncept of dimensional consistency can be summarized by t he old saying
“You can’t add apples and oranges.” If you have studied po wer series expansions in a calculus course, you know the sta ndard
mathematical functions such as trigonometric functions, l ogarithms, and exponential functions can be expressed a s infinite sums
of the form where the a are dimensionless constants for all n = 0, 1, 2, ⋯ and x is the
argument of the function. (If you have not studied power serie s in calculus yet, just trust us.) Use this fact to explain why the
requirement that all terms in an equation have the same dime nsions is sufficient as a definition of dimensional con sistency. That
is, it actually implies the arguments of standard mathema tical functions must be dimensionless, so it is not really ne cessary to
make this latter condition a separate requirement of th e definition of dimensional consistency as we have done in this section.
1.E.5 Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).2 –2
n

1.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83862This page titled 1.E: Practice is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.E: Units and Measurement (Exercises) has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applicati ons-spring-2009.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Math Review
2.1: Introduction
2.2: Geometrical Shapes
2.3: Triangles
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
2.5: Finding Angle Measurements
2.6: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
2.7: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities
2.7.1: Solving Linera Equations
2.7.2: Solving Inequalities
2.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations
2.7.4: Solving a System of Linear Equations
2.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer's Ru le
2.8: Functions
2.8.1: Basic Functions
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
2.8.4: Properties_of_Logarithms
2.8.5: Exponential and Logarithmic Models
2.9: Vectors
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
2.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
2.9.5: Algebra of Vectors
2.9.6: Products of Vectors
2.9.7: Further Topics
2.9.E: Practice
2.10: Vectors
2: Math Review is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838642.1: Introduction
You might well wonder why we start off a physics book wit h a chapter on mathematics. The thing is, the mathe matics covered in
this chapter is mathematics you are supposed to alre ady know. The problem is that you might be a little bit rusty with it. We don’t
want that rust to get in the way of your learning of t he physics. So, we try to knock the rust off of the math ematics that you are
supposed to already know, so that you can concentrate on the physics. As much as we emphasize that this is a p hysics course rather
than a mathematics course, there is no doubt that you will advance your mathematical knowledge if you take this course seriously.
You will use mathematics as a tool, and as with any too l, the more you use it the better you get at using it. Some of the mathematics
in this book is expected to be new to you. The mathe matics that is expected to be new to you will be intro duced in recitation on an
as-needed basis. It is anticipated that you will lea rn and use some calculus in this course before you ev er see it in a mathematics
course. (This book is addressed most specifically to students who have never had a physics course before an d have never had a
calculus course before but are currently enrolled in a calculus course. If you have already taken calculu s, physics, or both, then you
have a wellearned advantage.) Two points of emphasis reg arding the mathematical component of your solutions to physics
problems that have a mathematical component are in ord er:
1. You are required to present a clear and complete analy tical solution to each problem. This means that you will be manipulating
symbols (letters) rather than numbers.
2. For any physical quantity, you are required to use the symbol which is conventionally used by physicists, and/or a symbol
chosen to add clarity to your solution. In other words, it i s not okay to use the symbol x to represent every unknown.
Aside from the calculus, here are some of the kinds of mat hematical problems you have to be able to solve:
The reciprocal of is not. Try it in the case of som e simple numbers. Suppose and. Then
, and the reciprocal of is which is clearly not 6 (wh ich is what you obtain if you take the reciprocal of to be
). So what is the reciprocal of? The reciprocal of is.
2.1.1 Problems Involving Percent Change
A cart is traveling along a track. As it passes throu gh a photogate its speed is measured to be. Later, at a second
photogate, the speed of the cart is measured to be. Find th e percent change in the speed of the cart.
The percent change in anything is the change divide d by the original, all times 100%. (I’ve emphasized th e word “original”
because the most common mistake in these kinds of pro blems is dividing the change by the wrong thing.) The change in a
quantity is the new value minus the original value. (The most common mistake here is reversing the order. If you forget
which way it goes, think of a simple problem for which yo u know the answer and see how you must arrange the new a nd
original values to make it come out right. For insta nce, suppose you gained 2 kg over the summer. You know that the change
in your mass is +2 kg. You can calculate the differe nce both ways—we’re talking trial and error with at mos t two trials.
You’ll quickly find out that it is “the new value mi nus the original value” a.k.a. “final minus initial” that yields the correct
value for the change.)
Okay, now let’s solve the given problem
Recalling that the change is the new value minus the origi nal value we have
While it’s certainly okay to memorize this by accide nt because of familiarity with it, you should concent rate on being able to
derive it using common sense (rather than working at m emorizing it). Substituting the given values for the case at hand we
obtain1

2.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838642.1.2 Problems Involving Right Triangles
The length of the shorter side of a right triangle i s and the length of the hypotenuse is. Find the leng th of the longer side and
find both of the angles, aside from the right angle, in t he triangle.
Solution
Draw the triangle such that it is obvious which side is the sh orter side
Pythagorean Theorem →
Subtract from both sides of the equation →
Swap sides →
Take the square root of both sides of the equation →
By definition, the sine of θ is the side opposite θ divi ded by the hypotenuse → sinθ=
Take the arcsine of both sides of the equation in order to ge t θ by itself → θ=sin
By definition, the cosine of ϕ is the side adjacent to ϕ divided by the hypotenuse → cosϕ=
Take the arccosine of both sides of the equation in order to get ϕ by itself → ϕ=cos
To solve a problem like the one above, you need to memorize the relations between the sides and the angl es of a right triangle.
A convenient mnemonic for doing so is “SOHCAHTOA ”
pronounced as a single word.
Referring to the diagram above right:
SOH reminds us that:: sinθ=
CAH reminds us that:: cosθ=
TOA reminds us that:: tanθ=
Points to remember:
1. The angle θ is never the 90 degree angle.
2. The words “opposite” and “adjacent” designate sides r elative to the angle. For instance,
the cosine of θ is the length of the side adjacent to θ div ided by the length of the hypotenuse.Example:
-1

2.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83864You also need to know about the arcsine and the arcc osine functions to solve the example problem above. The arcsine function
is the inverse of the sine function. The answer to th e question, “What is the arcsine of 0.44?” is, “that a ngle whose sine is 0.44
.” There is an arcsine button on your calculator. It is typically labeled sin-1, to be read, “arcsine.” T o use it you probably have
to hit the inverse button or the second function butto n on your calculator first.
The inverse function of a function undoes what the fun ction does. Thus:
sin sinθ =θ
Furthermore, the sine function is the inverse functio n to the arcsine function and the cosine function i s the inverse function to
the arccosine function. For the former, this means that:
sin(sin x)=x
2.1.3 Problems Involving the Quadratic Formula
First comes the quadratic equation, then comes the qu adratic formula. The quadratic formula is the soluti on to the quadratic
equation:
in which
x is the variable whose value is sought, and a, b, and c are co nstants
The goal is to find the value of x that makes the left side 0. That value is given by the quadratic formula:
to be read/said:
‘x’ equals minus ‘b’, plus-or-minus the square root of ‘b’ sq uared minus four ‘a’ ‘c’, all over two ‘a’.
So, how do you know when you have to use the quadratic formula? There is a good chance that you need it whe n the square of the
variable for which you are solving, appears in the equ ation you are solving. When that is the case, carry ou t the algebraic steps
needed to arrange the terms as they are arranged in equation 1-8 above. If this is impossible, then the quadratic formula is not to be
used. Note that in the quadratic equation you have a term with the variable to the second power, a term with the variable to the first
power, and a term with the variable to the zeroth power (the constant term). If additional powers also appea r, such as the one-half
power (the square root), or the third power, then the quadratic formula does not apply. If the equation i ncludes additional terms in
which the variable whose value is sought appears as the argument of a special function such as the sine fu nction or the exponential
function, then the quadratic formula does not apply. Now suppose that there is a square term and you can g et the equation that you
are solving in the form of equation 1-8 above but t hat either b or c is zero. In such a case, you can u se the quadratic formula, but it
is overkill. If b in equation 1-8 above is zero then the eq uation reduces to:
The easy way to solve this problem is to recognize tha t there is at least one x in each term, and to factor the x out. This yields:
Then you have to realize that a product of two multi plicands is equal to zero if either multiplicand is equal to zero. Thus, setting
either multiplicand equal to zero and solving for x yields a solution. We have two multiplicands involvi ng x, so, there are two
solutions to the equation. The second multiplicand in the exp ression is x itself, so
is a solution to the equation. Setting the first term equal to zero gives:-1
-1

2.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83864Now suppose the b in the quadratic equation, equation 1-8, i s zero. In that case, the quadratic equation reduces to:
which can easily be solved without the quadratic formula as f ollows:
where we have emphasized the fact that there are two sq uare roots to every value by placing a plus-or-minu s sign in front of the
radical.
Now, if upon arranging the given equation in the form of t he quadratic equation (equation 1-8):
you find that a, b, and c are all non-zero, then you should use the quadratic formula. Here we present an example of a problem
whose solution involves the quadratic formula:
Given
find x.
Solution
At first glance, this one doesn’t look like a quadrat ic equation, but as we begin isolating x, as we always stri ve to do in solving
for x, (hey, once we have x all by itself on the left side of the equation, with no x on the right side of the equation, we have
indeed solved for x—that’s what it means to solve for x) we quickly find that it is a quadratic equation. Whe never we have the
unknown in the denominator of a fraction, the first s tep in isolating that unknown is to multiply both side s of the equation by
the denominator. In the case at hand, this yields:
Multiplying through on the left we find
At this point it is pretty clear that we are dealing with a quadratic equation so our goal becomes gettin g it into the standard
form of the quadratic equation, the form of equatio n 1-8, namely:. Combining the terms involving x on the left
and rearranging we obtain
Subtracting 24 from both sides yields:
which is indeed in the standard quadratic equation fo rm. Now we just have to use inspection to identify which values in our
given equation are the a, b, and c that appear in th e standard quadratic equation (equation 1-8). Althou gh it is
not written, the constant multiplying the x, in the case a t hand, is just 1. So we have a = 1, b = 4, and c = −21.
Substituting these values into the quadratic formula (eq uation 1-9):Example: Quadratic Formula Example Problem

2.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83864yields
which results in x=3,x=-7
as the solutions to the problem. As a quick check we substitut e each of these values back into the original equation:
and find that each substitution leads to an identity. (An identity is an equation whose validity is trivially obvious, such as 6 =
6.)
This chapter does not cover all the non-calculus mat hematics you will encounter in this course. If you m aster the concepts in this
chapter (or re-master them if you already mastered them) you will be on your way to mastering all the no n-calculus mathematics
you need for this course. Regarding reading it all: B y the time you complete your physics course, you are supposed to have read
this book from cover to cover. Reading physics materia l that is new to you is supposed to be slow going. By the word reading in
this context, we really mean reading with understanding. Reading a physics text involves not only reading but taking the time to
make sense of diagrams, taking the time to make sen se of mathematical developments, and taking the time to make sense of the
words themselves. It involves rereading. The method I use is to push my way through a chapter once, all th e way through at a
novel-reading pace, picking up as much as I can on th e way but not allowing myself to slow down. Then, I reall y read it. On the
second time through I pause and ponder, study diagra ms, and ponder over phrases, looking up words in the di ctionary and working
through examples with pencil and paper as I go. I tr y not to go on to the next paragraph until I really understand what is being said
in the paragraph at hand. That first read, while of lit tle value all by itself, is of great benefit in answe ring the question, “Where is
the author going with this?”, while I am carrying out the se cond read.
This book is a physics book, not a mathematics book. One o f your goals in taking a physics course is to become more proficient
at solving physics problems, both conceptual problems involving little to no math, and problems involving some mathematics.
In a typical physics problem you are given a descript ion about something that is taking place in the unive rse and you are
supposed to figure out and write something very specif ic about what happens as a result of what is taking p lace. More
importantly, you are supposed to communicate clearly, co mpletely, and effectively, how, based on the descripti on and basic
principles of physics, you arrived at your conclusion. T o solve a typical physics problem you have to: (1) fo rm a picture based
on the given description, quite often a moving picture, in your mind, (2) concoct an appropriate mathematical problem based
on the picture, (3) solve the mathematical problem, and (4) interpret the solution of the mathematical problem. The physics
occurs in steps 1, 2, and 4. The mathematics occurs in step 3. It only represents about 25% of the solution to a typical physics
problem.
This page titled 2.1: Introduction is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 2.5 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Jeffrey W. Schnick
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1A: Mathematical Prelude by Jeffrey W. Schnick is licensed CC BY-SA 2.5. Original source: http://www.cbphysics.org.Note

2.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838652.2: Geometrical Shapes
know what a polygon is
know what perimeter is and how to find it
know what the circumference, diameter, and radius of a cir cle is and how to find each one
know the meaning of the symbol ππ and its approximating value
know what a formula is and four versions of the circumference formula of a circle
know the meaning and notation for area
know the area formulas for some common geometric figures
be able to find the areas of some common geometric fig ures
know the meaning and notation for volume
know the volume formulas for some common geometric object s
be able to find the volume of some common geometric ob jects
Polygons
We can make use of conversion skills with denominate numbers to make measure ments of geometric figures such as rectangles,
triangles, and circles. To make these measurements we nee d to be familiar with several definitions.
A polygon is a closed plane (flat) figure whose sides are line segm ents (portions of straight lines).
Polygons
Not polygons
Perimeter
The perimeter of a polygon is the distance around the polygon.
To find the perimeter of a polygon, we simply add up the lengt hs of all the sides.
Find the perimeter of each polygon.
SolutionLearning Objectives
Definition: Polygon
Definition: Perimeter
Sample Set A

2.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865
Solution
Solution
Our first observation is that three of the dimension s are missing. However, we can determine the missing meas urements using
the following process. Let A, B, and C represent the missing me asurements. Visualize
Sample Set A
Sample Set A

2.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Find the perimeter of each polygon.
Answer
20 ft
Answer
26.8 m
Answer
49.89 mi
Circumference/Diameter/Radius
Diameter (d)
A diameter of a circle is any line segment that passes through th e center of the circle and has its endpoints on the circl e.Practice Set A
Practice Set A
Practice Set A

2.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Radius (r)
A radius of a circle is any line segment having as its endpoints the center of the circle and a point on the circle.
The radius is one half the diameter.
Circumference (C)
The circumference of a circle is the distance around the circle. It is given by
Find the circumference of the circle.
Solution
Use the formula.
By commutativity of multiplication,
, exactly
This result is exact since has not been approximated.
Find the perimeter of the figure.
Solution
We notice that we have two semicircles (half circles).
The larger radius is 6.2 cm.
The smaller radius is
The width of the bottom part of the rectangle is 2.0 cm.Sample Set B
Sample Set B

2.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Find the outside perimeter of
Answer
41.634 mm
Exercises
Find each perimeter or approxi mate circumference. Use.
Answer
21.8 cm
Practice Set B
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865
Answer
38.14 inches
Answer
0.86 m
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865
Answer
120.78 m
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865
Answer
43.7 mm
The Meaning and Notation for Area
The product, or, square length unit (sq length unit), can be int erpreted physically as the
area of a surface.
Area
The area of a surface is the amount of square length units contai ned in the surface.
For example, 3 sq in. means that 3 squares, 1 inch on each side, can be placed precisely on some surface. (Th e squares may have to
be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the surfa ce.)
We will examine the area of the following geometric figur es.

2.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Area Formulas
We can determine the areas of these geometric figures usi ng the following formulas.
Figure Area Formula Statement
TriangleArea of a triangle is one half the
base times the height.
RectangleArea of a rectangle is the length
times the width.
ParallelogramArea of a parallelogram is base
times the height.
TrapezoidArea of a trapezoid is one half
the sum of the two bases times
the height.
CircleArea of a circle is times the
square of the radius.
Finding Areas of Some Common Geometric Figures
Find the area of the triangle.
Solution
The area of this triangle is 60 sq ft, which is often writte n as 60.
Find the area of the rectangle.
Sample Set A
Sample Set A

2.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Solution
Let's first convert 4 ft 2 in. to inches. Since we wish t o convert to inches, we'll use the unit fraction si nce it has inches in
the numerator. Then,
Thus,
The area of this rectangle is 400 sq in.
Find the area of the parallelogram.
Solution
The area of this parallelogram is 63.86 sq cm.
Find the area of the trapezoid.
Solution
The area of this trapezoid is 71.545 sq mm.Sample Set A
Sample Set A

2.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Find the approximate area of the circle.
Solution
The area of this circle is approximately 886.23 sq ft.
Find the area of each of the following geometric figures.
Answer
36 sq cm
Answer
37.503 sq mm
Answer
13.26 sq in.Sample Set A
Practice Set A
Practice Set A
Practice Set A

2.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865
Answer
367.5 sq mi
Answer
452.16 sq ft
Answer
44.28 sq cm
The Meaning and Notation for Volume
The product, or cubic length unit (cu length unit), can be inte rpreted
physically as the volume of a three-dimensional object.
Volume
The volume of an object is the amount of cubic length units contai ned in the object.
For example, 4 cu mm means that 4 cubes, 1 mm on each side, would precisely fill some three-dimensional obj ect. (The cubes may
have to be cut and rearranged so they match the shape of the object.)Practice Set A
Practice Set A
Practice Set A

2.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865

Volume Formulas
Figure V olume Formula Statement
Rectangular solidThe volume of a rectangular
solid is the length times the
width times the height.
SphereThe volume of a sphere is
times times the cube of the
radius.
CylinderThe volume of a cylinder is
times the square of the radius
times the height.
ConeThe volume of a cone is
times times the square of the
radius times the height.

2.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Finding Volumes of Some Common Geometric Objects
Find the volume of the rectangular solid.
Solution
The volume of this rectangular solid is 270 cu in.
Find the approximate volume of the sphere.
Solution
The approximate volume of this sphere is 904.32 cu cm, which i s often written as 904.32 cm.
Find the approximate volume of the cylinder.
SolutionSample Set B
Sample Set B
Sample Set B

2.2.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865The volume of this cylinder is approximately 588.0529 2 cu ft. The volume is approximate because we approxi mated with
3.14.
Find the approximate volume of the cone. Round to two decima l places.
Solution
The volume of this cone is approximately 20.93 cu mm. The volume is approximate because we approximated with 3.14.
Find the volume of each geometric object. If is required, approximate it with 3.14 and find the approximate volume.
Answer
21 cu in.
SphereSample Set B
Practice Set B
Practice Set B

2.2.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865
Answer
904.32 cu ft
Answer
157 cu m
Answer
0.00942 cu in.
Exercises
Find each indicated measurement.
Area
Answer
16 sq mPractice Set B
Practice Set B
Exercise

2.2.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Area
Area
Answer
1.21 sq mm
Area
Area
Answer
18 sq in.Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Area
Exact area
Answer
Approximate area
AreaExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865
Answer
40.8 sq in.
Area
Approximate area
Answer
31.0132 sq in.
Exact area
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Approximate area
Answer
158.2874 sq mm
Exact area
Approximate area
Answer
64.2668 sq in.
Area
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Approximate area
Answer
43.96 sq ft
V olume
V olume
Answer
512 cu cm
Exact volume
Approximate volumeExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865
Answer
11.49 cu cm
Approximate volume
Exact volume
Answer
Approximate volume
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Approximate volume
Answer
22.08 cu in.
Approximate volume
Exercises for Review
In the number 23,426, how many hundreds are there?
Answer
List all the factors of 32.Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Find the value of.
Answer
Find the value of.
Find the perimeter.
Answer
27.9m
Area (A) is measured in square units, perimeter (P) is measured in units, and circumference (C) is measured in units.
Square
Figure
Rectangle
Figure Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.2.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Parallelogram
Figure
Trapezoid
Figure
Triangle
Figure
Circle
Figure
V olume (V) is measured in cubic units and surface area (SA) is measured in square units.

2.2.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Cube
Figure
Rectangular Solid
Figure
Right Circular Cylinder
Figure
Right Circular Cone
Figure

2.2.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83865Sphere
Figure
This page titled 2.2: Geometrical Shapes is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Denny Burzynski
& Wade Ellis, Jr. (OpenStax CNX).

2.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838662.3: Triangles
6.1.2: Triangles
1. Identify equilateral, isosceles, scalene, acute, right, and obtuse triangles.
2. Identify whether triangles are similar, congruent, or neit her.
3. Identify corresponding sides of congruent and similar triangles.
4. Find the missing measurements in a pair of similar triangle s.
5. Solve application problems involving similar triangles
Introduction
Geometric shapes, also called figures, are an importan t part of the study of geometry. The triangle is on e of the basic shapes in
geometry. It is the simplest shape within a classificat ion of shapes called polygons. All triangles have th ree sides and three angles,
but they come in many different shapes and sizes. Wi thin the group of all triangles, the characteristics o f a triangle’s sides and
angles are used to classify it even further. Triangle s have some important characteristics, and understan ding these characteristics
allows you to apply the ideas in real-world problems.
Classifying and Naming Triangles
A polygon is a closed plane figure with three or more straight sides. Polygons each have a special name bas ed on the number of
sides they have. For example, the polygon with three s ides is called a triangle because “tri” is a prefix t hat means “three.” Its name
also indicates that this polygon has three angles. The prefi x “poly” means many.
The table below shows and describes three classificati ons of triangles. Notice how the types of angles in the triangle are used to
classify the triangle.
Name of Triangle Picture of Triangle Description
Acute Triangle
A triangle with 3 acute angles (3 angles
measuring between 0° and 90°).
Obtuse Triangle
A triangle with 1 obtuse angle (1 angle
measuring between 90° and 180°).
Right Triangle
A triangle containing one right angle (1
angle that measures 90°). Note that the
right angle is shown with a corner mark and
does not need to be labeled 90°.
The sum of the measures of the three interior angle s of a triangle is always 180°. This fact can be appli ed to find the measure of the
third angle of a triangle, if you are given the other two. Consider the examples below.Learning Objectives

2.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866A triangle has two angles that measure 35° and 75°. Find the m easure of the third angle.
Solution
The sum of the three interior angles of a triangle is 18 0°.
35° + 75° + = 180°
Find the value of.
110º + = 180º
= 180° ‒ 110º
= 70°
Answer: The third angle of the triangle measures 70°.
One of the angles in a right triangle measures 57º. Find the m easurement of the third angle.
Solution
The sum of the three angles of a triangle is 180°. One of t he angles has a measure of 90° as it is a right triangle.
57° + 90° + = 180°
Simplify.
147º + = 180°
Find the value of.
= 180º - 147º
= 33º
Answer: The third angle of the right triangle measures 33°.
There is an established convention for naming triangl es. The labels of the vertices of the triangle, which are generally capital
letters, are used to name a triangle.
You can call this triangle ABC or ∆ABC since A, B, and C are vertices of the triangle. When naming the trian gle, you can begin
with any vertex. Then keep the letters in order as y ou go around the polygon. The triangle above could be named in a variety of
ways: ∆ABC, or ∆CBA. The sides of the triangle are line segment s AB, AC, and CB.
Just as triangles can be classified as acute, obtuse, or right based on their angles, they can also be cl assified by the length of their
sides. Sides of equal length are called congruent sides. While we designate a segment joining points A and B by the notation,
we designate the length of a segment joining points A and B by the notation AB without a segment bar over it. The length AB is a
number, and the segment is the collection of points that make up the segment.Example
Example

2.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Mathematicians show congruency by putting a hash mark symbol through the middle of sides of equal length. If the hash mark is
the same on one or more sides, then those sides are c ongruent. If the sides have different hash marks, the y are not congruent. The
table below shows the classification of triangles by their si de lengths.
Name of Triangle Picture of Triangle Description
Equilateral Triangle
A triangle whose three sides have the same
length. These sides of equal length are
called congruent sides.
Isosceles Triangle
A triangle with exactly two congruent sides.
Scalene Triangle
A triangle in which all three sides are a
different length.
To describe a triangle even more specifically, you can us e information about both its sides and its angles. Consider this example.
Classify the triangle below.
Solution
Notice what kind of angles the triangle has. Since one angl e is a right angle, this is a right triangle.
Notice the lengths of the sides. Are there congruence marks or other labels?
The congruence marks tell us there are two sides of equal le ngth. So, this is an isosceles triangle.
Answer: This is an isosceles right triangleExample

2.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Classify the given triangle.
Identifying Congruent and Similar Triangles
Two triangles are congruent if they are exactly the same size and shape. In congruent triangles, the mea sures of corresponding
angles and the lengths of corresponding sides are equal. Consider the two triangles shown below:
Since both ∠B and ∠E are right angles, these triangles are right triangle s. Let’s call these two triangles ∆ABC and ∆DEF. These
triangles are congruent if every pair of correspondin g sides has equal lengths and every pair of correspo nding angles has the same
measure.
The corresponding sides are opposite the corresponding angles.
↔ means “corresponds to”
∠B ↔ ∠E
∠A ↔ ∠D
∠C ↔ ∠F
∆ABC and ∆DEF are congruent triangles as the corresponding sides and corresponding angles are equal.
Let’s take a look at another pair of triangles. Below are the triangles ∆ABC and ∆RST.
These two triangles are surely not congruent because ∆R ST is clearly smaller in size than ∆ABC. But, even thoug h they are not the
same size, they do resemble one another. They are t he same shape. The corresponding angles of these tri angles look like they might
have the same exact measurement, and if they did they woul d be congruent angles and we would call the triangles similar triangles.Try It Now 1

2.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Congruent angles are marked with hash marks, just as con gruent sides are.
Figure: Image showing angle measurements of both
triangles.
Figure: Image showing triangles ABC and RST using hash m arks to show angle
congruency.
We can also show congruent angles by using multiple b ands within the angle, rather than multiple hash mark s on one band. Below
is an image using multiple bands within the angle.
Figure: Image showing triangles ABC and RST using band s to show angle congruency.
If the corresponding angles of two triangles have th e same measurements they are called similar triangles. This name makes sense
because they have the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. When a pair of triangles is similar, t he corresponding sides are
proportional to one another. That means that there is a consistent scale factor that can be used to comp are the corresponding sides.
In the previous example, the side lengths of the lar ger triangle are all 1.4 times the length of the sm aller. So, similar triangles are
proportional to one another.
Just because two triangles look similar does not mean they are similar triangles in the mathematical sense of the wo rd. Checking
that the corresponding angles have equal measure is one wa y of being sure the triangles are similar.
Corresponding Sides of Similar Triangles
There is another method for determining similarity o f triangles that involves comparing the ratios of th e lengths of the
corresponding sides.
If the ratios of the pairs of corresponding sides are equal, t he triangles are similar.

2.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Consider the two triangles below.
∆ABC is not congruent to ∆DEF because the side lengths of ∆DEF are longer than those of ∆ABC. So, are these triangles simila r?
If they are, the corresponding sides should be proportiona l.
Since these triangles are oriented in the same way, you can pair the left, right, and bottom sides: and, and, and
. (You might call these the two shortest sides, the two longest sides, and the two leftover sides and arrive at the same ratios).
Now we will look at the ratios of their lengths.
Substituting the side length values into the proportion, you see that it is true:
If the corresponding sides are proportional, then the tr iangles are similar. Triangles ABC and DEF are similar, but not congruent.
Let’s use this idea of proportional corresponding sides t o determine whether two more triangles are similar.
Determine if the triangles below are similar by seeing if their corresponding sides are proportional.
Solution
First determine the corresponding sides, which are opposite c orresponding angles.
Write the corresponding side lengths as ratios.
Substitute the side lengths into the ratios, and determ ine if the ratios of the corresponding sides are equ ivalent. They are, so the
triangles are similar.Example

2.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Answer: ∆ABC and ∆DEF are similar.
The mathematical symbol ~ means “is similar to”. So, you can write ∆ABC is similar to ∆DEF as ∆ABC ~ ∆DEF.
Determine whether the two triangles are similar, congruen t, or neither.
Finding Missing Measurements in Similar Triangles
You can find the missing measurements in a triangle if you know some measurements of a similar triangle. Let’s look at an
example.
∆ABC and ∆XYZ are similar triangles. What is the length of sid e BC?
Solution
In similar triangles, the ratios of corresponding si des are proportional. Set up a proportion of two ratio s, one that includes the
missing side.
Substitute in the known side lengths for the side names in the ratio. Let the unknown side length be n.
Solve for n using cross multiplication.Try It Now 2
Example

2.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866This process is fairly straightforward—but be careful th at your ratios represent corresponding sides, recal ling that corresponding
sides are opposite corresponding angles.
Solving Application Problems Involving Similar Triangles
Applying knowledge of triangles, similarity, and congr uence can be very useful for solving problems in rea l life. Just as you can
solve for missing lengths of a triangle drawn on a pa ge, you can use triangles to find unknown distances be tween locations or
objects.
Let’s consider the example of two trees and their shad ows. Suppose the sun is shining down on two trees, one tha t is 6 feet tall and
the other whose height is unknown. By measuring the le ngth of each shadow on the ground, you can use triangl e similarity to find
the unknown height of the second tree.
First, let’s figure out where the triangles are in this situation. The trees themselves create one pair of c orresponding sides. The
shadows cast on the ground are another pair of correspo nding sides. The third side of these imaginary simila r triangles runs from
the top of each tree to the tip of its shadow on the grou nd. This is the hypotenuse of the triangle.
If you know that the trees and their shadows form similar t riangles, you can set up a proportion to find the height of the tree.
When the sun is at a certain angle in the sky, a 6- foot tree will cast a 4-foot shadow. How tall is a tree that casts an 8-foot
shadow?
Solution
The angle measurements are the same, so the triangles are similar triangles. Since they are similar triang les, you can use
proportions to find the size of the missing side.
Set up a proportion comparing the heights of the trees an d the lengths of their shadows.
Substitute in the known lengths. Call the missing tree heigh t h.
Solve for h using cross-multiplication.
Answer: The tree is 12 feet tall.Example

2.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Summary
Triangles are one of the basic shapes in the real wor ld. Triangles can be classified by the characteristi cs of their angles and sides,
and triangles can be compared based on these charact eristics. The sum of the measures of the interior ang les of any triangle is 180º.
Congruent triangles are triangles of the same size and shape. They have corresponding sides of equal len gth and corresponding
angles of the same measurement. Similar triangles hav e the same shape, but not necessarily the same size. The lengths of their sides
are proportional. Knowledge of triangles can be a helpful i n solving real-world problems.
1. Obtuse scalene; this triangle has vertices P, Q, and R, one angle (angle Q) that is between 90º and 180º, and sides of three
different lengths.
2. ∆ABC and ∆DEF are neither similar nor congruent; th e corresponding angle measures are not known to be e qual as shown
by the absence of congruence marks on the angles. Also, t he ratios of the corresponding sides are not equal:
6.1.3: Pythagorean Theorem
1. Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the unknown side of a right triangle.
2. Solve application problems involving the Pythagorean Th eorem.
Introduction
A long time ago, a Greek mathematician named Pythagoras discovered an interesting property about right triangles: the sum of
the squares of the lengths of each of the triangle’s legs is the same as the square of the length of the tria ngle’s hypotenuse. This
property—which has many applications in science, art, engin eering, and architecture—is now called the Pythagorean Theorem.
Let’s take a look at how this theorem can help you le arn more about the construction of triangles. And th e best part—you don’t
even have to speak Greek to apply Pythagoras’ discovery.
The Pythagorean Theorem
Pythagoras studied right triangles, and the relationsh ips between the legs and the hypotenuse of a right t riangle, before deriving his
theory.
If a and b are the lengths of the legs of a right triangle and c is the length of the hypotenuse, then the sum of th e squares of the
lengths of the legs is equal to the square of the length of the hypotenuse.
This relationship is represented by the formula: Try It Now Answers
Learning Objectives
The Pythagorean Theorem

2.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866In the box above, you may have noticed the word “squ are,” as well as the small 2s to the top right of the le tters in. To
square a number means to multiply it by itself. So, fo r example, to square the number you multiply, and to square the number
, you multiply. Some common squares are shown in the table below.
Number Number Times Itself Square
1 1
2 4
3 9
4 16
5 25
10 100
When you see the equation, you can think of this as “the length of side a times itself, plus the length of side b times
itself is the same as the length of side c times itself.”
Let’s try out all of the Pythagorean Theorem with an act ual right triangle.
This theorem holds true for this right triangle—the s um of the squares of the lengths of both legs is th e same as the square of the
length of the hypotenuse. And, in fact, it holds true for all right triangles.
The Pythagorean Theorem can also be represented in te rms of area. In any right triangle, the area of the square drawn from the
hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the areas of the sq uares that are drawn from the two legs. You can see t his illustrated below in the
same 3-4-5 right triangle.
Note that the Pythagorean Theorem only works with right triangles.
Finding the Length of the Hypotenuse
You can use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the lengt h of the hypotenuse of a right triangle if you know the length of the
triangle’s other two sides, called the legs. Put another way, i f you know the lengths of a and b, you can find c.

2.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
In the triangle above, you are given measures for le gs a and b: 5 and 12, respectively. You can use the Pythagorean T heorem to find
a value for the length of c, the hypotenuse.
The Pythagorean Theorem.
Substitute known values for a and b.
Evaluate.
Simplify. To find the value of c, think about a number that, when multiplied by itself, equals 169. Does 10 work? How about 11?
12? 13? (You can use a calculator to multiply if the numb ers are unfamiliar.)
The square root of 169 is 13.
Using the formula, you find that the length of c, the hypotenuse, is 13.
In this case, you did not know the value of c—you were given the square of the length of the hypo tenuse, and had to figure it out
from there. When you are given an equation like an d are asked to find the value of c, this is called finding the square root
of a number. (Notice you found a number, c, whose square was 169.)
Finding a square root takes some practice, but it also takes knowledge of multiplication, division, and a l ittle bit of trial and error.
Look at the table below.
Number Number which, when multiplied by
itself, equals number Square Root
1 1
4 2
9 3
16 4
25 5
100 10
It is a good habit to become familiar with the square s of the numbers from 0 ‒10, as these arise frequently in mathematics. If you
can remember those square numbers—or if you can use a calculator to find them—then finding many common s quare roots will be
just a matter of recall.

2.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866For which of these triangles is?
A)
B)
C)
D)
Finding the Length of a Leg
You can use the same formula to find the length of a right triangle’s leg if you are given measurement s for the lengths of the
hypotenuse and the other leg. Consider the example bel ow.
Find the length of side a in the triangle below. Use a calculator to estimate the s quare root to one decimal place.
Solution
In this right triangle, you are given the measurement s for the hypotenuse, c, and one leg, b. The hypotenuse is always opposite
the right angle and it is always the longest side of the tr iangle.
= 6
= 7
To find the length of leg a, substitute the known values i nto the Pythagorean Theorem.
Solve for. Think: what number, when added to 36, gives you 49?Try It Now 1
Example

2.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Use a calculator to find the square root of 13. The ca lculator gives an answer of 3.6055…, which you can roun d to 3.6. (Since
you are approximating, you use the symbol ≈.)
Answer: a ≈ 3.6
Which of the following correctly uses the Pythagorean Theo rem to find the missing side,?
A)
B)
C)
D)
Using the Pythagorean Theorem to Solve Real-world Problems
The Pythagorean Theorem is perhaps one of the most u seful formulas you will learn in mathematics because there are so many
applications of it in real world settings. Architects and engineers use this formula extensively when buil ding ramps, bridges, and
buildings. Look at the following examples.
The owners of a house want to convert a stairway leadin g from the ground to their back porch into a ramp. The porch is 3 feet
off the ground, and due to building regulations, th e ramp must start 12 feet away from the base of the p orch. How long will the
ramp be?
Use a calculator to find the square root, and round the answe r to the nearest tenth.
Solution
To solve a problem like this one, it often makes sense to draw a simple diagram showing where the legs and hy potenuse of the
triangle lie.
Identify the legs and the hypotenuse of the triangl e. You know that the triangle is a right triangle since the ground and the
raised portion of the porch are perpendicular—this m eans you can use the Pythagorean Theorem to solve thi s problem. Identify
a, b, and c.Try It Now 2
Example

2.3.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866 = 3
= 12
Use the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of c.
Use a calculator to find c.
The square root of 153 is 12.369…, so you can round that t o 12.4.
Answer: The ramp will be 12.4 feet long.
A sailboat has a large sail in the shape of a right triangle. The longest edge of the sail measures 17 yar ds, and the bottom edge
of the sail is 8 yards. How tall is the sail?
Solution
Draw an image to help you visualize the problem. In a r ight triangle, the hypotenuse will always be the long est side, so here it
must be 17 yards. The problem also tells you that the bottom edge of the triangle is 8 yards.
Setup the Pythagorean Theorem.
, so
Answer: The height of the sail is 15 yards.
Summary
The Pythagorean Theorem states that in any right triang le, the sum of the squares of the lengths of the tria ngle’s legs is the same as
the square of the length of the triangle’s hypotenuse. This theorem is represented by the formula 222 abc + =. Put simply, if youExample

2.3.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866know the lengths of two sides of a right triangle, you can apply the Pythagorean Theorem to find the length of the third side.
Remember, this theorem only works for right triangles.
1. B)
; this is a right triangle; when you sum the squares of the lengths of the sides, you get the square of th e
length of the hypotenuse.
2. C); in this triangle, the hypotenuse has length, and the legs have length and. Substituting into the
Pythagorean Theorem you have:; this equation is the sa me as, or. What number, times
itself, equals? That would make.
A triangle is formed when three straight line segments bound a portion of the plane. The line segments are called the sides of the
triangle. A point where two sides meet is called a vertex of the triangle, and the angle formed is called an angle of the triangle.
The symbol for triangle is.
The triangle in Figure is denoted by (or or, etc.).
Its sides are,, and.
Its vertices are, and.
Its angles are,, and.
Figure: Triangle.
The triangle is the most important figure in plane geometry, This is because figures with more than thre e sides can always be
divided into triangles (Figure). If we know the prope rties of a triangle, we can extend this knowledge to the study of other
figures as well.
Figure: A closed figure formed by more than three str aight lines can be divided into triangles.
A fundamental property of triangles is the following:Try It Now Answers

2.3.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866The sum of the angles of a triangle is.
In of Figure,.
Find:
Solution
Answer:
Proof of Theorem: Through draw parallel to (see Fi gure). Note that we are using the parallel postulate here,
and because they are alternate interior angles of p arallel lines, Therefore.
Figure: Through draw parallel to.
We may verify Theorem by measuring the angles of a triangle with a protractor and taking the sum, However no measuring
instrument is perfectly accurate, It is reasonable to expect an answer such as,,, etc. The purpose of our
mathematical proof is to assure us that the sum of the angle s of every triangle must be exactly \(180^{\circ}\).
Find:Theorem
Example
Example

2.3.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
Solution
Check:
Answer:.
Find and:
Solution
Answer:,.
In Figure, is called an exterior angle of,,, and are called the interior angles of. and are
said to be the interior angles remote from the exterior angle.Example

2.3.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
Figure: is an exterior angle of.
The results of Example suggest the following theorem.
An exterior angle is equal to the sum of the two remote inter ior angles,
In Figure,.
Find:
Solution
Using Theorem,.
Answer:.
Proof of Theorem: We present this proof in double-column form, with statements in the left column and the reason for each
statement in the right column. The last statement is the t heorem we wish to prove.
Statements Reasons
1. 1. The sum of the angles of a triangle is.
2. 2. Subtract from both sides of the equation, statement 1.
3. 3. and are supplementary.
4..4. Both (statement 3) and (statement 2) equal
Find:Theorem
Example (repeated)
Example

2.3.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
Solution
is an exterior angle with remote interior angles and. By Theorem,
The least common denominator (1, c, d) is 15.
Check:
Answer:.
Our work on the sum of the angles of a triangle can easil y be extended to other figures:
Find the sum of the angles of a quadrilateral (four sided f igure),
Solution
Divide the quadrilateral into two triangles as illustrate d,Example

2.3.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
Answer:.
Find the sum of the angles of a pentagon (five-sided figure).
Solution
Divide the pentagon into three triangles as illustrat ed, The sum is equal to the sum of the angles of the three triangle =
Answer:.
There is one more simple principle which we will derive from Theorem, Consider the two triangles in Figure.
Figure: Each triangle has an angle of and.
We are given that and. A short calculation shows th at we must also have. This
suggests the following theorem:Example

2.3.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866If two angles of one triangle are equal respectively to two angles of another triangle, then their remaining angles a re also equal.
In Figure, if and then.
Proof
Figure. and.
Our Theorem, which states that the sum of the angles of a triangle is, is one of the most important con sequences of
the parallel postulate, Therefore, one way of testing the truth of the parallel postulate (see the Historical Note in Section 1.4) is
to test the truth of Theorem, This was actually trie d by the German mathematician, astronomer, and physici st, Karl
Friedrich Gauss (1777 - 1855). (This is the same Gauss who se name is used as a unit of measurement in the theo ry of
magnetism), Gauss measured the sum of the angles of th e triangle formed by three mountain peaks in Germany, He found the
sum of the angles to be 14.85 seconds more than (60 seconds 1 minute, 60 minutes = 1 degree). However thi s small excess
could have been due to experimental error, so the sum m ight actually have been.
Aside from experimental error, there is another difficu lty involved in verifying the angle sum theorem. Acco rding to the nonEuclidean geometry of Lobachevsky, the sum of the a ngles of a triangle is always less than. In the non-Euclidean
geometry of Riemann, the sum of the angles is always more than, However in both cases the difference from is
insignificant unless the triangle is very large, Neit her theory tells us exactly how large such a triangl e should be, Even if we
measured the angles of a very large triangle, like o ne formed by three stars, and found the sum to be ind istinguishable from
, we could only say that the angle sum theorem and pa rallel postulate are apparently true for these larg e distances, These
distances still might be too small to enable us to determine whichgeometric system best describes the universe as a wh ole,
Problems
1 - 12. Find and all the missing angles of each triangle:
1.
2.
Theorem
Historical Note

2.3.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838663.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13 - 14. Find, and:

2.3.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386613.
14.
15 - 20. Find:
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21. Find the sum of the angles of a hexagon (6-sided figure).
22. Find the sum of the angles of an octagon (8-sided figure).
23 - 26. Find:

2.3.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386623.
24.
25.
26.
In a right triangle, the sides of the right angle ar e called the legs of the triangle and the remaining side is called the hypotenuse. In
Figure, side and are the legs and side is the hypotenus e.
Figure: A right triangle.
The following is one of the most famous theorems in mathem atics.
In a right triangle, the square of the hypotenuse is equa l to the sum of the squares of the legs. That is,
Thus, for the sides of the triangle in Figure,
Before we prove Theorem, we will give several examples.Theorem: Pythagorean Theorem

2.3.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Find
Solution
Check:
Answer:.
Find:
Solution
Check:Example
Example

2.3.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
Answer:.
Find:
Solution
Check:
Answer:.Example

2.3.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Find
Solution

We reject because cannot be negative.
Check,:
Answer:.
We will now restate and prove Theorem:
In a right triangle, the square of the hypotenuse is equa l to the sum of the squares of the legs. That is,
In Figure,Example
Theorem Pythagorean Theorem

2.3.28 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
Figure. A right triangle.
Figure. Draw perpendicular to.
Proof
In Figure, draw perpendicular to. Let. Then (Figu re). As in Example, section
4.2, and. From these two similarities we obtain two proport ions:
The converse of the Pythagorean Theorem also holds:

2.3.29 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866In a triangle, if the square of one side is equal to t he sun of the squares of the other two sides then the triangle is a right
triangle.
In Figure, if then is a right triangle with.
Figure: If then.
Proof
Draw a new triangle,, so that,, and (Figure). is a right triangle, so by Theorem
,. We have and therefore. Therefore because
. Therefore,.
Figure: Given, draw so that, and.
Is a right triangle?Theorem (converse of the Pythagorean Theorem).
Example

2.3.30 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
Solution
so by Theorem, is a right triangle.
Answer: yes.
Find and:
Solution
is a rectangle so and. Therefore and.
Answer:,.
Find, and:Example
Example

2.3.31 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
Solution
is a rhombus. The diagonals of a rhombus are perpendic ular and bisect each other.
Answer:.
A ladder 39 feet long leans against a building, How fa r up the side of the building does the ladder reach if the foot of the ladder
is 15 feet from the building?
Solution
Answer: 36 feet.
Pythagoras (c. 582 - 507 B.C.) was not the first to discove r the theorem which bears his name. It was known long b efore his
time by the Chinese, the Babylonians, and perhaps al so the Egyptians and the Hindus, According to traditi on, Pythagoras was
the first to give a nroof of the theorem, His proof probably made use of areas, like the one suggested. In Figure below,Example
Historical Note

2.3.32 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866(each square contains four congruent right triangles with sides of lengths,, and, In addition the square on the left contains
a square with side a and a square with side while the one on th e right contains a square with side c.)
Figure: Pythagoras may have proved in this way.
Since the time of Pythagoras, at least several hundred dif ferent proofs of the Pythagorean Theorem have been prop osed,
Pythagoras was the founder of the Pythagorean school, a secre t religious society devoted to the study of philosophy,
mathematics, and science. Its membership was a select group, whic h tended to keep the discoveries and practices of the so ciety
secret from outsiders. The Pythagoreans believed that n umbers were the ultimate components of the universe and t hat all
physical relationships could be expressed with whole numb ers, This belief was prompted in part by their discover y that the
notes of the musical scale were related by numerical rati os. The Pythagoreans made important contributions to m edicine,
physics, and astronomy, In geometry, they are credited wit h the angle s
um theorem for triangles, the properties of parallel line s, and the theory of similar triangles and proportions.
Problems
1 - 10. Find. Leave answers in simplest radical form.
1.
2.
3.

2.3.33 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
4.
5.
6.
7.

2.3.34 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
8.
9.
10.
11 - 14. Find and all sides of the triangle:
11.

2.3.35 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
12.
13.
14.
15 - 16. Find:
15.

2.3.36 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
16.
17. Find and.
18. Find:
19. Find and:

2.3.37 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
20. Find and:
21. Find and:
22. Find, and:
23. Find and:

2.3.38 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
24. Find and:
25 - 30. Is a right triangle?
25.
26.
27.

2.3.39 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
28.
29.
30.
31. A ladder 25 feet long leans against a building, Ho w far up the side of the building does the ladder re ach if the foot of the ladder
is 7 feet from the building?
32. A man travels 24 miles east and then 10 miles north. At the end of his journey how far is he from his startin g point?
33. Can a table 9 feet wide (with its legs folded) fit throu gh a rectangular doorway 4 feet by 8 feet?

2.3.40 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
34. A baseball diamond is a square 90 feet on each si de, Find the distance from home plate to second base (leave answer in simplest
radical form).
This appendix contains some formulas and results from geomet ry that are important in the study of trigonometry.
For a circle with radius:
Circumference:
Area:
The sum of the measures of the three angles of a triangle is.
A triangle in which each angle has a measure of less that is called an acute triangle.
A triangle that has an angle whose measure is greater th an is called an obtuse triangle.Circles
Triangles

2.3.41 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866A triangle that contains an angle whose measure is is ca lled a right triangle. The side of a right triangle that is opposite
the right angle is called the hypotenuse, and the other two sides are called the legs.
An isosceles triangle is a triangle in which two sides of the triangle have equal length. In this case, the two angles across
from the two sides of equal length have equal measure.
An equilateral triangle is a triangle in which all three sides have the same lengt h. Each angle of an equilateral triangle has
a measure of.
The sum of the measures of the two acute angles of a right triangle is. In the diagram on the right,.
The Pythagorean Theorem. In a right triangle, the square of the hypotenuse is equa l to the sum of the squares of the other
two sides. In the diagram on the right,
A right triangle in which both acute angles are. For this type of right triangle, the lengths of the two legs are equal. So if
is the length of the hypotenuse and is the length of each of the legs, then by the Pythagorean Theorem,. Solving
this equation for, we obtain
A right triangle with acute angles of and.
We start with an equilateral triangle with sides of le ngth. By drawing an angle bisector at one of the ve rtices, we create two
congruent right triangles with acute angles of and.Right Triangles
Special Right Triangles

2.3.42 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866
This means that the third side of each of these righ t triangles will have a length of. If the length of the altitude is, then
using the Pythagorean Theorem, we obtain
Two triangles are similar if the three angles of one triangle are equal in measure to the three angles o f the other triangle. The
following diagram shows similar triangles and. We write.
The sides of similar triangles do not have to have t he same length but they will be proportional. Using t he notation in the
diagram, this means that
We use some properties of parallelograms in the study o f vectors in Section 3.5. A parallelogram is a quadrilateral with two
pairs of parallel sides. We will use the diagram on the ri ght to describe some properties of parallelograms.
Similar Triangles
Parallelograms

2.3.43 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83866Opposite sides are equal in length. In the diagram, this me ans that
As shown in the diagram, opposite angles are equal. That is,
The sum of two adjacent angles is. In the diagram, this me ans that
This page titled 2.3: Triangles is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Ted Sundstrom &
Steven Schlicker (ScholarWorks @Grand Valley State University) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts
platform.
6.1: Basic Geometric Concepts and Figures by Darlene Diaz is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://www.sccollege.edu/OER/Documents/MATH 105/Math For Liberal Art Students (2017).pdf.
1.5: Triangles by Henry Africk is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://academicworks.cuny.edu/ny_oers/44.
4.4: Pythagorean Theorem by Henry Africk is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://academicworks.cuny.edu/ny_oers/44.
6: Some Geometric Facts about Triangles and Parallelogram s by Ted Sundstrom & Steven Schlicker is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 3.0.
Original source: https://scholarworks.gvsu.edu/books/12.

2.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838672.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
Plot ordered pairs in a Cartesian coordinate system.
Graph equations by plotting points.
Graph equations with a graphing utility.
Find -intercepts and -intercepts.
Use the distance formula.
Use the midpoint formula.
Plotting Ordered Pairs in the Cartesian Coordinate System
The Cartesian coordinate system, also called the rectangular coordinate system, is based on a two-dimensional plane consisting of
the -axis and the -axis. Perpendicular to each other, th e axes divide the plane into four sections. Each sec tion is called a quadrant;
the quadrants are numbered counterclockwise as shown in Figure.
Figure
The center of the plane is the point at which the two axes cross. It is known as the origin, or point. Fro m the origin, each axis
is further divided into equal units: increasing, pos itive numbers to the right on the -axis and up the - axis; decreasing, negative
numbers to the left on the -axis and down the -axis. The axes extend to positive and negative infinity as sh own by the arrowheads
in Figure.Learning Objectives

2.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867
Figure
Each point in the plane is identified by its -coordi nate, or horizontal displacement from the origin, an d its -coordinate, or vertical
displacement from the origin. Together, we write them as an ordered pair indicating the combined distance from the origin in the
form. An ordered pair is also known as a coordinate pair because it consists of - and -coordinates. For ex ample, we can
represent the point in the plane by moving three un its to the right of the origin in the horizontal dir ection, and one unit down
in the vertical direction. See Figure.
Figure
When dividing the axes into equally spaced increment s, note that the -axis may be considered separately f rom the -axis. In other
words, while the -axis may be divided and labeled accord ing to consecutive integers, the -axis may be divided and labeled by
increments of, or, or. In fact, the axes may repr esent other units, such as years against the balance i n a savings account, or
quantity against cost, and so on. Consider the rectan gular coordinate system primarily as a method for sh owing the relationship
between two quantities.
A two-dimensional plane where the
-axis is the horizontal axis
-axis is the vertical axisCartesian Coordinate System

2.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867A point in the plane is defined as an ordered pair,, such that is determined by its horizontal distanc e from the origin and
is determined by its vertical distance from the origin.
Plot the points,, and in the plane.
Solution
To plot the point, begin at the origin. The -coordi nate is, so move two units to the left. The -coordin ate is, so then
move four units up in the positive direction.
To plot the point, begin again at the origin. The -coordinate is, so move three units to the right. Th e -coordinate is also
, so move three units up in the positive direction.
To plot the point, begin again at the origin. The - coordinate is. This tells us not to move in either direction along the
-axis. The -coordinate is, so move three units down in the negative direction. See the graph in Figure.
Figure
Analysis
Note that when either coordinate is zero, the point mu st be on an axis. If the -coordinate is zero, the point is on the -axis. If
the -coordinate is zero, the point is on the -axis.
Graphing Equations by Plotting Points
We can plot a set of points to represent an equation. When such an equation contains both an variable and a variable, it is called
an equation in two variables. Its graph is called a graph in two variables. Any graph on a two-dimensional plane is a graph in
two variables.
Suppose we want to graph the equation. We can begin by substituting a value for into the equation and det ermining the
resulting value of. Each pair of - and -values is an ordered pair that can be plotted. Table lists val ues of from to and
the resulting values for.
Table Example: Plotting Points in a Rectangular Coordinate System

2.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867We can plot the points in the table. The points for t his particular equation form a line, so we can conne ct them (Figure). This is
not true for all equations.
Figure
Note that the -values chosen are arbitrary, regardles s of the type of equation we are graphing. Of course, some situations may
require particular values of to be plotted in order to see a particular result. Otherwise, it is logical to choose values that can be
calculated easily, and it is always a good idea to cho ose values that are both negative and positive. There is no rule dictating how
many points to plot, although we need at least two to graph a line. Keep in mind, however, that the more po ints we plot, the more
accurately we can sketch the graph.
1. Make a table with one column labeled, a second column labe led with the equation, and a third column listing the resul ting
ordered pairs.
2. Enter -values down the first column using positive an d negative values. Selecting the -values in numerical o rder will
make the graphing simpler.
3. Select -values that will yield -values with little effo rt, preferably ones that can be calculated mentally.
4. Plot the ordered pairs.
5. Connect the points if they form a line.Howto: Given an equation, graph by plotting points

2.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867Graph the equation by plotting points.
Solution
First, we construct a table similar to Table. Choose val ues and calculate.
Table
Now, plot the points. Connect them if they form a line. See Fi gure.
Figure
Construct a table and graph the equation by plotting points:.
Answer
Please see Table and graph below.
Table Example: Graphing an Equation in Two Variables by Plotting Points
Exercise

2.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867
Figure
Finding -intercepts and -intercepts
The intercepts of a graph are points at which the graph crosses the axes. The -intercept is the point at which the graph crosses the
\(x\)-axis. At this point, the -coordinate is zero. Th e -intercept is the point at which the graph crosses the -axis. At this point, the
-coordinate is zero.
To determine the -intercept, we set equal to zero an d solve for. Similarly, to determine the -intercept, we set equal to zero
and solve for. For example, lets find the intercepts of t he equation.
To find the -intercept, set.
−intercept:
To find the -intercept, set.
−intercept:

2.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867We can confirm that our results make sense by observ ing a graph of the equation as in Figure. Notice tha t the graph crosses
the axes where we predicted it would.
Figure
1. Find the -intercept by setting and solving for.
2. Find the -intercept by setting and solving for.
Find the intercepts of the equation. Then sketch the grap h using only the intercepts.
Solution
Set to find the -intercept.
−intercept:
Set to find the -intercept.
−intercept:
Plot both points, and draw a line passing through them as i n Figure.Howto: GIVEN AN EQUATION, FIND THE INTERCEPTS
Example: Finding the Intercepts of the Given Equation

2.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867
Figure
Find the intercepts of the equation and sketch the graph:.
Answer
-intercept is; -intercept is
Figure
Using the Distance Formula
Derived from the Pythagorean Theorem, the distance formula is used to find the distance between two points in the plane. The
Pythagorean Theorem,, is based on a right triangle wher e and are the lengths of the legs adjacent to the right angle,
and is the length of the hypotenuse. See Figure.Exercise

2.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867
Figure
The relationship of sides and to side is the same as that of sides and to side. We use the absolute v alue
symbol to indicate that the length is a positive num ber because the absolute value of any number is pos itive. (For example,
.) The symbols and indicate that the lengths of t he sides of the triangle are positive. To find the l ength, take
the square root of both sides of the Pythagorean Theorem.
It follows that the distance formula is given as
We do not have to use the absolute value symbols in this defi nition because any number squared is positive.
Given endpoints and, the distance between two points is g iven by
Find the distance between the points and.
Solution
Let us first look at the graph of the two points. Connect the p oints to form a right triangle as in Figure
Figure
Then, calculate the length of using the distance formu la.distance between two points
Example: Finding the Distance between Two Points

2.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867Find the distance between two points: and.
Answer
Using the Midpoint Formula
When the endpoints of a line segment are known, we can find the point midway between them. This point is known as the midpoint
and the formula is known as the midpoint formula. Given the endpoints of a line segment, and, the m idpoint
formula states how to find the coordinates of the midpoint M.
A graphical view of a midpoint is shown in Figure. Not ice that the line segments on either side of the mid point are
congruent.
Figure
Find the midpoint of the line segment with the endpoints a nd.
Solution
Use the formula to find the midpoint of the line segment.
Find the midpoint of the line segment with endpoints and.
AnswerExercise
Example: Finding the Midpoint of the Line Segment
Exercise

2.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83867The diameter of a circle has endpoints and. Find the ce nter of the circle.
Solution
The center of a circle is the center, or midpoint, of i ts diameter. Thus, the midpoint formula will yield the ce nter point.
Access these online resources for additional instruction a nd practice with the Cartesian coordinate system.
1. Plotting points on the coordinate plane
2. Find x and y intercepts based on the graph of a line
Key Concepts
We can locate, or plot, points in the Cartesian coordi nate system using ordered pairs, which are defined as dis placement from
the -axis and displacement from the -axis. See Example.
An equation can be graphed in the plane by creating a t able of values and plotting points. See Example.
Using a graphing calculator or a computer program makes gr aphing equations faster and more accurate. Equations usu ally have
to be entered in the form _____. See Example.
Finding the - and -intercepts can define the graph of a line. These are t he points where the graph crosses the axes. See
Example.
The distance formula is derived from the Pythagorean Theo rem and is used to find the length of a line segment. See Example
and Example.
The midpoint formula provides a method of finding the co ordinates of the midpoint dividing the sum of the -coord inates and
the sum of the -coordinates of the endpoints by. See Example and Example.
This page titled 2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.1: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/precalculus.Example: Finding the Center of a Circle
Media

2.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838682.5: Finding Angle Measurements
Angles
Lines, line segments, points, and rays are the build ing blocks of other figures. For example, two rays with a common endpoint
make up an angle. The common endpoint of the angle is called the vertex.
The angle ABC is shown below. This angle can also be ca lled ∠ABC, ∠CBA or simply ∠B. When you are naming angles, be
careful to include the vertex (here, point B) as the midd le letter.
The image below shows a few angles on a plane. Notice tha t the label of each angle is written “point-vertex-po int,” and the
geometric notation is in the form ∠ABC.
Sometimes angles are very narrow; sometimes they are v ery wide. When people talk about the “size” of an an gle, they are referring
to the arc between the two rays. The length of the ra ys has nothing to do with the size of the angle itsel f. Drawings of angles will
often include an arc (as shown above) to help the reader iden tify the correct ‘side’ of the angle.
Think about an analog clock face. The minute and hou r hands are both fixed at a point in the middle of the clock. As time passes,
the hands rotate around the fixed point, making larg er and smaller angles as they go. The length of the h ands does not impact the
angle that is made by the hands.
An angle is measured in degrees, represented by the sy mbol º. A circle is defined as having 360º. (In skateb oarding and basketball,
“doing a 360” refers to jumping and doing one complete bo dy rotation.
A right angle is any degree that measures exactly 90º. This repres ents exactly one-quarter of the way around a circle. R ectangles
contain exactly four right angles. A corner mark is often u sed to denote a right angle, as shown in right angle DCB be low.
Angles that are between 0º and 90º (smaller than right angles) are called acute angles. Angles that are between 90º and 180º (larger
than right angles and less than 180º) are called obtuse angles. And an angle that measures exactly 180º is called a straight angle

2.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868because it forms a straight line.
Figure: Examples of Angles
Label each angle below as acute, right, or obtuse.
Solution
You can start by identifying any right angles.
∠GFI is a right angle, as indicated by the corner mark at ve rtex F.
Acute angles will be smaller than ∠GFI (or less than 90º). This means that ∠DAB and ∠MLN are acute.
∠TQS is larger than ∠GFI, so it is an obtuse angle.
Answer: ∠DAB and ∠MLN are acute angles. ∠GFI is a right angle. ∠TQS is an obtuse angle.Example

2.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868Identify each point, ray, and angle in the picture below.
Solution
Begin by identifying each point in the figure. There are 4: E, F, G, and J.
Now find rays. A ray begins at one point, and then con tinues through another point towards infinity (indic ated by an arrow).
Three rays start at point J:,, and. But also notice that a ray could start a t point F and go through J and G, and
another could start at point G and go through J and F. These rays can be represented by and.
Finally, look for angles. ∠EJG is obtuse, ∠EJF is acute, and ∠FJG is straight. (Don’t forget those straight angles!)
Answer: Points: E, F, G, J
Rays:,,,,
Angles: ∠EJG, ∠EJF, ∠FJG
Identify the acute angles in the given image:
Finding Angle Measurements
Understanding how parallel and perpendicular lines re late can help you figure out the measurements of so me unknown angles. To
start, all you need to remember is that perpendicular lin es intersect at a 90º angle and that a straight angle measu res 180º.Example
Try It Now 2

2.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868The measure of an angle such as ∠A is written as m ∠A. Look at the example below. How can you find the measu rements of the
unmarked angles?
Find the measurement of ∠IJF.
Solution
Only one angle, ∠HJM, is marked in the image. Notice that it is a right a ngle, so it measures 90º. ∠HJM is formed by the
intersection of lines and. Since is a line, ∠IJM is a straight angle measuring 180º.
You can use this information to find the measurement of ∠HJI:
m∠HJM + m ∠HJI = m∠IJM
90º + m∠HJI = 180º
m∠HJI = 90º
Now use the same logic to find the measurement of ∠IJF. ∠IJF is formed by the intersection of lines and. Sinc e is
a line, ∠HJF will be a straight angle measuring 180º.Example

2.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868
You know that ∠HJI measures 90º. Use this information to find the measurement of ∠IJF:
m∠HJM + m ∠IJF = m∠HJF
90º + m∠IJF = 180º
m∠IJF = 90º
Answer: m∠IJF = 90º
In this example, you may have noticed that angles ∠HJI, ∠IJF, and ∠HJM are all right angles. (If you were asked to find the
measurement of ∠FJM, you would find that angle to be 90º, too.) This is what happens when two lines are perpendicular—the fou r
angles created by the intersection are all right angles.
Not all intersections happen at right angles, though. In the example below, notice how you can use the sam e technique as shown
above (using straight angles) to find the measurement of a missing angle.
Find the measurement of ∠DAC.
Solution
This image shows the line and the ray intersecting a t point A. The measurement of ∠BAD is 135º. You can use straight
angles to find the measurement of ∠DAC.Example

2.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868
∠BAC is a straight angle, so it measures 180º.
Use this information to find the measurement of ∠DAC.
m∠BAD + m ∠DAC = m ∠BAC
135º + m ∠DAC = 180º
m∠DAC = 45º
Answer: m∠DAC = 45º
Find the measurement of ∠CAD.
Try It Now 2

2.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868Supplementary and Complementary
In the example above, m ∠BAC and m ∠DAC add up to 180º. Two angles whose measures add up to 18 0º are called
supplementary angles. There’s also a term for two angles whose measurements add up to 90º, they are called complementary
angles.
One way to remember the difference between the two term s is that “corner” and “complementary” each begin wit h c (a 90º angle
looks like a corner), while straight and “supplementary” each begin with s (a straight angle measures 180º).
If you can identify supplementary or complementary angles within a problem, finding missing angle measu rements is often simply
a matter of adding or subtracting.
Two angles are supplementary. If one of the angles measures 4 8º, what is the measurement of the other angle?
Solution
Two supplementary angles make up a straight angle, so the mea surements of the two angles will be 180º.
m∠A + m∠B = 180º
You know the measurement of one angle. To find the measur ement of the second angle, subtract 48º from 180º.
48º+ m∠B = 180º
m∠B = 180º - 48º
m∠B = 132º
Answer: The measurement of the other angle is 132º
Find the measurement of ∠AXZ.
Solution
This image shows two intersecting lines, and. They int ersect at point X, forming four angles. Angles ∠AXY and
∠AXZ are supplementary because together they make up the st raight angle ∠YXZ.
Use this information to find the measurement of ∠AXZ.
m∠AXY + m ∠AXZ = m ∠YXZ
30º + m∠AXZ = 180ºExample
Example

2.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868m∠AXZ = 150º
Answer: m∠AXZ = 150º
Find the measurement of ∠BAC.
Solution
This image shows the line and the rays and, all int ersecting at point A. Angle ∠BAD is a right angle. Angles
∠BAC and ∠CAD are complementary because together they create ∠BAD.
Use this information to find the measurement of ∠BAC.
m∠BAC + m ∠CAD = m ∠BAD
m∠BAC + 50º = 90º
m∠BAC = 40ºExample

2.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868
Answer: m∠BAC = 40º
Find the measurement of ∠CAD.
Solution
You know the measurements of two angles here: ∠CAB and ∠DAE. You also know that m ∠BAE = 180º.
Use this information to find the measurement of ∠CAD.
m∠BAC + m ∠CAD + m ∠DAE = m ∠BAE
25º + m∠CAD + 75º = 180º
m∠CAD + 100º = 180º
m∠CAD = 80º
Answer: m∠CAD = 80ºExample

2.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868Which pair of angles is complementary?
A) ∠PKO and ∠MKN
B) ∠PKO and ∠PKM
C) ∠LKP and ∠LKN
D) ∠LKM and ∠MKN
Summary
Parallel lines do not intersect, while perpendicular lin es cross at a 90º angle. Two angles whose measurements add up to 180º are
said to be supplementary, and two angles whose measuremen ts add up to 90º are said to be complementary. For mo st pairs of
intersecting lines, all you need is the measurement of one angle to find the measurements of all other angles formed by the
intersection.
1. C) FH || EG; both EG and FH are marked with >> on each line, and those markings mean the y are parallel.
2. 137º; ∠BAD is a straight angle measuring 180º. Since ∠BAC measures 43º, the measure of ∠CAD must be 180º – 43º =
137º.
3. D) ∠LKM and ∠MKN; the measurements of two complementary angles will add up to 90º. ∠LKP is a right angle, so
∠LKN must be a right angle as well. ∠LKM + ∠MKN = ∠LKN, so ∠LKM and ∠MKN are complementary.Try It Now 3
Try It Now Answers

2.5.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868

2.5.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868
Two lines are parallel if they do not meet, no matter how far they are exte nded. The symbol for parallel is. In Figure,
. The arrow marks are used to indicate the lines are paral lel.
Figure: and are parallel.They do not meet no matt er how far they are
extended.
Figure: and are not parallel. They meet at
point.
We make the following assumption about parallel lines, ca lled the parallel postulate.

2.5.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868The probabilities assigned to events by a distribution fun ction on a sample space are given by
Through a point not on a given line one and only on e line can be drawn parallel to the given line. So in Figure, there is exactly
one line that can be drawn through that is parallel to.
Figure: There is exactly one line that can be drawn through parallel to.
Figure: is a transversal.
A transversal is a line that intersects two other lines at two distin ct points. In Figure, is a transversal. and are
called alternate interior angles of lines and. The word "alternate," here, means th at the angles are on different sides of the
transversal, one angle formed with and the other forme d with. The word "interior" means that they are betwe en the two
lines. Notice that they form the letter "." (Figure). and are also alternate interior angles. They also form a " " though
It is stretched out and backwards. Viewed from the side, the letter " " may also look like an "."
Figure: Alternate interior form the letters " " or " ". The letter may be stretched out or backwards.
Alternate interior angles are important because of the following theorem:
If two lines are parallel then their alternate interi or angles are equal, If the alternate interior angle s of two lines are equal then
the lines must 'oe parallel,Theorem: Parallel Postulate
Theorem The "Z" Theorem

2.5.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868In Figure, must be parallel to because the alterna te interior angles are both. Notice that the other pair of alternate
interior angles, and, are also equal. They are both. In Figure, the lines are not parallel and none of the alternate
interior angles are equal.
Figure: The lines are parallel and their alternate i nterior angles are equal.
Figure: The lines are not parallel and their alterna te interior angles are not equal.
The Proof of Theorem is complicated and will be defe rred to the appendix.
Find and:
Solution
since the arrows indicate parallel lines. because alternate interior angles of parallel lines are equa l.
Answer:.
Corresponding angles of two lines are two angles which are on the same side o f the two lines and the same side of the transversal,
In Figure, and are corresponding angles of lines an d. They form the letter "." and, and, and
and are other pairs of corresponding angles of an d. They all form the letter " ", though it might be a backwards or
upside down " " (Figure).Example

2.5.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868
Figure: Four pairs of corresponding angles are illustrat ed.
Figure: Corresponding angles form the letter "," thou gh it may be a backwards or upside down "."
Corresponding angles are important because of the followi ng theorem:
If two lines are parallel then their corresponding an gles are equal. If the corresponding angles of two line s are equal then the
lines must be parallel.
Find:
Solution
The arrow indicate. Therefore because and are the measures of corresponding angles of the parallel
lines and.
Answer:.Theorem: The "F" Theorem
Example

2.5.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868
Figure: Each pair of corresponding angles is equal.
Notice that we can now find all the other angles in Exa mple. Each one is either supplementary to one of t he angles
or forms equal vertical angles with one of them (Figu re). Therefore all the corresponding angles are equal, Also each
pair of alternate interior angles is equal. It is not hard to see that if just one pair of corresponding angles or one pair of alternate
interior angles are equal then so are all other pairs of corresponding and alternate interior angles.
Proof of Theorem: The corresponding angles will be eq ual if the alternate interior angles are equal and vice versa. Therefore
Theorem follows directly from Therorem.
In Figure, and are called interior angles on the same side of the transversal.(In some textbooks, interior angles on
the same sdie of the transversal are called cointer ior angles.) and are also interior angles on the same side of the transversal,
Notice that each pair of angles forms the letter "." Compare Figure with Figure 10 and also with Example, T he
following theorem is then apparent:
Figure: Interior angles on the same side of the transve rsal form the letter " ". It may also be a backwards "."
If two lines are parallel then the interior angles o n the same side of the transversal are supplementary (they add uP to). If
the interior angles of two lines on the same side of the transversal are supplementary then the lines must be paral lel.
Find and the marked angles:Theorem:The "C" Theorem
Example

2.5.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868
Solution
The lines are parallel so by Theorem the two labelled angles must be supplementary.
Check:
Answer:,,.
Find and the marked angles:
Solution
because vertical angles are equal. and are interior angles on the same side of the transversal,
and therefore are supplementary because the lines are p arallel.Example

2.5.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868Check:
Answer:,,.
List all pairs of alternate interior angles in the d iagram, (The single arrow indicates is parallel to a nd the double arrow
indicates is parallel to.
Solution
We see if a letter or can be formed using the line segm ents in the diagram (Figure),
Answer: and are alternate interior angles of lines a nd. and are alternate interior angles of
lines and Example

2.5.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868A telescope is pointed at a star above the horizon, What angle must the mirror make with the horizonta l so that the
star can be seen in the eyepiece?
Solution
because they are alternate interior angles of paral lel lines and. because the angle of
incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. Therefore
Answer:
SUMMARY
Alternate interior angles of paralle lines are equal. They form the letter "."Example

2.5.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868
Corresponding angles of parallel lines are equal. They form the letter "."
Interior angles on the same sides of the transversal of parallel lines are supplementary. They form the lette r "."
The parallel postulate given earlier in this section is the equivalent of the fifth postulate of Euclid's Elements. Euclid was
correct in assuming it as a postulate rather than tr ying to prove it as a theorem, However this did not b ecome clear to the
mathematical world until the nineteenth century, 2200 years later, In the interim, scores of prominent math ematicians
attempted unsuccessfully to give a satisfactory proo f of the parallel postulate. They felt that it was no t as self-evident as a
postulate should be, and that it required some formal ju stification,
In 1826, N, I, Lobachevsky, a Russian mathematician, pr esented a system of geometry based on the assumption that through a
given point more than one straight line can be drawn parallel to a given line (Figure). In 1854, the Germ an
mathematician Georg Bernhard Riemann proFosed a syste m of geometriJ in which there are no parallel lines at all, A gecmetry
in which the parallel postulate has been replaced by some other postulate is called a non-Euclidean geomet ry. The existence of
these geometries shows that the parallel postulate need not necessarily be true. Indeed Einstein used the ge ometry of Riemann
as the basis for his theory of relativity.
Figure: In the geometry of Lobachevsky, more than on e line can be drawn through parallel to.Historical Note

2.5.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83868Of course our original parallel postulate makes the m ost sense for ordinary applications, and we use it thr oughout this book,
However, for applications where great distances are inv olved, such as in astronomy, it may well be that a no n-Euclidean
geometry gives a better approximation of physical reality.
Problems
For each of the following, state the theorem(s) used i n obtaining your answer (for example, "alternate inte rior angles of parallel
lines are equal"). Lines marked with the same arrow are ass umed to be parallel,
1 - 2. Find, and:
1.
2.
3 - 4. Find,,,,,, and:
3.
4.
5 - 10. Find:
5.
6.

2.5.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838687.
8.
9.
10.
11 - 18. Find and the marked angles:
11.
12.
13.
14.

2.5.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386815.
16.
17.
18.
19 - 26. For each of the following, list all pairs of a lternate interior angles and corresponding angles, I f there are none, then list all
pairs of interior angles on the same side of the transve rsal. Indicate the parallel lines which form each pair of angles.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

2.5.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386825.
26.
27. A telescope is pointed at a star above the horizo n. What angle must the mirror make wiht the horizo ntal so that the
star can be seen in the eyepiece?
28. A periscope is used by sailors in a submarine to see objects on the surface of the water, If, what an gle does the
mirror make with the horizontal?
This page titled 2.5: Finding Angle Measurements is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Henry Africk (New York City College of Technology at CUNY Academi c Works) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of
the LibreTexts platform.
6.1: Basic Geometric Concepts and Figures by Darlene Diaz is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://www.sccollege.edu/OER/Documents/MATH 105/Math For Liberal Art Students (2017).pdf.
1.4: Parallel Lines by Henry Africk is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://academicworks.cuny.edu/ny_oers/44.

2.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838692.6: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
6.1.1: Properties of Angles
1. Identify parallel and perpendicular lines.
2. Find measures of angles.
3. Identify complementary and supplementary angles.
Introduction
Imagine two separate and distinct lines on a plane. Th ere are two possibilities for these lines: they will e ither intersect at one point,
or they will never intersect. When two lines intersec t, four angles are formed. Understanding how these angl es relate to each other
can help you figure out how to measure them, even if you on ly have information about the size of one angle.
Parallel and Perpendicular
Parallel lines are two or more lines that never inters ect. Likewise, parallel line segments are two line segme nts that never intersect
even if the line segments were turned into lines tha t continued forever. Examples of parallel line segm ents are all around you, in the
two sides of this page and in the shelves of a bookcase. When you see lines or structures that seem to run in the same direction,
never cross one another, and are always the same distan ce apart, there’s a good chance that they are parallel.
Perpendicular lines are two lines that intersect at a 90º (right) angle. And perpendicular line segments als o intersect at a 90º (right)
angle. You can see examples of perpendicular lines e verywhere as well—on graph paper, in the crossing patt ern of roads at an
intersection, to the colored lines of a plaid shirt. I n our daily lives, you may be happy to call two lines perpendicular if they merely
seem to be at right angles to one another. When study ing geometry, however, you need to make sure that two l ines intersect at a 90º
angle before declaring them to be perpendicular.
The image below shows some parallel and perpendicular l ines. The geometric symbol for parallel is ||, so you can show that AB ||
CD. Parallel lines are also often indicated by the mar king >> on each line (or just a single > on each lin e). Perpendicular lines are
indicated by the symbol ⊥, so you can write.
If two lines are parallel, then any line that is perpe ndicular to one line will also be perpendicular to t he other line. Similarly, if two
lines are both perpendicular to the same line, then those two lines are parallel to each other. Let’s ta ke a look at one example and
identify some of these types of lines.Learning Objectives

2.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869Identify a set of parallel lines and a set of perpendic ular lines in the image below.
Solution
Parallel lines never meet, and perpendicular lines i ntersect at a right angle. and do not intersect in this image, but if you
imagine extending both lines, they will intersect soon. So, they are neither parallel nor perpendicular.
is perpendicular to both and, as indicated by the rig ht-angle marks at the intersection of those lines.
Since is perpendicular to both lines, then and are p arallel.Example

2.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869
Answer: ||
Which statement most accurately represents the image bel ow?
A) EF || GH
B) AB ⊥ EG
C) FH || EG
D) AB || FH
Determine the slopes of parallel and perpendicular line s.
Find equations of parallel and perpendicular lines
Definition of Parallel and Perpendicular
Parallel lines are lines in the same plane that never intersect. Two nonvertical lines in the same plane, wi th slopes and, are
parallel if their slopes are the same,. Consider the foll owing two lines:
Consider their corresponding graphs:Try It Now 1
Learning Objectives

2.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869
Figure
Both lines have a slope and thus are parallel.
Perpendicular lines are lines in the same plane that intersect at right angles (degrees). Two nonvertical l ines in the same plane,
with slopes and, are perpendicular if the product o f their slopes is. We can solve for and obtain
. In this form, we see that perpendicular lines have sl opes that are negative reciprocals, or opposite reciprocals. For example,
if given a slope
then the slope of a perpendicular line is the opposite re ciprocal:
The mathematical notation reads “ perpendicular.” We can verify that two slopes produce perpendicular l ines if their product
is.
Geometrically, we note that if a line has a positive sl ope, then any perpendicular line will have a negativ e slope. Furthermore, the
rise and run between two perpendicular lines are intercha nged.

2.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869
Figure
Perpendicular lines have slopes that are opposite rec iprocals, so remember to find the reciprocal and ch ange the sign. In other
words,
If, then
Determining the slope of a perpendicular line can be per formed mentally. Some examples follow
Table
Given slope Slope of perpendicular line
Determine the slope of a line parallel to.
Solution:
Since the given line is in slope-intercept form, we c an see that its slope is. Thus the slope of any line parallel to the
given line must be the same,. The mathematical notation reads “ parallel.”
Answer:Example

2.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869Determine the slope of a line perpendicular to.
Solution:
First, solve for and express the line in slope-intercept fo rm.
In this form, we can see that the slope of the given line is, and thus.
Answer:
Find the slope of the line perpendicular to.
Answer
Finding Equations of Parallel and Perpendicular Lines
We have seen that the graph of a line is completely determined by two points or one point and its slope. Often you will be asked to
find the equation of a line given some geometric rel ationship—for instance, whether the line is parallel or perpendicular to another
line.
Find the equation of the line passing through and paral lel to
Solution
Here the given line has slope, and the slope of a l ine parallel is. Since you are given a point and th e slope, use
the point-slope form of a line to determine the equation.
Answer:
It is important to have a geometric understanding of this question. We were asked to find the equation of a line parallel to
another line passing through a certain point.Example
Exercise
Example

2.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869
Figure
Through the point we found a parallel line,, shown d ashed. Notice that the slope is the same as the given
line, but the -intercept is different. If we keep in m ind the geometric interpretation, then it will be ea sier to remember the
process needed to solve the problem.
Find the equation of the line passing through and perpe ndicular to.
Solution:
The given line has slope, and thus. Substitute this slop e and the given point into point-slope form.
Answer:
Geometrically, we see that the line, shown dashed bel ow, passes through and is perpendicular to the given
line.
Example

2.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869Figure
It is not always the case that the given line is in sl ope-intercept form. Often you have to perform addition al steps to determine the
slope. The general steps for finding the equation of a li ne are outlined in the following example.
Find the equation of the line passing through and perpe ndicular to.
Solution:
Step 1: Find the slope. First, find the slope of the given li ne. To do this, solve for to change standard form t o slopeintercept form,.
In this form, you can see that the slope is, and thus.
Step 2: Substitute the slope you found and the given point into the point-slope form of an equation for a line. In this case, the
slope is and the given point is.
Step 3: Solve for.
Answer:
Find the equation of the line passing through and paral lel to.
Solution:
Find the slope by solving for.
The given line has the slope, and so. We use this and th e point in point-slope form.Example
Example

2.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869Answer:
Find the equation of the line perpendicular to and passi ng through.
Answer
When finding an equation of a line perpendicular to a horizontal or vertical line, it is best to consider the g eometric interpretation.
Find the equation of the line passing through and perpe ndicular to.
Solution:
We recognize that is a horizontal line and we want to fi nd a perpendicular line passing through.
Figure
If we draw the line perpendicular to the given horizontal line, the result is a vertical line.Exercise
Example

2.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83869
Figure
Equations of vertical lines look like. Since it must pass through, we conclude that is the equation. All
ordered pair solutions of a vertical line must share the sa me -coordinate.
Answer:
We can rewrite the equation of any horizontal line,, in slope-intercept form as follows:
Written in this form, we see that the slope is. If we try to find the slope of a perpendicular line by fin ding the opposite
reciprocal, we run into a problem:, which is undefine d. This is why we took care to restrict the definition to two
nonvertical lines. Remember that horizontal lines are per pendicular to vertical lines.
Key Takeaways
Parallel lines have the same slope.
Perpendicular lines have slopes that are opposite recipr ocals. In other words, if, then.
To find an equation of a line, first use the given informati on to determine the slope. Then use the slope and a point on the line to
find the equation using point-slope form.
Horizontal and vertical lines are perpendicular to each o ther.
Determine the slope of parallel lines and perpendicular lines.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9. Exercise Parallel and Perpendicular Lines

2.6.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386910.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Answer
1. and
3. and
5. and
7. and
9. and undefined
11. and
13. and
15. and
17. and
19. and
Determine if the lines are parallel, perpendicular, or n either.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10. Exercise Parallel and Perpendicular Lines

2.6.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386911.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
Answer
1. Parallel
3. Perpendicular
5. Perpendicular
7. Perpendicular
9. Parallel
11. Neither
13. Parallel
15. Parallel
Find the equation of the line
1. Parallel to and passing through.
2. Parallel to and passing through.
3. Perpendicular to and passing through.
4. Perpendicular to and passing through.
5. Perpendicular to and passing through.
6. Perpendicular to and passing through.
7. Parallel to and passing through.
8. Parallel to and passing through (7, −3)\).
9. Perpendicular to and passing through.
10. Perpendicular to and passing through.
11. Parallel to and passing through.
12. Parallel to and passing through.
13. Parallel to and passing through.
14. Parallel to and passing through.
15. Perpendicular to and passing through.
16. Perpendicular to and passing through.
17. Parallel to and passing through.
18. Parallel to and passing through.
19. Perpendicular to and passing through.
20. Perpendicular to and passing through.
21. Parallel to and passing through.
22. Parallel to and passing through.
23. Perpendicular to and passing through.Exercise Equations in Point-Slope Form

2.6.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8386924. Perpendicular to and passing through.
25. Parallel to and passing through.
26. Parallel to and passing through.
27. Perpendicular to and passing through.
28. Perpendicular to and passing through.
Answer
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
11.
13.
15.
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
This page titled 2.6: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous.
6.1: Basic Geometric Concepts and Figures by Darlene Diaz is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://www.sccollege.edu/OER/Documents/MATH 105/Math For Liberal Art Students (2017).pdf.
3.6: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines by Anonymous is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 3.0. Original source:
https://2012books.lardbucket.org/books/beginning-algeb ra.

2.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83875SECTION OVERVIEW
2.7: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities
2.7.1: Solving Linera Equations
2.7.2: Solving Inequalities
2.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations
2.7.4: Solving a System of Linear Equations
2.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer's Rule
This page titled 2.7: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax.

2.7.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838702.7.1: Solving Linera Equations
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Solve equations using a general strategy
It is time now to lay out one overall strategy that can be used to solve any linear equation. Some equati ons we solve will not require
all these steps to solve, but many will.
Beginning by simplifying each side of the equation makes the remaining steps easier.
Solve:.
Answer
Solve:
Answer
Solve:
AnswerLearning Objectives
Exercise: How to Solve Linear Equations Using the General Strategy
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838701. Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
Use the Distributive Property to remove any parentheses.
Combine like terms.
2. Collect all the variable terms on one side of the equation.
Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
3. Collect all the constant terms on the other side of the equation.
Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
4. Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 1.
Use the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
State the solution to the equation.
5. Check the solution. Substitute the solution into the original equation to m ake sure the result is a true statement.
Solve:
Answer

Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible by distributing.
The only y term is on the left side, so all variable t erms are on the left side of the
equation.
Add 9 to both sides to get all constant terms on the ri ght side of the equation.
Simplify.
Rewrite −y as −1y.
Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 1 by dividing both sides by −1.
Simplify.
Check:

Let y=−17.

Solve:
AnswerGENERAL STRATEGY FOR SOLVING LINEAR EQUATIONS.
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Solve:
Answer
Solve:
Answer

Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
Distribute.
Combine like terms.
The only a term is on the left side, so all variable t erms are on one side of the
equation.
Add 10 to both sides to get all constant terms on the o ther side of the equation.
Simplify.
Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 11 by dividing both sides by
55.
Simplify.
Check:

Let a=0.

Solve:
Answer
Solve:
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Solve:
Answer

Distribute.
Add m to get the variables only to the left.
Simplify.
Add 2 to get constants only on the right.
Simplify.
Divide by 5.
Simplify.
Check:

Let m=2.

Solve:
Answer
Solve:
Answer
Solve: Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer

Simplify—use the Distributive Property.
Combine like terms.
Add 2 to both sides to collect constants on the right.
Simplify.
Divide both sides by −6−6.
Simplify.
Check: Let y=−13.

Solve:
Answer
Solve:
Answer
Solve: Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer

Distribute.
Combine like terms.
Subtract 4x to get the variables only on the right sid e since.
Simplify.
Subtract 21 to get the constants on left.
Simplify.
Divide by 6.
Simplify.
Check:

Let.

Solve:
Answer
Solve:
Answer
Solve: Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer

Simplify from the innermost parentheses first.
Combine like terms in the brackets.
Distribute.
Add 160s to get the s’s to the right.
Simplify.
Subtract 600 to get the constants to the left.
Simplify.
Divide.
Simplify.
Check:

Substitute s=−2.

Solve:.
Answer
Solve:.
Answer
Solve:.Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer

Distribute.
Subtract 18n to get the variables to the left.
Simplify.
Subtract 1.8 to get the constants to the right.
Simplify.
Divide.
Simplify.
Check:

Let n=0.4.

Solve:.
Answer
Solve:.
Answer
Key Concepts
General Strategy for Solving Linear Equations
1. Simplify each side of the equation as much as possible.
Use the Distributive Property to remove any parentheses.
Combine like terms.
2. Collect all the variable terms on one side of the equat ion.
Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
3. Collect all the constant terms on the other side of the e quation.
Use the Addition or Subtraction Property of Equality.
4. Make the coefficient of the variable term to equal to 1.
Use the Multiplication or Division Property of Equality.
State the solution to the equation.Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838705. Check the solution.
Substitute the solution into the original equation.
Practice Makes Perfect
In the following exercises, solve each linear equation.
Answer
Answer
Answer
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
Answer
Answer
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
Answer
Answer
Answer
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
Answer
Answer
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
Answer
Answer
Answer
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
Answer
Answer
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
Answer
Answer
Answer
Classify Equations
In the following exercises, classify each equation as a conditional equation, an identity, or a contradicti on and then state the
solution.Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
identity; all real numbers
Answer
identity; all real numbers
Answer
conditional equation;
Answer
conditional equation; Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
contradiction; no solution
Answer
contradiction; no solution
Answer
conditional equation;
Answer
contradiction; no solution
Answer
identity; all real numbersExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
identity; all real numbers
Everyday Math
Fencing Micah has 44 feet of fencing to make a dog run in h is yard. He wants the length to be 2.5 feet more than the width.
Find the length, L, by solving the equation 2L+2(L−2.5)=44.
Coins Rhonda has in nickels and dimes. The number of dimes i s one less than twice the number of nickels. Find the
number of nickels, by solving the equation
Answer
8 nickels
Writing Exercises
Using your own words, list the steps in the general strategy f or solving linear equations.
Explain why you should simplify both sides of an equat ion as much as possible before collecting the varia ble terms to one side
and the constant terms to the other side.
Answer
Answers will vary.
What is the first step you take when solving the equation Why is this your first step?
Solve the equation explaining all the steps of your so lution as in the examples in this section.
Answer
Answers will vary.Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Use the Distance, Rate, and Time Formula
One formula you will use often in algebra and in every day life is the formula for distance traveled by an object moving at a
constant rate. Rate is an equivalent word for “speed.” The basic idea of rate may already familiar to you. Do you know what
distance you travel if you drive at a steady rate of 60 miles per hour for 2 hours? (This might happen i f you use your car’s cruise
control while driving on the highway.) If you said 120 miles, you already know how to use this formula!
For an object moving at a uniform (constant) rate, the distance traveled, the elapsed time, and the rate ar e related by the
formula:
We will use the Strategy for Solving Applications that we used earlier in this chapter. When our problem requi res a formula, we
change Step 4. In place of writing a sentence, we write the app ropriate formula. We write the revised steps here for refe rence.
1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
2. Identify what we are looking for.
3. Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent th at quantity.
4. Translate into an equation. Write the appropriate formula for th e situation. Substitute in the given information.
5. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
You may want to create a mini-chart to summarize the inf ormation in the problem. See the chart in this first exam ple.
Jamal rides his bike at a uniform rate of 12 miles per ho ur for hours. What distance has he traveled?DISTANCE, RATE, AND TIME
SOLVE AN APPLICATION (WITH A FORMULA).
Exercise

2.7.1.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
Step 1. Read the problem.
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. distance traveled
Step 3. Name. Choose a variable to represent it. Let d = distance.
Step 4. Translate: Write the appropriate formula.

Substitute in the given information.
Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check
Does 42 miles make sense?
Jamal rides:

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence. Jamal rode 42 miles.
Lindsay drove for hours at 60 miles per hour. How much distan ce did she travel?
Answer
330 miles
Trinh walked for hours at 3 miles per hour. How far did she wa lk?
Answer
7 miles
Rey is planning to drive from his house in San Diego to visit his grandmother in Sacramento, a distance of 5 20 miles. If he can
drive at a steady rate of 65 miles per hour, how many hou rs will the trip take?Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
Step 1. Read the problem.
Step 2. Identify what you are looking for. How many hours (time)
Step 3. Name.
Choose a variable to represent it.Let t = time.

Step 4. Translate.
Write the appropriate formula.
Substitute in the given information.
Step 5. Solve the equation.
Step 6. Check. Substitute the numbers into
the formula and make sure the result is a
true statement.

Step 7. Answer the question with a complete sentence. Rey’s trip will take 8 hours.
Lee wants to drive from Phoenix to his brother’s apart ment in San Francisco, a distance of 770 miles. If he d rives at a steady
rate of 70 miles per hour, how many hours will the trip take?
Answer
11 hours
Yesenia is 168 miles from Chicago. If she needs to be in Chi cago in 3 hours, at what rate does she need to drive?
Answer
56 mph
Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable
You are probably familiar with some geometry formula s. A formula is a mathematical description of the re lationship between
variables. Formulas are also used in the sciences, such a s chemistry, physics, and biology. In medicine they a re used for
calculations for dispensing medicine or determining bo dy mass index. Spreadsheet programs rely on formulas t o make calculations.
It is important to be familiar with formulas and be able t o manipulate them easily.
In Exercise and Exercise, we used the formula. Th is formula gives the value of d, distance, when you su bstitute
in the values of r and t, the rate and time. But in E xercise, we had to find the value of t. We substitute d in values of d and r
and then used algebra to solve for tt. If you had to do this often, you might wonder why there is not a for mula that gives the value
of t when you substitute in the values of d and r. We can make a formula like this by solving the formula for t.Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870To solve a formula for a specific variable means to isolate that variable on one side of the equals sig n with a coefficient of 1. All
other variables and constants are on the other side o f the equals sign. To see how to solve a formula for a specific variable, we will
start with the distance, rate and time formula.
Solve the formula d=rt for t:
1. when d=520 and r=65
2. in general
Answer
We will write the solutions side-by-side to demonstrate that solving a formula in general uses the same steps a s when we
have numbers to substitute.
1. when d=520 and r=65 2. in general
Write the formula. Write the formula.
Substitute.
Divide, to isolate t. Divide, to isolate tt.
Simplify. Simplify.
We say the formula is solved for t.
Solve the formula for r:
1. when d=180 and t=4
2. in general
Answer
1.
2.
Solve the formula for r:
1. when d=780 and t=12
2. in general
Answer
1.
2. \(r = \frac{d}{rt\)
Solve the formula for h:
1. when and
2. in generalExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
1. when and 2. in general
Write the formula.
Write the formula.
Substitute.

Clear the fractions.
Clear the fractions.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Solve for h.
Solve for hh.
We can now find the height of a triangle, if we know the area and the base, by using the formula
Solve the formula for h:
1. when and
2. in general
Answer
1.
2.
Solve the formula for h:
1. when and
2. in general
Answer
1.
2.
The formula is used to calculate simple interest, I, for a principal, P, invested at rate, r, for t years.
Solve the formula I=Prt to find the principal, P:
1. when I=$5,600, r=4%,t=7years
2. in generalExercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
1. I=$5,600, r=4%,t=7years 2. in general
Write the formula.
Write the formula.
Substitute.

Simplify.
Simplify.
Divide, to isolate P.
Divide, to isolate P.
Simplify.
Simplify.
The principal is

Solve the formula I=Prt to find the principal, P:
1. when I=$2160, r=6%,t=3 years
2. in general
Answer
1. $12000
2.
Solve the formula I=Prt to find the principal, P:
1. when I=$5400, r= 12%,t=5 years
2. in general
Answer
1. $9000
2.
Later in this class, and in future algebra classes, you ’ll encounter equations that relate two variables, usu ally x and y. You might be
given an equation that is solved for y and need to solve it for x, or vice versa. In the following example, we’re give n an equation
with both x and y on the same side and we’ll solve it for y.
Solve the formula 3x+2y=18 for y:
1. when x=4
2. in generalExercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Answer
1. when x=4 2. in general

Substitute.

Subtract to isolate the
y-term.
Subtract to isolate the
y-term.
Divide.
Divide.
Simplify.
Simplify.
Solve the formula 3x+4y=10 for y:
1. when
2. in general
Answer
1.
2.
Solve the formula 5x+2y=18 for y:
1. when
2. in general
Answer
1.
2.
In Exercise through Exercise we used the numbers i n part 1 as a guide to solving in general in part 2. Now we will
solve a formula in general without using numbers as a guid e.
Solve the formula P=a+b+c for a.
Answer
We will isolate aa on one side of the equation.
Both b and c are added to a, so we subtract them from both
sides of the equation.
Simplify.
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83870Solve the formula P=a+b+c for b.
Answer
b=P−a−c
Solve the formula P=a+b+c for c.
Answer
c=P−a−b
Solve the formula 6x+5y=13 for y.
Answer

Subtract 6x from both sides to isolate the term with y.
Simplify.
Divide by 5 to make the coefficient 1.
Simplify.
The fraction is simplified. We cannot divide 13−6x by 5.
Solve the formula 4x+7y=9 for y.
Answer
Solve the formula 5x+8y=1 for y.
Answer
Key Concepts
To Solve an Application (with a formula)
1. Read the problem. Make sure all the words and ideas are understood.
2. Identify what we are looking for.
3. Name what we are looking for. Choose a variable to represent th at quantity.
4. Translate into an equation. Write the appropriate formula for th e situation. Substitute in the given information.Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.1.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838705. Solve the equation using good algebra techniques.
6. Check the answer in the problem and make sure it makes sense.
7. Answer the question with a complete sentence.
Distance, Rate and Time
For an object moving at a uniform (constant) rate, the d istance traveled, the elapsed time, and the rate are relate d by the
formula: d=rt where d = distance, r = rate, t = time.
To solve a formula for a specific variable means to get that variable by itself with a coefficient of 1 on one side of the
equation and all other variables and constants on the o ther side.
This page titled 2.7.1: Solving Linera Equations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.4: Use a General Strategy to Solve Linear Equations by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/elementary-algebra-2 e.
2.4E: Exercises by OpenStax has no license indicated. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/elementary-algebra-2 e.
2.6: Solve a Formula for a Specific Variable by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/elementary-algebra-2 e.

2.7.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838712.7.2: Solving Inequalities
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Solve inequalities using the Subtraction and Addition Proper ties of inequality
Solve inequalities using the Division and Multiplication Pro perties of inequality
Solve inequalities that require simplification
Translate to an inequality and solve
Solve Inequalities using the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Inequality
The Subtraction and Addition Properties of Equality st ate that if two quantities are equal, when we add or sub tract the same amount
from both quantities, the results will be equal.
Similar properties hold true for inequalities.
Table
For example, we know that −4 is less than 2.
If we subtract 5 from both quantities, is the left side still less than
the right side?
We get −9 on the left and −3 on the right.
And we know −9 is less than −3.
The inequality sign stayed the same.
Similarly we could show that the inequality also stays the s ame for addition.
This leads us to the Subtraction and Addition Properties of Inequality.
We use these properties to solve inequalities, taking t he same steps we used to solve equations. Solving the i nequality, the
steps would look like this:Learning Objectives
PROPERTIES OF EQUALITY
PROPERTIES OF INEQUALITY

2.7.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Any number greater than 4 is a solution to this inequal ity.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Add to both sides of the inequality.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve Inequalities using the Division and Multiplication Properties of Inequality
The Division and Multiplication Properties of Equality state that if two quantities are equal, when we divide or multiply both
quantities by the same amount, the results will also be e qual (provided we don’t divide by 0).Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Are there similar properties for inequalities? What hap pens to an inequality when we divide or multiply both sides by a constant?
Consider some numerical examples.
Table

Divide both sides by 5.
Multiply both sides by 5.
Simplify.
Fill in the inequality signs.
The inequality signs stayed the same.
Does the inequality stay the same when we divide or multi ply by a negative number?
Table

Divide both sides by -5.
Multiply both sides by -5.
Simplify.

Fill in the inequality signs.

The inequality signs reversed their direction.
When we divide or multiply an inequality by a positi ve number, the inequality sign stays the same. When we divide or multiply an
inequality by a negative number, the inequality sign rev erses.
Here are the Division and Multiplication Properties of Ine quality for easy reference.
For any real numbers a,b,c
When we divide or multiply an inequality by a:
positive number, the inequality stays the same.
negative number, the inequality reverses.PROPERTIES OF EQUALITY
DIVISION AND MULTIPLICATION PROPERTIES OF INEQUALITY

2.7.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Divide both sides of the inequality by 7.
Since, the inequality stays the same.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Answer

Divide both sides of the inequality by −10.
Since, the inequality reverses.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number lin e, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve each inequality, graph the solution on the number lin e, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Sometimes when solving an inequality, the variable ends u p on the right. We can rewrite the inequality in reverse t o get the
variable to the left.
Think about it as “If Xavier is taller than Alex, then Alex i s shorter than Xavier.”
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.Exercise
Exercise
SOLVING INEQUALITIES
Exercise

2.7.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Answer

Multiply both sides of the inequality by.
Since, the inequality stays the same.
Simplify.
Rewrite the variable on the left.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Multiply both sides of the inequality by −2.
Since, the inequality reverses.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number line, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Solve Inequalities That Require Simplification
Most inequalities will take more than one step to solv e. We follow the same steps we used in the general str ategy for solving linear
equations, but be sure to pay close attention during multip lication or division.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Subtract 9m from both sides to collect the variables on the
left.
Simplify.
Divide both sides of the inequality by −5, and reverse the
inequality.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality graph the solution on the number lin e, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Simplify each side as much as possible. 8p+3(p−12)>7p−28
Distribute. 8p+3p−36>7p−28
Combine like terms. 11p−36>7p−28
Subtract 7p from both sides to collect the variables on the left. 11p−36−7p>7p−28−7p
Simplify. 4p−36>−28
Add 36 to both sides to collect the constants on the ri ght. 4p−36+36>−28+36
Simplify. 4p>8
Divide both sides of the inequality by 4; the inequal ity stays
the same.
Simplify.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Just like some equations are identities and some are c ontradictions, inequalities may be identities or con tradictions, too. We
recognize these forms when we are left with only const ants as we solve the inequality. If the result is a t rue statement, we have an
identity. If the result is a false statement, we have a con tradiction.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the num ber line, and write the solution in interval
notation.
Answer
Simplify each side as much as possible. 8x−2(5−x)<4(x+9)+6 x
Distribute. 8x−10+2x<4x+36+6x
Combine like terms. 10x−10<10x+36
Subtract 10x from both sides to collect the variables o n the
left.10x−10−10x<10x+36−10x
Simplify. −10<36
The xx’s are gone, and we have a true statement.The inequality is an identity.
The solution is all real numbers.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the num ber line, and write the solution in interval
notation.
Answer
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the num ber line, and write the solution in interval
notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer

Multiply both sides by the LCD, 24, to clear the frac tions.
Simplify.
Combine like terms.
Subtract 5a from both sides to collect the variables on the left.
Simplify.
The statement is false! The inequality is a contradiction.
There is no solution.
Graph the solution on the number line.
Write the solution in interval notation. There is no so lution.
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Solve the inequality, graph the solution on the number l ine, and write the solution in interval notation.
Answer
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Translate to an Inequality and Solve
To translate English sentences into inequalities, we need to recognize the phrases that indicate the in equality. Some words are easy,
like ‘more than’ and ‘less than’. But others are not as obviou s.
Think about the phrase ‘at least’ – what does it mean to be ‘at least 21 years old’? It means 21 or more. The phrase ‘at least’ is the
same as ‘greater than or equal to’.
Table shows some common phrases that indicate inequalities.
Table
" data-valign="middle"
class="lt-math-15134">is
greater thanis greater than or equal to is less than is less than or equ al to
" data-valign="middle"
class="lt-math-15134">is more
thanis at least is smaller than is at most
" data-valign="middle"
class="lt-math-15134">is larger
thanis no less than has fewer than is no more than
" data-valign="middle"
class="lt-math-15134">exceedsis the minimum is lower than is the maximum
Translate and solve. Then write the solution in interva l notation and graph on the number line.
Twelve times c is no more than 96.
Answer
Translate.
Solve—divide both sides by 12.
Simplify.
Write in interval notation.
Graph on the number line.
Translate and solve. Then write the solution in interva l notation and graph on the number line.
Twenty times y is at most 100
AnswerExercise
Exercise

2.7.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871
Translate and solve. Then write the solution in interva l notation and graph on the number line.
Nine times z is no less than 135
Answer
Translate and solve. Then write the solution in interva l notation and graph on the number line.
Thirty less than x is at least 45.
Answer
Translate.
Solve—add 30 to both sides.
Simplify.
Write in interval notation.
Graph on the number line.
Translate and solve. Then write the solution in interva l notation and graph on the number line.
Nineteen less than p is no less than 47
Answer
Translate and solve. Then write the solution in interva l notation and graph on the number line.
Four more than a is at most 15.
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871
Key Concepts
Subtraction Property of Inequality
For any numbers a, b, and c,
if a<b then a−c<b−c and
if a>b then a−c>b−c.
Addition Property of Inequality
For any numbers a, b, and c,
if a<b then a+c<b+c and
if a>b then a+c>b+c.
Division and Multiplication Properties of Inequality
For any numbers a, b, and c,
if a<b and c>0, then ac<bc and ac>bc.
if a>b and c>0, then ac>bc and ac>bc.
if a<b and c<0, then ac>bc and ac>bc.
if a>b and c<0, then ac<bc and ac<bc.
When we divide or multiply an inequality by a:
positive number, the inequality stays the same.
negative number, the inequality reverses.
Practice Makes Perfect
Everyday Math
Safety A child’s height, h, must be at least 57 inches for the child to safely ride in the front seat of a car. Write this as an
inequality.
Fighter pilots The maximum height, h, of a fighter pilot is 77 inches. Write this as an inequa lity.
Answer
Elevators The total weight, w, of an elevator’s passengers can be no more than 1,200 pou nds. Write this as an inequality.
Shopping The number of items, n, a shopper can have in the express check-out lane is at most 8. Write this as an inequality.
AnswerExercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83871Writing Exercises
Give an example from your life using the phrase ‘at least’.
Give an example from your life using the phrase ‘at most’.
Answer
Answers will vary.
Explain why it is necessary to reverse the inequality when s olving
Explain why it is necessary to reverse the inequality when s olving
Answer
Answers will vary.
Self Check
ⓐ After completing the exercises, use this checklist to evalua te your mastery of the objectives of this section.
ⓑ What does this checklist tell you about your mastery of this section? What steps will you take to improve?
This page titled 2.7.2: Solving Inequalities is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.7: Solve Linear Inequalities by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/elementary-algebra2e.
2.7E: Exercises by OpenStax has no license indicated. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/elementary-algebra-2 e.Exercise
Exercise
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838722.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Solve quadratic equations using the Quadratic Formula
Use the discriminant to predict the number and type of solu tions of a quadratic equation
Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve a quad ratic equation
Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
1. Evaluate when and.
2. Simplify.
3. Simplify.
Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula
When we solved quadratic equations in the last section by completing the square, we took the same steps every time. By the end of
the exercise set, you may have been wondering ‘isn’t there an easier way to do this?’ The answer is ‘yes’. Mathematicians look for
patterns when they do things over and over in order to make their work easier. In this section we will deri ve and use a formula to
find the solution of a quadratic equation.
We have already seen how to solve a formula for a spe cific variable ‘in general’, so that we would do the al gebraic steps only once,
and then use the new formula to find the value of th e specific variable. Now we will go through the steps o f completing the square
using the general form of a quadratic equation to solve a qua dratic equation for.Learning Objectives

2.7.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872We start with the standard form of a quadratic equation a nd solve it for by completing the square.

Isolate the variable terms on one side.
Make the coefficient of equal to, by dividing by.
Simplify.
To complete the square, find and add it to both side s of
the equation.
The left side is a perfect square, factor it.
Find the common denominator of the right side and writ e
equivalent fractions with the common denominator.
Simplify.
Combine to one fraction.
Use the square root property.
Simplify the radical.
Add to both sides of the equation.
Combine the terms on the right side.
The final equation is called the "Quadratic Formula."
The solutions to a quadratic equation of the form, where are given by the formula:
To use the Quadratic Formula, we substitute the values of, and from the standar d form into the expression on the right side
of the formula. Then we simplify the expression. The res ult is the pair of solutions to the quadratic equation.
Notice the Quadratic Formula (Equation) is an equation. Make sure you use both sides of the equation.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.Definition: Quadratic Formula
Example How to Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula

2.7.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Solution:
Step 1: Write the quadratic equation in
standard form. Identify the values.This equation is in standard form.
Step 2: Write the quadratic formula. Then
substitute in the values of.Substitute in
Step 3: Simplify the fraction, and solve
for.
Step 4: Check the solutions.Put each answer in the original equation
to check. Substitute and.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Answer
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
AnswerExercise
Exercise

2.7.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838721. Write the quadratic equation in standard form,. Id entify the values of, and.
2. Write the Quadratic Formula. Then substitute in the valu es of, and.
3. Simplify.
4. Check the solutions.
If you say the formula as you write it in each proble m, you’ll have it memorized in no time! And remember, the Quadratic Formula
is an EQUATION. Be sure you start with “ ”.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Solution:

Write the equation in standard form by adding to ea ch side.
This equation is now in standard form.
Identify the values of,,.,,
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of.
Simplify.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Simplify.

Check:

Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
AnswerHowTo: Solve a Quadratic Equation Using the Quadratic Formula
Example
Exercise

2.7.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Answer
When we solved quadratic equations by using the Square Root Property, we sometimes got answers that had radi cals. That can
happen, too, when using the Quadratic Formula. If we get a radical as a solution, the final answer must have the radical in its
simplified form.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Solution:

This equation is in standard form.
Identify the values of and.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Factor out the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Check:
We leave the check for you!
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
AnswerExercise
Example
Exercise

2.7.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Answer
When we substitute, and into the Quadratic Formula an d the radicand is negative, the quadratic equation will have imagi nary
or complex solutions. We will see this in the next exam ple.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Solution:
Table 9.3.5

This equation is in standard form.
Identify the values of.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical using complex numbers.
Simplify the radical.
Factor the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
Rewrite in standard form.
Write as two solutions.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
AnswerExercise
Example
Exercise

2.7.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Answer
Remember, to use the Quadratic Formula, the equation must be written in standard form,. Sometimes, we will need
to do some algebra to get the equation into standard f orm before we can use the Quadratic Formula.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Solution:
Our first step is to get the equation in standard form.
Table 9.3.6

Distribute to get the equation in standard form.
This equation is now in standard form.
Identify the values of.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Factor the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
Write as two solutions.
Check:
We leave the check for you!
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
AnswerExercise
Example
Exercise

2.7.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Answer
When we solved linear equations, if an equation had to o many fractions we cleared the fractions by multiply ing both sides of the
equation by the LCD. This gave us an equivalent equati on—without fractions— to solve. We can use the same st rategy with
quadratic equations.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Solution:
Our first step is to clear the fractions.
Table 9.3.7

Multiply both sides by the LCD,, to clear the fracti ons.
Multiply.
Subtract to get the equation in standard form.
Identify the values of, and.
Write the Quadratic Formula.
Then substitute in the values of and.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Factor the common factor in the numerator.
Remove the common factors.
Rewrite to show two solutions.
Check:
We leave the check for you!
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
AnswerExercise
Example
Exercise

2.7.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Answer
Think about the equation. We know from the Zero Product Property that this equation has only one solution,.
We will see in the next example how using the Quadratic Formula to solve an equation whose standard form is a perfec t square
trinomial equal to gives just one solution. Notice that once the radicand is simplified it becomes, which leads t o only one
solution.
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Solution:
Table 9.3.8

Add to get the equation in standard form.
Identify the values of, and.
Write the quadratic formula.
Then substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.

Simplify the radical.
Simplify the fraction.
Check:
We leave the check for you!
Did you recognize that is a perfect square trinomial. It is equivalent to? If you solve
by factoring and then using the Square Root Property, do you get the same result?
Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
AnswerExercise
Example
Exercise

2.7.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Solve by using the Quadratic Formula:.
Answer
Use the Discriminant to Predict the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
When we solved the quadratic equations in the previou s examples, sometimes we got two real solutions, one real so lution, and
sometimes two complex solutions. Is there a way to predic t the number and type of solutions to a quadratic e quation without
actually solving the equation?
Yes, the expression under the radical of the Quadrat ic Formula makes it easy for us to determine the num ber and type of solutions.
This expression is called the discriminant.
Discriminant
Figure 9.3.85
Let’s look at the discriminant of the equations in s ome of the examples and the number and type of solut ions to those quadratic
equations.
Table 9.3.9
Quadratic Equation (in
standard form)Discriminat Value of the Discriminant Number and Type of Solutions
real
real
complex
Figure 9.3.86
Using the Discriminant, to Determine the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
For a quadratic equation of the form,,
If, the equation has real solutions.
if, the equation has real solution.
if, the equation has complex solutions.Exercise
Definition

2.7.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Determine the number of solutions to each quadratic equ ation.
a.
b.
c.
Solution:
To determine the number of solutions of each quadratic e quation, we will look at its discriminant.
a.
The equation is in standard form, identify, and.
Write the discriminant.
Substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.
Since the discriminant is positive, there are real solut ions to the equation.
b.
The equation is in standard form, identify, and.
Write the discriminant.
Substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.
Since the discriminant is negative, there are complex s olutions to the equation.
c.
The equation is in standard form, identify, and.
Write the discriminant.Example

2.7.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Substitute in the values of, and.
Simplify.
Since the discriminant is, there is real solution to the equation.
Determine the number and type of solutions to each quadra tic equation.
a.
b.
c.
Answer
a. complex solutions
b. real solutions
c. real solution
Determine the number and type of solutions to each quadra tic equation.
a.
b.
c.
Answer
a. real solutions
b. complex solutions
c. real solution
Identify the Most Appropriate Method to Use to Solve a Quadratic Equation
We summarize the four methods that we have used to solve q uadratic equations below.
Methods for Solving Quadratic Equations
1. Factoring
2. Square Root Property
3. Completing the Square
4. Quadratic Formula
Given that we have four methods to use to solve a quad ratic equation, how do you decide which one to use? Fac toring is often the
quickest method and so we try it first. If the equati on is or we use the Square Root Property. For any othe r
equation, it is probably best to use the Quadratic Form ula. Remember, you can solve any quadratic equation b y using the Quadratic
Formula, but that is not always the easiest method.
What about the method of Completing the Square? Most people find that method cumbersome and prefer not to use it. We needed
to include it in the list of methods because we comp leted the square in general to derive the Quadratic Fo rmula. You will also use
the process of Completing the Square in other areas of alge bra.Exercise
Exercise

2.7.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872Identify the Most Appropriate Method to Solve a Quadratic Equation
1. Try Factoring first. If the quadratic factors easily, this method is v ery quick.
2. Try the Square Root Property next. If the equation fits the form or, it can easily be solved by using the
Square Root Property.
3. Use the Quadratic Formula. Any other quadratic equation is best solved by using th e Quadratic Formula.
The next example uses this strategy to decide how to solve e ach quadratic equation.
Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve each q uadratic equation.
a.
b.
c.
Solution:
a.
Since the equation is in the, the most appropriate metho d is to use the Square Root Property.
b.
We recognize that the left side of the equation is a perfect square trinomial, and so factoring will be th e most appropriate
method.
c.
Put the equation in standard form.
While our first thought may be to try factoring, thi nking about all the possibilities for trial and erro r method leads us to choose
the Quadratic Formula as the most appropriate method.
Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve each q uadratic equation.
a.
b.
c.
Answer
a. Factoring
b. Square Root Property
c. Quadratic Formula
Identify the most appropriate method to use to solve each q uadratic equation.
a.
b. Example
Exercise
Exercise

2.7.3.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83872c.
Answer
a. Quadratic Formula
b. Factoring or Square Root Property
c. Square Root Property
Practice Makes Perfect
In the following exercises, solve each equation.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Answer
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
In the following exercises, solve by using the Quadratic Fo rmula.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21. Solve Quadratic Equations of the Form Using the Square Root Property
Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula

2.7.3.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8387222.
23.
24.
25.
Answer
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
28. In the following exercises, determine the number of rea l solutions for each quadratic equation.
a.
b.
c.
Answer
28. a. no real solutions b. c.
29. In the following exercises, determine the number of rea l solutions for each quadratic equation.
a.
b.
c.
Answer
29. a. b. no real solutions c.
Key Concepts
Quadratic Formula
The solutions to a quadratic equation of the form are g iven by the formula:
How to solve a quadratic equation using the Quadratic Formula.Use the Discriminant to Predict the Number of Real Solutions of a Quadratic Equation

2.7.3.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838721. Write the quadratic equation in standard form,. Id entify the values of.
2. Write the Quadratic Formula. Then substitute in the valu es of.
3. Simplify.
4. Check the solutions.
Using the Discriminant,, to Determine the Number and Type of Solutions of a Quadratic Equation
For a quadratic equation of the form,
If, the equation has real solutions.
If, the equation has real solution.
If, the equation has complex solutions.
Methods to Solve Quadratic Equations:
Factoring
Square Root Property
Completing the Square
Quadratic Formula
How to identify the most appropriate method to solve a quad ratic equation.
1. Try Factoring first. If the quadratic factors easily, this me thod is very quick.
2. Try the Square Root Property next. If the equation fits the form or, it can easily be s olved by using
the Square Root Property.
3. Use the Quadratic Formula. Any other quadratic equation is best solved by using th e Quadratic Formula.
Glossary
discriminant
In the Quadratic Formula,, the quantity is called the d iscriminant.
This page titled 2.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.4: Solve Quadratic Equations Using the Quadratic Formula by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/intermediate-algebra -2e.
9.4E: Exercises by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/intermediate-algebra -2e.
9.2E: Exercises by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/intermediate-algebra -2e.

2.7.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838732.7.4: Solving a System of Linear Equations
Solve a system of equations using the substitution method.
Recognize systems of equations that have no solution or a n infinite number of solutions.
Solve application problems using the substitution method.
Using Substitution to Solve a System of Equations
In the substitution method, you solve for one variabl e and then substitute that expression into the other equation. The important
thing here is that you are always substituting values that are equivalent.
For example:
Sean is 5 years older than four times his daughter’s age. His daug hter is 7. How old is Sean?
You might do this problem in your head. Sean’s daugh ter is 7, so “four times his daughter’s age” is 28, a nd 5 years added to that is
33. Sean is 33.
If you solved the problem like that, you used a simp le substitution—you substituted in the value “7” for “his daughter’s age.” You
learned in the second part of the problem that “his daughter is 7.” So substituting in a value of “7” fo r “his daughter’s age” in the
first part of the problem was okay, because you knew these t wo quantities were equal.
Let’s look at a simple system of equations that can be s olved using substitution.
Find the value of for this system.
Equation A:
Equation B:
Solution
The problem asks to solve for.
Equation B gives you the value of,, so you can
substitute 2 into Equation A for.
Substituting into Equation A.
Simplify and solve the equation for.
You can substitute a value for a variable even if it is an expression. Here’s an example.
Solve for and.
Equation A:
Equation B: Learning Objectives
Example
Example

2.7.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
The goal of the substitution method is to rewrite one of the
equations in terms of a single variable. Equation tel ls us that
, so it makes sense to substitute that into
Equation A for.
Substitute into Equation A for and you get
Simplify and solve the equation to get.
To now find, substitute this value for into either e quation
and solve for. We will use Equation A here to get.
TRUE TRUEFinally, check the solution, by substituting these
values into each of the original equations.
and The solution is.
Remember, a solution to a system of equations must be a solution to each of the equations within the syst em. The ordered pair
works for both equations, so you know that it is a solution to the system as well.
Let’s look at another example whose substitution involv es the distributive property.
Solve for and.Example

2.7.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
Choose an equation to use for the substitution.
The first equation tells you how to express in terms of, so it
makes sense to substitute into the second equation for.
Substitute for into the second equation.
Simplify and solve the equation for.
To find, substitute this value for back into one of the
original equations.
TRUE TRUECheck the solution, by substituting them into each
of the original equations.
and.
The solution is.
In the examples above, one of the equations was alre ady given to us in terms of the variable or. This allowed us to quickly
substitute that value into the other equation and solve for one of the unknowns.
Sometimes you may have to rewrite one of the equations in terms of one of the variables first before you ca n substitute. Look at the
example below.
Solve for and.Example

2.7.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
Choose an equation to use for the substitution. The seco nd
equation,, can easily be rewritten in terms of, so i t
makes sense to start there.
Rewrite in terms of.
Substitute for in the other equation as
Simplify and solve the equation for.
Substitute back into one of the original equations to solve
for.
TRUE TRUECheck both solutions by substituting them into each of the
original equations.
and
The solution is.
Solve the system for and.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Answer
A. Incorrect. If you substitute the values and into the first equation, you get a false statement:.
To solve this system, try rewriting the first equation as. T hen substitute in for in the second
equation, and solve for. The correct answer is,.
B. Correct. Substituting these values into either equati on results in a true statement:, and.
C. Incorrect. If you substitute the values and into t he second equation, you get a false statement:
. To solve this system, try rewriting the first equation as. Then substitute in for in the
second equation, and solve for. The correct answer is.
D. Incorrect. If you substitute the values and into the second equation, you get a false statement:
. To solve this system, try rewriting the first equation as. Then substitute in for in the second
equation, and solve for. The correct answer is.Exercise

2.7.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Special Situations
There are some cases where using the substitution metho d will yield results that, at first, do not make sense. Let’s take a look at
some of these and figure out what is going on.
Solve for and.
Solution
Since the first equation is, you can substitute
in for in the second equation.
Expand the expression on the left.
Combine like terms on the left side of equation.
, so you are left with.
The statement is false, so there is no solution.
You get the false statement. What does this mean? The gr aph of this system sheds some light on what is happeni ng.
The lines are parallel. They never intersect and ther e is no solution to this system of linear equations. No te that the result
is not a solution. It is simply a false statement and it indica tes that there is no solution.
Now take this problem, which is interesting as well.
Substituting for in the second equation, you find the following:
This time, you get a true statement:. But what does this type of answer mean? Again, graphing can help you make
sense of this system.Example

2.7.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873
This system consists of two equations that both repres ent the same line; the two lines are collinear. Every point along the line will
be a solution to the system, and that’s why the substit ution method yields a true statement. In this case, th ere are an infinite number
of solutions.
Aubrey is using the substitution method to solve the following system of equations:
She arrives at an answer of. She thinks that this answer means that the lines are parallel and that the syst em has no
solution.
Aubrey wants to check her answer. Which of the followin g actions will best help her find out whether the two e quations in the
system are, in fact, parallel?
A. Check to see whether the slopes of both lines are the sa me, and the y-intercepts are different.
B. Check to see whether either line goes through the o rigin.
C. Check to see whether the lines have the same y-interc ept.
D. Check to see whether both lines go through the point.
Answer
A. Correct. Parallel lines have the same slope, but she also h as to check whether they have different y-intercepts bec ause
the lines could be collinear (remember that 2 colline ar lines are the same line). If Aubrey finds that the slope s of the
lines are the same and the y-intercepts are different, th en she can be confident that her answer is correct.
B. Incorrect. The origin has no bearing on whether two line s are parallel. In the case of this system, neither line goe s
through the origin, but the lines are still parallel. If Aubrey finds that the slopes of the lines are the same and the yintercepts are different, then she can be confident that her answer is correct.
C. Incorrect. It is true that lines with the same y-intercept are never parallel, because parallel lines can never inte rsect. But
just checking that the y-intercepts aren’t the same is not enough. To be parallel, lines also must have the same slop e. If
Aubrey finds that the slopes of the lines are the same and the y-intercepts are different, then she can be confident th at
her answer is correct.
D. Incorrect. Although she arrived at an answer of, this does not mean that the lines themselves intersect at the
point. If Aubrey finds that the slopes of the lines are the same and the y-intercepts are different, then she can be
confident that her answer is correct.Exercise

2.7.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solving Application Problems Using Substitution
Systems of equations are a very useful tool for model ing real-life situations and answering questions about them. If you can
translate the application into two linear equations wi th two variables, then you have a system of equation s that you can solve to find
the solution. You can use any method to solve the syst em of equations. Use the substitution method in this topi c.
In order to sell more of its produce, a local farm sel ls bags of apples in two sizes: medium and large. A me dium bag contains 4
Macintosh and 1 Granny Smith apples and costs $2.80. A la rge bag contains 8 Macintosh and 4 Granny Smith apples and costs
$7.20. The price of one Granny Smith apple is the same i n the medium bag as it is in the large bag. The price of one Macintosh
apple is the same in the medium bag as it is in the large bag. What is the price of each kind of apple?
Let’s start by creating a system of equations that r epresents what is happening in the problem. There are two types of apples and
two sizes of bags. You can let represent the cost of a Macintosh apple and represent the cost of a Grann y Smith apple. Let’s
make a table and see what is known.
Cost of Macintosh
apples+Cost of Granny
Smith apples= Total cost of bag
Medium + = $2.80
Large + = $7.20
Now that you have two equations in the same variables, you can solve the system. You will use substitution. The st eps are shown in
the example below:
Solve for and using the substitution method.
Solution
First, rewrite one of the equations in terms of one of the
variables.
Substitute for in the second equation and solve
for.
Substitute the value of,, into one of the original
equations to solve for.
Check both equations by substituting in the values of and.

One Granny Smith apple costs $0.80 and one Macintosh apple costs $0.50.Example

2.7.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Using the substitution method can be an effective approac h to solving geometric problems.
The perimeter of a rectangle is 60 inches. If the length is 10 inches longer than the width, find the dimensions using the
substitution method.
Solution
Use the information provided to write a system of equat ions. Let
and.
Substitute for in the first equation and solve for.
To find, substitute 10 for in one of the equations a nd solve
for.
Check both solutions by substituting them into the two
equations.
Both of them are true, so this is a correct solution.
The length of the rectangle is 20 inches.
The width of the rectangle is 10 inches.
Summary
The substitution method is one way of solving systems o f equations. To use the substitution method, use one e quation to find an
expression for one of the variables in terms of the ot her variable. Then substitute that expression in pla ce of that variable in the
second equation. You can then solve this equation as it will now have only one variable. Solving using the s ubstitution method will
yield one of three results: a single value for each variable within the system (indicating one solution), an untrue statement
(indicating no solutions), or a true statement (indicatin g an infinite number of solutions).
Solve a system of equations when no multiplication is necessa ry to eliminate a variable.
Solve a system of equations when multiplication is necessary t o eliminate a variable.
Recognize systems that have no solution or an infinite nu mber of solutions.
Solve application problems using the elimination method.
Introduction
The elimination method for solving systems of linear equations uses the ad dition property of equality. You can add the same va lue
to each side of an equation.
So if you have a system: and, you can add to the left side of the first equation and add 8 to the rig ht
side of the equation. And since, you are adding the same value to each side of the first equation.Example
Learning Objectives

2.7.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Using Addition to Eliminate a Variable
If you add the two equations, and together, as noted abo ve, watch what happens.
You have eliminated the term, and this equation can be solved using the methods for solving equations with o ne variable.
Let’s see how this system is solved using the eliminat ion method.
Use elimination to solve the system.
Solution
Add the equations.
Solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations and solv e for
TRUE TRUEBe sure to check your answer in both equations!
The answers check.
The solution is.
Unfortunately, not all systems work out this easily. How a bout a system like and? If you add these two
equations together, no variables are eliminated.
But you want to eliminate a variable. So let’s add the opposite of one of the equations to the other equation.
You have eliminated the variable, and the problem can now be solved. See the example below.
Use elimination to solve the system.Example
Example

2.7.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
You can eliminate the y-variable if you add the opp osite of one
of the equations to the other equation.
Rewrite the second equation as its opposite.
Add.
Solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations and solv e for
TRUE TRUEBe sure to check your answer in both equations!
The answers check.
The solution is.
The following are two more examples showing how to solve lin ear systems of equations using elimination.
Use elimination to solve the system.
Solution
Notice the coefficients of each variable in each equ ation. If you
add these two equations, the term will be eliminated since
Add and solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations.
TRUE TRUECheck solutions.
The answers check.
The solution is.Example

2.7.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Use elimination to solve for and.
Solution
Notice the coefficients of each variable in each equ ation. You
will need to add the opposite of one of the equation s to eliminate
the variable, as, but.
Change one of the equations to its opposite, add and so lve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations and solv e for
The solution is.
Go ahead and check this last example—substitute into bot h equations. You get two true statements: and!
Notice that you could have used the opposite of the first equ ation rather than the second equation and gotten the sam e result.
Using Multiplication and Addition to Eliminate a Variables
Many times, adding the equations or adding the opposite of one of the equations will not result in eliminat ing a variable. Look at
the system below.
If you add the equations above, or add the opposite of one of the equations, you will get an equation th at still has two variables. So
let’s now use the multiplication property of equalit y first. You can multiply both sides of one of the e quations by a number that will
result in the coefficient of one of the variables bei ng the opposite of the same variable in the other equatio n.
This is where multiplication comes in handy. The first e quation contains the term and the second equation contains the term.
If you multiply the second equation by -4, when you add bo th equations, the variables will add up to 0.
See the example below.
Solve for and.
Equation A:
Equation B: Example
Example

2.7.4.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
Look for terms that can be eliminated. The equations do not
have any or terms with the same coefficients.
Multiply the second equation by -4 so they have the sa me
coefficient.
Rewrite the system, and add the equations.
Solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations to find.
TRUE TRUECheck your answer.
The answers check.
The solution is.
There are other ways to solve this system. Instead of m ultiplying one equation in order to eliminate a var iable when the equations
were added, you could have multiplied both equations by different numbers.
Let’s remove the variable this time. Multiply Equatio n A by 5 and Equation B by -3.
Solve for and.Example

2.7.4.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
Look for terms that can be eliminated. The equations do not
have any and terms with the same coefficient.
In order to use the elimination method, you have to create
variables that have the same coefficient—then you can eliminate
them. Multiply the top equation by 5.
Now multiply the bottom equation by -3.
Next add the equations, and solve for.
Substitute into one of the original equations to find.
The solution is. You arrive at the same solution as before.
These equations were multiplied by 5 and -3 respective ly, because that gave you terms that would add up to 0. Be sure to multiply
all of the terms of the equation.
Felix needs to find and in the following system.
Equation A:
Equation B:
If he wants to use the elimination method to eliminate on e of the variables, which is the most efficient way for him to do so?
A. Add Equation A and Equation B
B. Add to both sides of Equation A
C. Multiply Equation A by 5
D. Multiply Equation B by -1
Answer
A. Correct. If Felix adds the two equations, the terms and will cancel out, leaving. Felix will then easily
be able to solve for.
B. Incorrect. Adding to both sides of Equation A will n ot change the value of the equation, nor will it help eli minate
either of the variables—Felix will end up with the rewritten equation. The correct answer is to add
Equation A and Equation B.
C. Incorrect. Multiplying Equation A by 5 yields, which does not help Felix eliminate any of the variables
in the system. Felix may notice that now both equations have a constant of 25, but subtracting one from another is not
an efficient way of solving this problem. Instead, it wou ld create another equation where both variables are pr esent. The
correct answer is to add Equation A and Equation B.
D. Incorrect. Multiplying Equation B by -1 yields, which doe s not help Felix eliminate any of the
variables in the system. Felix may notice that now both equati ons have a term of, but adding them would not
eliminate them, it would give him a. The correct answer is to add Equation A and Equation B.Exercise

2.7.4.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Special Situations
Just as with the substitution method, the elimination method will sometimes eliminate both variables, and you end up with either a
true statement or a false statement. Recall that a fal se statement means that there is no solution.
Let’s look at an example.
Solve for and.
Solution
Add the equations to eliminate the x-term.
There is no solution.
Graphing these lines shows that they are parallel lin es and as such do not share any point in common, ver ifying that there is no
solution.
If both variables are eliminated and you are left wi th a true statement, this indicates that there are an infinite number of ordered
pairs that satisfy both of the equations. In fact, the equ ations are the same line.
Solve for and.
Solution
Add the equations to eliminate the x-term.
There are an infinite number of solutions.Example
Example

2.7.4.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Graphing these two equations will help to illustrate what is h appening.
Solving Application Problems Using the Elimination Method
The elimination method can be applied to solving sys tems of equations that model real situations. Two exam ples of using the
elimination method in problem solving are shown below.
The sum of two numbers is 10. Their difference is 6. What are the two number s?
Solution
Write a system of equations to model the situation.
=one number
=the other number
Add the equations to eliminate the y-term and then so lve for.
Substitute the value for into one of the original eq uations to
find.
TRUE TRUECheck your answer by substituting and into the
original system.
The answers check.
The numbers are 8 and 2.
A theater sold 800 tickets for Friday night’s performance. One child ticket costs $4.50 and one adult ticket costs $6.00.
The total amount collected was $4,500. How many of each type of tic ket were sold?Example
Example

2.7.4.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
The total number of tickets sold is.
The amount of money collected is
System of equations:Write a system of equations to model the ticket sale si tuation.
=number of adult tickets sold
=number of child tickets sold
Use multiplication to re-write the first equation.
Add the opposite of the second equation to eliminate a term and
solve for.
Substitute 200 in for in one of the original equatio ns.
TRUE TRUECheck your answer by substituting and into the
original system.
The answers check.
600 adult tickets and 200 child tickets were sold.
Summary
Combining equations is a powerful tool for solving a sy stem of equations. Adding or subtracting two equations i n order to
eliminate a common variable is called the eliminatio n (or addition) method. Once one variable is eliminat ed, it becomes much
easier to solve for the other one. Multiplication can be used to set up matching terms in equations before they are combined. When
using multiplication in the elimination method, it is important to multiply all the terms on both sides o f the equation—not just the
one term you are trying to eliminate.
Solve a system of equations when no multiplication is necessa ry to eliminate a variable.
Solve a system of equations when multiplication is necessary t o eliminate a variable.
Solve application problems that require the use of this method.
Recognize systems that have no solution or an infinite nu mber of solutions.
Introduction
Equations can have more than one or two variables. You are go ing to look at equations with three variables. Equati ons with one
variable graph on a line. Equations with two variable s graph on a plane. Equations with three variables g raph in a 3-dimensional
space.
Equations with one variable require only one equatio n to have a unique (one) solution. Equations with two variables require two
equations to have a unique solution (one ordered pa ir). So it should not be a surprise that equations wit h three variables require a
system of three equations to have a unique solution (one ord ered triplet).Learning Objectives

2.7.4.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solving A System of Three Variables
Just as when solving a system of two equations, there a re three possible outcomes for the solution of a syste m of three variables.
Let’s look at this visually, although you will not be graphing these equations.
Case 1: There is one solution. In order for three equations wi th three variables to have one solution, the planes m ust intersect in a
single point.
Case 2: There is no solution. The three planes do not have any points in common. (Note that two of the equations may have points
in common with each other, but not all three.) Below are exa mples of some of the ways this can happen.
Case 3: There are an infinite number of solutions. This occur s when the three planes intersect in a line. And this ca n also occur
when the three equations graph as the same plane.
Let’s start by looking at Case 1, where the system has a unique (one) solution. This is the case that you are usually most interested
in.
Here is a system of linear equations. There are three va riables and three equations.
You know how to solve a system with two equations and two variables. For the first step, use the elimination met hod to remove one
of the variables. In this case, can be eliminated by addin g the first and second equations.
To solve the system, though, you need two equations using two variables. Adding the first and thi rd equations in the original system
will also give an equation with and but not.
Now you have a system of two equations and two variables.

2.7.4.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solve the system using elimination again. In this case, you can eliminate by adding the opposite of the second e quation:
Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
Now you use one of the equations in the two-variable syste m to find.
Finally, use any equation from the first system, along with the values al ready found, to solve for the last variable.
Be sure to check your answer. With this many steps, there are a lot of places to make a si mple error!
Since,, and is a solution for all three equations, it’s the solution for the system of equations. Just as two values
can be written as an ordered pair, three values can be writt en as an ordered triplet:.
1. Choose two equations and use them to eliminate one vari able.
2. Choose another pair of equations and use them to eli minate the same variable.
3. Use the resulting pair of equations from steps 1 and 2 t o eliminate one of the two remaining variables.
4. Solve the final equation for the remaining variable.
5. Find the value of the second variable. Do this by using one o f the resulting equations from steps 1 and 2 and the valu e of
the found variable from step 4.Solving a system of three variables

2.7.4.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838736. Find the value of the third variable. Do this by using one of the original equations and the values of the found v ariables
from steps 4 and 5.
7. Check your answer in all three equations!
Solve for,, and.
Solution
Step 1: Choose two equations and eliminate a variable. The first
two equations can be added to eliminate.
Step 2: The third equation has no variable, so there’ s nothing
to eliminate! You have a system of two equations and tw o
variables.
Step 3: Eliminate a second variable. These equations ca n be
added to eliminate.
Step 4: Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
Step 5: Use that value and one of the equations from th e system
in step 3 that involves just two variables, one of which was
that you already know. Solve for the second variable.
Step 6: Use the two found values and one of the original
equations that had all three variables to solve for th e third
variable.
Step 7: Check your answer.
The solution is.
As with systems of two equations with two variables, you may need to add the opposite of one of the equations o r even multiply
one of the equations before adding in order to elimina te one of the variables.Example

2.7.4.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solve for,, and.Example

2.7.4.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
Step 1: First, choose two equations and eliminate a vari able.
Multiply the second equation by -1, and then add it to the first
equation. This will eliminate.
Step 2: Next, combine the third equation and one of t he first two
to eliminate again. However, the third equation has a
coefficient of -4 on while the coefficients in the first two
equations are both 1. So, multiply the second equation by 4 and
add.
Step 3: Eliminate a second variable using the equation s from
steps 1 and 2. Again, they cannot be added as they are. Look at
the coefficients on. If you multiply the equation f rom step 1
by -3, the terms will have the same coefficient.
Multiply and then add. Be careful of the signs!
Step 4: Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
Step 5: Use that value and one of the equations from th e system
in step 3, that involves just two variables, one of whic h was.
Solve for the second variable.
Step 6: Use the two found values and one of the original
equations to solve for the third variable.
Step 7: Check your answer.
The solution is.
These systems can be helpful for solving real-world problem s.

2.7.4.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Andrea sells photographs at art fairs. She prices the photos according to size: small photos cost $10, medium photos
cost $15, and large photos cost $40. She usually sells as many small photos as medium and large photos combined. She
also sells twice as many medium photos as large. A booth at the art fa ir costs $300.
If her sales go as usual, how many of each size photo must she sel l to pay for the booth?Example

2.7.4.23 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
=number of small photos sold
=number of medium photos sold
=number of large photos sold
=money received for small photos
=money received for medium photos
=money received for large photosTo set up the system, first choose the variables. In this case the
unknown values are the number of small, medium, and l arge
photos.
The total of her sales must be $300 to pay for the boo th.
The number of small photos is the same as the total of m edium
and large photos.
She sells twice as many medium photos as large photos.
To make things easier, rewrite the equations to be in the same
format, with all variables on the left side of the eq ual sign and
only a constant number on the right.
Now solve the system.
Step 1: First choose two equations and eliminate a varia ble.
Since one equation has no variable, it may be helpfu l to use
the other two equations and eliminate the variable from them.
Multiply the second equation by -10 and add.
Step 2: The second equation for our two-variable system will be
the remaining equation (that has no variable).
Step 3: Eliminate a second variable using the equation s from
steps 1 and 2.
While you could multiply the second equation by 25 t o
eliminate, the numbers will be easier to work with if y ou
divide the first equation by 25. Don’t forget to be c areful of the
signs!
Step 4: Solve the resulting equation for the remaining variable.
Step 5: Use that value and one of the equations contain ing just
two variables, one of those variables being, that you
already know, to solve for the second
variable. t’s best to use one of the original equations—in case
an error was made in multiplication.
Step 6: Use the two found values and one of the origin al
equations to solve for the third variable.
You can even use one of the equations before you rewro te it for
the system.
She usually sells as many small photos as medium and large
photos combined.
Medium and large photos combined, which is the
number of small photos.
She also sells twice as many medium photos as large. Step 7: Check your answer.

2.7.4.24 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Medium photos is 6, which is twice the number of large photos
(3).With application problems, it’s sometimes easier (and be tter) to
use the original wording of the problem rather than the
equations you write.
A booth at the art fair costs $300. Andrea receives $1 0(9) or $90
for the 9 small photos, $15(6) or $90 for the 6 mediu m photos,
and $40(3) or $120 for the large photos.
If Andrea sells small photos, medium photos, and lar ge photos, she’ll receive exactly the amount of mone y needed to pay for
the booth.
In the solution to this system, what is the value of?
A. 5
B. 16
C. -31
D. 1
Answer
A. Correct. Eliminate by adding the last two equations tog ether to get. Now, multiply the second equation
by 3 and add it to the first equation to get. This creates a smal ler system of two equations and two
variables: and. Multiply by to create and now add t his
to. This eliminates, giving, so.
B. Incorrect. Eliminate by adding the last two equatio ns together, to get. Now, multiply the second
equation by 3 and add it to the first equation to get. This c reates a smaller system of two equations and
two variables: and. Multiply by to create and now ad d
this to. This eliminates, giving, so.
C. Incorrect. Eliminate by adding the last two equatio ns together, to get. Now, multiply the second
equation by 3 and add it to the first equation to get. This c reates a smaller system of two equations and
two variables: and. Multiply by to create and now ad d
this to. This eliminates, giving, so.
D. Incorrect. Eliminate by adding the last two equations t ogether, to get. Now, multiply the second
equation by 3 and add it to the first equation to get. This c reates a smaller system of two equations and
two variables: and. Multiply by to create and now ad d
this to. This eliminates, giving, so.
Systems with No Solutions or an Infinite Number of Solutions
Now let’s look at Case 2 (no solution) and Case 3 (an inf inite number of solutions).
Since you will not graph these equations, as it is dif ficult to graph in three dimensions on a 2-dimensiona l sheet of paper, you will
look at what happens when you try to solve systems with no soluti ons or an infinite number of solutions.
Let’s look at a system that has no solutions.Exercise

2.7.4.25 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Suppose you wanted to solve this system, and you started wit h the last two equations. Multiply the third equation b y 4 and add it to
the second equation to eliminate.
In this case, the result is a false statement. This means there are no solutions to the t wo equations and therefore there can be no
solutions for the system of three equations. If this o ccurs for any two of the three equations, then there is no solution for the system
of equations.
Now let’s look at a system that has an infinite number of solut ions.
For the first step, you would choose two equations and co mbine them to eliminate a variable. You can eliminat e by multiplying
the first equation by 3 and adding to the second equation.
Notice that when the two equations are added, all variables are eliminated! The final equation is a true statement:.
When this happens, it’s because the two equations are equivalent. These two equations would graph as the same plane. B ut in order
for the solution to the system of three equations to be infin ite, you need to continue to check with the third equatio n.
Since the first two equations are equivalent, the syste m of equations could be written with only two equations. Continue as before.
Multiply the first equation by -4 and add the third equati on.
Again, the final equation is the true statement. So t he third equation is the same plane as the first two. Now you can confirm
that there are an infinite number of solutions—all of t he points that are on the plane that these three equation s each describe.
This is one type of situation where there are an infin ite number of solutions. There are others, which you will not examine at this
time.
How many solutions does the following system of equations have?Example

2.7.4.26 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873Solution
Multiply the first equation by -2 and then add that resulting
equation to the second equation.
is a true statement, which leads us to believe that yo u may
have an infinite number of solutions. This outcome ind icates that
the first pair of equations is really the same equation. The values
of,, and that will make the first equation work wil l also
work for the second.
Now add the third equation with the first.
Again, the result is another true statement. The first a nd third
equations are the same. So you have three equations tha t will all
graph as the same plane.
There are an infinite number of solutions to this system.
Solve the following system of equations.
Solution
Compare the coefficients on the terms. Multiply the first
equation by -4 and then add that resulting equation to the second
equation.
Notice that a false statement is produced:. This means
that there is no solution to this system of equations; yo u do not
have to complete any further steps.
The system has no solutions.
How many solutions does this system have?
A. No solutions
B. One
C. An infinite number of solutions
Answer
A. Correct. Multiply the last equation by -2 to get. If you ad d this equation to the first one, you will
get, a false statement. This means that this system has no so lutions.
B. Incorrect. If you multiply the last equation by -2 and t hen add it to the first equation, you get, a false stateme nt.
This system has no solutions.Example
Exercise

2.7.4.27 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83873C. Incorrect. If you multiply the last equation by -2 and t hen add it to the first equation, you get, a false stateme nt.
This system has no solutions.
Summary
Combining equations is a powerful tool for solving a system of equations, including systems with three equati ons and three
variables. Sometimes, you must multiply one of the equa tions before you add so that you can eliminate a va riable. You continue the
process of combining equation and eliminating variab les until you have found the value of all of the va riables. Occasionally this
process leads to all of the variables being eliminate d (eliminated not solved for). When all the variables are eliminated by
combining equations, if it leads to a false statemen t, then the system will have no solutions. When all th e variables are eliminated
by combining equations, if one of the resulting equat ions is true, the system may have an infinite number of solutions. However, all
the equations must be compared and found to true for there to be an infinite number of solutions, not jus t two of the three
equations.
This page titled 2.7.4: Solving a System of Linear Equations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by The NROC Project via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.2.1: The Substitution Method by The NROC Project is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://content.nroc.org/DevelopmentalMath.HTML5/Com mon/toc/toc_en.html.
14.2.2: The Elimination Method by The NROC Project is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://content.nroc.org/DevelopmentalMath.HTML5/Com mon/toc/toc_en.html.
14.3.1: Solving Systems of Three Variables by The NROC Project is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://content.nroc.org/DevelopmentalMath.HTML5/Com mon/toc/toc_en.html.

2.7.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838742.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer's Rule
Evaluate 2 × 2 determinants.
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of equations in two v ariables.
Evaluate 3 × 3 determinants.
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three equations in three variables.
Know the properties of determinants.
We have learned how to solve systems of equations in t wo variables and three variables, and by multiple meth ods: substitution,
addition, Gaussian elimination, using the inverse of a matrix, and graphing. Some of these methods are easier to apply than others
and are more appropriate in certain situations. In this section, we will study two more strategies for solving systems of equations.
Evaluating the Determinant of a 2 × 2 Matrix
A determinant is a real number that can be very use ful in mathematics because it has multiple applicatio ns, such as calculating area,
volume, and other quantities. Here, we will use determina nts to reveal whether a matrix is invertible by using the entries of a square
matrix to determine whether there is a solution to t he system of equations. Perhaps one of the more interes ting applications,
however, is their use in cryptography. Secure signals or messages are sometimes sent encoded in a matrix. The data can only be
decrypted with an invertible matrix and the determin ant. For our purposes, we focus on the determinant as a n indication of the
invertibility of the matrix. Calculating the determi nant of a matrix involves following the specific patt erns that are outlined in this
section.
The determinant of a 2 × 2 matrix, given
is defined as
Notice the change in notation. There are several ways to indicate the determinant, including and replaci ng the brackets
in a matrix with straight lines,.
Find the determinant of the given matrix.
Solution
Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Two Equations in Two Variables
We will now introduce a final method for solving syste ms of equations that uses determinants. Known as Cramer’s Rule, this
technique dates back to the middle of the 18th centu ry and is named for its innovator, the Swiss mathemati cian Gabriel Cramer
(1704-1752), who introduced it in 1750 in Introduction à l'Analyse des lignes Courbes algébriq ues. Cramer’s Rule is a viable andLearning Objectives
FIND THE DETERMINANT OF A 2 × 2 MATRIX
Example: Finding the Determinant of a Matrix

2.7.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874efficient method for finding solutions to systems with an arbitrary number of unknowns, provided that we hav e the same number of
equations as unknowns.
Cramer’s Rule will give us the unique solution to a system of equations, if it exists. However, if the syste m has no solution or an
infinite number of solutions, this will be indicated b y a determinant of zero. To find out if the system is inconsistent or dependent,
another method, such as elimination, will have to be used.
To understand Cramer’s Rule, let’s look closely at ho w we solve systems of linear equations using basic row ope rations. Consider a
system of two equations in two variables.
We eliminate one variable using row operations and s olve for the other. Say that we wish to solve for. If Equation is
multiplied by the opposite of the coefficient of in Equation, Equation is multiplied by the coefficie nt of in
Equation, and we add the two equations, the variable wil l be eliminated.
Now, solve for.
Similarly, to solve for,we will eliminate.
Solving for gives
Notice that the denominator for both and is the dete rminant of the coefficient matrix.
We can use these formulas to solve for and, but Crame r’s Rule also introduces new notation:
:determinant of the coefficient matrix
:determinant of the numerator in the solution of
:determinant of the numerator in the solution of
The key to Cramer’s Rule is replacing the variable c olumn of interest with the constant column and calcul ating the determinants.
We can then express and as a quotient of two determina nts.

2.7.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874Cramer’s Rule is a method that uses determinants to solve systems of equations that have the same numbe r of equations as
variables.
Consider a system of two linear equations in two variables.
The solution using Cramer’s Rule is given as
If we are solving for, the column is replaced with the constant column. If we are solving for, the colu mn is replaced
with the constant column.
Solve the following system using Cramer’s Rule.
Solution
Solve for.
Solve for.
The solution is.CRAMER’S RULE FOR SYSTEMS
Example: Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System

2.7.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the system of equations.
Answer
Evaluating the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix
Finding the determinant of a 2×2 matrix is straightfo rward, but finding the determinant of a 3×3 matrix is more complicated. One
method is to augment the 3×3 matrix with a repetition of the first two columns, giving a 3×5 matrix. Then we calculate the sum of
the products of entries down each of the three diagonals (upper left to lower rig ht), and subtract the products of entries up each of
the three diagonals (lower left to upper right). This is more easily understood with a visual and an example.
Find the determinant of the 3×3 matrix.
1. Augment with the first two columns.
2. From upper left to lower right: Multiply the entries down th e first diagonal. Add the result to the product of entries d own the
second diagonal. Add this result to the product of the entr ies down the third diagonal.
3. From lower left to upper right: Subtract the product of ent ries up the first diagonal. From this result subtract the pr oduct of
entries up the second diagonal. From this result, subtract the product of entries up the third diagonal.
The algebra is as follows:
Find the determinant of the matrix given
Solution
Augment the matrix with the first two columns and then fo llow the formula. Thus,Exercise
Example: Finding the Determinant of a 3 × 3 Matrix

2.7.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874Find the determinant of the 3 × 3 matrix.
Answer
No, this method only works for 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 matrices. For larger matrices it is best to use a graphing utili ty or computer
software.
Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve a System of Three Equations in Three Variables
Now that we can find the determinant of a matrix, we c an apply Cramer’s Rule to solve a system of three eq uations in three
variables. Cramer’s Rule is straightforward, following a pattern consistent with Cramer’s Rule for matrices. As the order of
the matrix increases to, however, there are many more cal culations required.
When we calculate the determinant to be zero, Cramer ’s Rule gives no indication as to whether the system has no solution or an
infinite number of solutions. To find out, we have to perf orm elimination on the system.
Consider a system of equations.
where
If we are writing the determinant,we replace the col umn with the constant column. If we are writing the det erminant,we
replace they y column with the constant column. If we are writing the determinant,we replace the column wi th the constant
column. Always check the answer.
Find the solution to the given system using Cramer’s Rule.
Solution
Use Cramer’s Rule.
,,, Exercise
Q&A: Can we use the same method to find the determinant of a larger matrix?
Example: Solving a System Using Cramer’s Rule

2.7.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874Then,
The solution is.
Use Cramer’s Rule to solve the matrix.
Answer
Solve the system of equations using Cramer’s Rule.
Solution
We begin by finding the determinants,,and.
We know that a determinant of zero means that either the system has no solution or it has an infinite numb er of solutions. To
see which one, we use the process of elimination. Our goal is t o eliminate one of the variables.
1. Multiply Equation by.
2. Add the result to Equation.
We obtain the equation, which is false. Therefore, t he system has no solution. Graphing the system reveals two parallel
lines. See Figure.Exercise
Example: Using Cramer’s Rule to Solve an Inconsistent System

2.7.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874
Figure
Solve the system with an infinite number of solutions.
Solution
Let’s find the determinant first. Set up a matrix augment ed by the first two columns.
Then,
As the determinant equals zero, there is either no so lution or an infinite number of solutions. We have to perform elimination to
find out.
1. Multiply Equation by and add the result to Equation:
2. Obtaining an answer of, a statement that is always t rue, means that the system has an infinite number of solutions.
Graphing the system, we can see that two of the planes a re the same and they both intersect the third plane on a line. See
Figure.
Figure Example: Use Cramer’s Rule to Solve a Dependent System

2.7.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874Understanding Properties of Determinants
There are many properties of determinants. Listed h ere are some properties that may be helpful in calcu lating the determinant of a
matrix.
1. If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determin ant equals the product of entries down the main diagonal.
2. When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes sign.
3. If either two rows or two columns are identical, the deter minant equals zero.
4. If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column o f zeros, the determinant equals zero.
5. The determinant of an inverse matrix is the recipr ocal of the determinant of the matrix.
6. If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the de terminant is multiplied by the same factor.
Illustrate each of the properties of determinants.
Solution
Property 1 states that if the matrix is in upper tria ngular form, the determinant is the product of the e ntries down the main
diagonal.
Augment with the first two columns.
Then
Property 2 states that interchanging rows changes the sign. Given
Property 3 states that if two rows or two columns are identic al, the determinant equals zero.
Property 4 states that if a row or column equals zero, the determinant equals zero. Thus,PROPERTIES OF DETERMINANTS
Example: Illustrating Properties of Determinants

2.7.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874Property 5 states that the determinant of an inverse matr ix is the reciprocal of the determinant. Thus,
Property 6 states that if any row or column of a matri x is multiplied by a constant, the determinant is m ultiplied by the same
factor. Thus,
Find the solution to the given system.
Solution
Using Cramer’s Rule, we have
Notice that the second and third columns are identica l. According to Property 3, the determinant will be ze ro, so there is either
no solution or an infinite number of solutions. We have t o perform elimination to find out.
1. Multiply Equation by and add the result to Equation.
Obtaining a statement that is a contradiction means that the system has no solution.Example: Using Cramer’s Rule and Determinant Properties to Solve a System

2.7.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83874Access these online resources for additional instruction a nd practice with Cramer’s Rule.
Solve a System of Two Equations Using Cramer's Rule
Solve a Systems of Three Equations using Cramer's Rule
Key Concepts
The determinant for is. See Example.
Cramer’s Rule replaces a variable column with the con stant column. Solutions are,. See Example.
To find the determinant of a matrix, augment with the first two columns. Add the three diagonal entries (upper left t o
lower right) and subtract the three diagonal entries (lower left to upper right). See Example.
To solve a system of three equations in three variables us ing Cramer’s Rule, replace a variable column with the co nstant column
for each desired solution:,,. See Example.
Cramer’s Rule is also useful for finding the solution of a system of equations with no solution or infinite solution s. See Example
and Example.
Certain properties of determinants are useful for solving problems. For example:
If the matrix is in upper triangular form, the determinan t equals the product of entries down the main diagonal.
When two rows are interchanged, the determinant changes s ign.
If either two rows or two columns are identical, the determi nant equals zero.
If a matrix contains either a row of zeros or a column of z eros, the determinant equals zero.
The determinant of an inverse matrix is the reciproc al of the determinant of the matrix.
If any row or column is multiplied by a constant, the dete rminant is multiplied by the same factor. See Example and
Example.
This page titled 2.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with Cramer 's Rule is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.8: Solving Systems with Cramer's Rule by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/precalculus.Media

2.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838812.8: Functions
Use functional notation to evaluate a function.
Determine the domain and range of a function.
Draw the graph of a function.
Find the zeros of a function.
Make new functions from two or more given functions.
Describe the symmetry properties of a function.
Determine the conditions for when a function has an inve rse.
Use the horizontal line test to recognize when a function is one-to-one.
Find the inverse of a given function.
Draw the graph of an inverse function.
Functions
Given two sets and a set with elements that are order ed pairs where is an element of and is an element of is a
relation from to. A relation from to defines a r elationship between those two sets. A function is a spe cial type of relation in
which each element of the first set is related to ex actly one element of the second set. The element of the first set is called the
input; the element of the second set is called the output. Functions are used all the time in mathematics to d escribe relationships
between two sets. For any function, when we know the input, the output is determined, so we say that the output i s a function of the
input. For example, the area of a square is determine d by its side length, so we say that the area (the out put) is a function of its side
length (the input). The velocity of a ball thrown in the air can be described as a function of the amou nt of time the ball is in the air.
The cost of mailing a package is a function of the we ight of the package. Since functions have so many uses, it is important to have
precise definitions and terminology to study them.
Figure: A function can be visualized as an input/outp ut device
A function consists of a set of inputs, a set of outputs, and a rule for assigning each input to exactly one output. The set of
inputs is called the domain of the function. The set of outputs is called the range of the function.
Figure: A function maps every element in the domain to exactly one element in the range. Although each input can be sent to
only one output, two different inputs can be sent to the same output.
For example, consider the function, where the domain is the set of all real numbers and the rule is to squa re the input. Then, the
input is assigned to the output.
Since every nonnegative real number has a real-value square root, every nonnegative number is an element of the range of this
function. Since there is no real number with a square that is negative, the negative real numbers are not el ements of the range. WeLearning Objectives
Definition: Functions

2.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881conclude that the range is the set of nonnegative real num bers.
For a general function with domain, we often use to denote the input and to denote the output associate d with. When
doing so, we refer to as the independent variable and as the dependent variable, because it depends on. Using function
notation, we write, and we read this equation as “ equa ls of For the squaring function described earlier, we wr ite
Algebraic Formulas
Sometimes we are given a function in an explicit formu la. Formulas arise in many applications. For example, the area of a circle of
radius is given by the formula. When an object is thrown upward from the ground with an initial velocity ft/s, its
height above the ground from the time it is thrown u ntil it hits the ground is given by the formula. W hen
dollars are invested in an account at an annual int erest rate compounded continuously, the amount of money after years is given
by the formula. Algebraic formulas are important to ols to calculate function values. Often we also repres ent these
functions visually in graph form.
Given an algebraic formula for a function, the grap h of is the set of points, where is in the domain of and is in
the range. To graph a function given by a formula, i t is helpful to begin by using the formula to create a table of inputs and outputs.
If the domain of consists of an infinite number of values, we cannot list all of them, but because listi ng some of the inputs and
outputs can be very useful, it is often a good way to begin.
When creating a table of inputs and outputs, we typic ally check to determine whether zero is an output. T hose values of where
are called the zeros of a function. For example, the zeros of are. The zeros determine where the graph
of intersects the -axis, which gives us more informatio n about the shape of the graph of the function. The graph of a function
may never intersect the -axis, or it may intersect multi ple (or even infinitely many) times.
Another point of interest is the -intercept, if it exis ts. The -intercept is given by.
Since a function has exactly one output for each inpu t, the graph of a function can have, at most, one -in tercept. If is in the
domain of a function then has exactly one -interce pt. If is not in the domain of then has no -interce pt. Similarly, for
any real number if is in the domain of, there is exactly one output and the line intersects the gr aph of exactly
once. On the other hand, if is not in the domain of is not defined and the line does not intersect the graph of. This
property is summarized in the vertical line test.
Given a function, every vertical line that may be d rawn intersects the graph of no more than once. If an y vertical line
intersects a set of points more than once, the set of poin ts does not represent a function.
We can use this test to determine whether a set of plotted poi nts represents the graph of a function (Figure).Vertical Line Test

2.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881
Figure: (a) The set of plotted points represents the gr aph of a function because every vertical line interse cts the set of points, at
most, once. (b) The set of plotted points does not repr esent the graph of a function because some vertical li nes intersect the set of
points more than once.
Consider the function
a. Find all zeros of.
b. Find the -intercept (if any).
c. Sketch a graph of.
Solution
1.To find the zeros, solve. We discover that has one zero at.
2. The -intercept is given by
3. Given that is a linear function of the form tha t passes through the points and, we can sketch the
graph of (Figure).
Figure: The function is a line with -intercept and -intercept.
Consider the function.
a. Find all zeros of.
b. Find the -intercept (if any).
c. Sketch a graph of.
SolutionExample: Finding Zeros and -Intercepts of a Function
Example: Using Zeros and -Intercepts to Sketch a Graph

2.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838811.To find the zeros, solve. This equation implies. Since for all, this equation has no
solutions, and therefore has no zeros.
2.The -intercept is given by.
3.To graph this function, we make a table of values. Since we need, we need to choose values of. We choo se
values that make the square-root function easy to evalu ate.
-3 -2 1
1 2 3
Making use of the table and knowing that, since the fu nction is a square root, the graph of should be simil ar to the graph of
, we sketch the graph (Figure).
Figure: The graph of has a -intercept but no -inter cepts.
Find the zeros of
Hint
Factor the polynomial.
Answer
If a ball is dropped from a height of 100 ft, its h eight s at time is given by the function, where s is
measured in feet and is measured in seconds. The domai n is restricted to the interval where is the time whe n the
ball is dropped and is the time when the ball hits the ground.
a. Create a table showing the height s(t) when and. Using the data from the table, determine the domain
for this function. That is, find the time when the ball hits the ground.
b. Sketch a graph of.
Solution
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
100 96 84 64 36 0
Since the ball hits the ground when, the domain of this fu nction is the interval.
2.Exercise
Example: Finding the Height of a Free-Falling Object

2.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881
Figure, the values of are getting smaller as is getti ng larger. A function with this property is said to be decreasing.
On the other hand, for the function graphed in Figu re, the values of are getting larger as the values
of are getting larger. A function with this propert y is said to be increasing. It is important to note, ho wever, that a function can
be increasing on some interval or intervals and decrea sing over a different interval or intervals. For examp le, using our
temperature function plotted above, we can see that the function is decreasing on the interval, increasin g on the interval
, and then decreasing on the interval. We make the idea of a function increasing or decreasing over a pa rticular
interval more precise in the next definition.
We say that a function is increasing on the interval if for all
when
We say is strictly increasing on the interval if for all
when
We say that a function is decreasing on the interval if for all
if
We say that a function is strictly decreasing on the i nterval if for all,
if
For example, the function is increasing on the inter val because whenever. On the other hand,
the function is decreasing on the interval because whenever (Figure).Definition: Increasing and Decreasing on an Interval

2.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881
Figure: (a) The function is increasing on the interv al. (b) The function is decreasing on the
interval.
Combining Functions
Now that we have reviewed the basic characteristics of f unctions, we can see what happens to these properties wh en we combine
functions in different ways, using basic mathematical operations to create new functions. For example, if th e cost for a company to
manufacture items is described by the function and the revenue created by the sale of items is described by the function
, then the profit on the manufacture and sale of i tems is defined as. Using the difference between two
functions, we created a new function.
Alternatively, we can create a new function by composing two functions. For example, given the functions and
, the composite function is defined such that
The composite function is defined such that
Note that these two new functions are different from each ot her.
Combining Functions with Mathematical Operators
To combine functions using mathematical operators, we simply write the functions with the operator and simpl ify. Given two
functions and, we can define four new functions:
Sum
Difference
Product
for Quotient

2.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881Given the functions and, find each of the following fun ctions and state its domain.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
1.
The domain of this function is the interval.
2.
The domain of this function is the interval.
3.
The domain of this function is the interval.
4..
The domain of this function is
For and, find and state its domain.
Hint
The new function is a quotient of two functions. For what val ues of is the denominator zero?
Answer
The domain is
Function Composition
When we compose functions, we take a function of a fun ction. For example, suppose the temperature on a give n day is described
as a function of time (measured in hours after midn ight) as in Table. Suppose the cost, to heat or coo l a building for 1 hour,
can be described as a function of the temperature. Combining these two functions, we can describe the cost of heating or cooling
a building as a function of time by evaluating. We have defined a new function, denoted, which is define d such that
for all in the domain of. This new function is ca lled a composite function. We note that since cost is a
function of temperature and temperature is a functio n of time, it makes sense to define this new function. It does not
make sense to consider, because temperature is not a functi on of cost.
Consider the function with domain and range, and the function with domain and range. If is a subse t of, then
the composite function is the function with domain s uch that
A composite function can be viewed in two steps. First, the function maps each input in the domain of t o its output
in the range of. Second, since the range of is a su bset of the domain of, the output is an element in the domain of, and
therefore it is mapped to an output in the range of. In Figure, we see a visual image of a composite function.Example: Combining Functions Using Mathematical Operations
Exercise
Definition: Composite Functions

2.8.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881
Figure: For the composite function, we have and.
Consider the functions and.
a. Find and state its domain and range.
b. Evaluate.
c. Find and state its domain and range.
d. Evaluate.
Solution
1. We can find the formula for in two different ways. We could write
Alternatively, we could write
Since for all real numbers the domain of is the se t of all real numbers. Since, the
range is, at most, the interval. To show that the rang e is this entire interval, we let and solve this equat ion
for to show that for all in the interval, there e xists a real number such that. Solving this equatio n for
we see that, which implies that
If is in the interval, the expression under the r adical is nonnegative, and therefore there exists a real number such that
. We conclude that the range of is the interval
2.
3. We can find a formula for in two ways. First, we could wr ite
Alternatively, we could write
The domain of is the set of all real numbers such that. To find the range of we need to find all val ues for which
there exists a real number such that
Solving this equation for we see that we need to satisfy
which simplifies toExample: Compositions of Functions Defined by Formulas

2.8.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881Finally, we obtain
Since is a real number if and only if the range of is the set
4.
In Example, we can see that. This tells us, in genera l terms, that the order in which we compose
functions matters.
Let. Let Find.
Solution
Symmetry of Functions
The graphs of certain functions have symmetry properti es that help us understand the function and the sha pe of its graph. For
example, consider the function shown in Figure. If we take the part of the curve that lies to the right o f
the -axis and flip it over the -axis, it lays exactly o n top of the curve to the left of the -axis. In this c ase, we say the function has
symmetry about the -axis. On the other hand, consider the function shown in Fi gure. If we take the graph
and rotate it about the origin, the new graph will lo ok exactly the same. In this case, we say the function has symmetry about
the origin.
Figure: (a) A graph that is symmetric about the -axis. (b) A graph that is symmetric about the origin.
If we are given the graph of a function, it is easy t o see whether the graph has one of these symmetry pro perties. But without a
graph, how can we determine algebraically whether a fun ction has symmetry? Looking at Figure again, we see t hat since
is symmetric about the -axis, if the point is on th e graph, the point is on the graph. In other words,. If
a function has this property, we say is an even funct ion, which has symmetry about the -axis. For example, is even
becauseExercise

2.8.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881In contrast, looking at Figure again, if a function is symmetric about the origin, then whenever the poin t is on the
graph, the point is also on the graph. In other word s,. If has this property, we say is an odd function,
which has symmetry about the origin. For example, is od d because
If for all in the domain of, then is an even function. An even function is symmetric about the -axis.
If for all in the domain of, then is an odd function. An odd function is symmetric about the origin.
Determine whether each of the following functions is even, od d, or neither.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
To determine whether a function is even or odd, we evaluate and compare it to and.
1. Therefore, is even.
2. Now, Furthermore, noting that, we see
that. Therefore, is neither even nor odd.
3. Therefore, is odd.
Determine whether is even, odd, or neither.
Hint
Compare with and.
Answer
is odd.
One symmetric function that arises frequently is the absolute value function, written as. The absolute value function is defined
as
Some students describe this function by stating that it “makes everything positive.” By the definition of th e absolute value function,
we see that if, then and if, then However, for Th erefore, it is more accurate to
say that for all nonzero inputs, the output is posit ive, but if, the output. We conclude that the ran ge of the absolute
value function is In Figure, we see that the absolut e value function is symmetric about the -axis and is therefore
an even function.Definition: Even and Odd Functions
Example: Even and Odd Functions
Exercise

2.8.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881
Figure: The graph of is symmetric about the -axis.
Find the domain and range of the function.
Solution
Since the absolute value function is defined for all real numbers, the domain of this function is. Since for
all, the function. Therefore, the range is, at most, the set To see that the range is, in fact,
this whole set, we need to show that for there exists a real number such that
A real number satisfies this equation as long as
Since, we know, and thus the right-hand side of the equation is nonnegative, so it is possible that there is a
solution. Furthermore,
Therefore, we see there are two solutions:
The range of this function is
For the function, find the domain and range.
Hint
for all real numbers.
Answer
Domain =, range =
Inverse Functions
An inverse function reverses the operation done by a particular function. In other words, whatever a funct ion does, the inverse
function undoes it. In this section, we define an inv erse function formally and state the necessary condit ions for an inverse function
to exist. We examine how to find an inverse function and study the relationship between the graph of a fu nction and the graph of its
inverse. Then we apply these ideas to define and discuss prop erties of the inverse trigonometric functions.Example: Working with the Absolute Value Function
Exercise: Domain and Range

2.8.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881Existence of an Inverse Function
We begin with an example. Given a function and an ou tput, we are often interested in finding what value or values
were mapped to by. For example, consider the functio n. Since any output, we can solve this equation
for to find that the input is. This equation defin es as a function of. Denoting this function as, and writing
, we see that for any in the domain of. Thus, this new function,, “undid” what
the original function did. A function with this prop erty is called the inverse function of the original func tion.
Given a function with domain and range, its inverse function (if it exists) is the function with domain and rang e
such that if and only if. In other words, for a function and its inverse,
for all in and
for all in.
Note that is read as “ inverse.” Here, the is not used as an exponent so
Figure shows the relationship between the domain and range of and the domain and range of.
Figure: Given a function and its inverse if and onl y if. The range of becomes the domain of
and the domain of becomes the range of.
Recall that a function has exactly one output for ea ch input. Therefore, to define an inverse function, we need to map each input to
exactly one output. For example, let’s try to find t he inverse function for. Solving the equation for, we arrive at
the equation. This equation does not describe as a function of because there are two solutions to this eq uation for
every. The problem with trying to find an inverse f unction for is that two inputs are sent to the same ou tput for each
output. The function discussed earlier did not ha ve this problem. For that function, each input was sent t o a
different output. A function that sends each input to a di fferent output is called a one-to-one function.
We say a function is a one-to-one function if when.
One way to determine whether a function is one-to-one is by lo oking at its graph. If a function is one-to-one, then no t wo inputs can
be sent to the same output. Therefore, if we draw a hor izontal line anywhere in the -plane, according to the horizontal line test,
it cannot intersect the graph more than once. We not e that the horizontal line test is different from t he vertical line test. The vertical
line test determines whether a graph is the graph of a function. The horizontal line test determines wheth er a function is one-to-one
(Figure).Definition: Inverse Functions
Definition: One-to-One functions

2.8.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881A function is one-to-one if and only if every horizo ntal line intersects the graph of no more than once.
Figure: (a) The function is not one-to-one because i t fails the horizontal line test. (b) The function i s oneto-one because it passes the horizontal line test.
For each of the following functions, use the horizontal li ne test to determine whether it is one-to-one.
a)
b)
Solution
a) Since the horizontal line for any integer intersects the graph more than once, this function is not one-to-one.Horizontal Line Test
Example: Determining Whether a Function Is One-to-One

2.8.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881
b) Since every horizontal line intersects the graph once (at most), this function is one-to-one.
Is the function graphed in the following image one-to-on e?
Solution
Use the horizontal line test.
Answer
NoExercise

2.8.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881Finding a Function’s Inverse
We can now consider one-to-one functions and show how t o find their inverses. Recall that a function maps elements in the domain
of to elements in the range of. The inverse funct ion maps each element from the range of back to its corresponding element
from the domain of. Therefore, to find the inverse function of a one-to-one function, given any in t he range of, we need to
determine which in the domain of satisfies. Since is one-to-one, there is exactly one such value. We can find that
value by solving the equation for. Doing so, we are able to write as a function of where the domain of this function
is the range of and the range of this new function is the domain of. Consequently, this function is the inverse of, and we write
. Since we typically use the variable to denote the independent variable and y to denote the dependent variable, we
often interchange the roles of and, and write. Rep resenting the inverse function in this way is also hel pful later when
we graph a function and its inverse on the same axes.
1. Solve the equation for.
2. Interchange the variables and and write.
Find the inverse for the function State the domain and ran ge of the inverse function. Verify that
Solution
Follow the steps outlined in the strategy.
Step 1. If then and
Step 2. Rewrite as and let.Therefore,.
Since the domain of is, the range of is. Since the r ange of is, the domain of is.
You can verify that by writing
Note that for to be the inverse of, both and for all in the domain of the inside
function.
Find the inverse of the function. State the domain and rang e of the inverse function.
Hint
Use the Problem-Solving Strategy for finding inverse funct ions.
Answer
. The domain of is. The range of is.
Graphing Inverse Functions
Let’s consider the relationship between the graph of a function and the graph of its inverse. Consider the graph of shown in
Figure and a point on the graph. Since, then. The refore, when we graph, the point is on the
graph. As a result, the graph of is a reflection of the g raph of about the line.Problem-Solving Strategy: Finding an Inverse Function
Example: Finding an Inverse Function
Exercise

2.8.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881
Figure: (a) The graph of this function shows point o n the graph of. (b) Since is on the graph of, the point
is on the graph of. The graph of is a reflection of the graph of about the line.
For the graph of in the following image, sketch a gra ph of by sketching the line and using symmetry. Id entify the
domain and range of.
Solution
Reflect the graph about the line. The domain of i s. The range of is. By using the preceding strategy
for finding inverse functions, we can verify that the inv erse function is, as shown in the graph.
Example: Sketching Graphs of Inverse Functions

2.8.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881Sketch the graph of and the graph of its inverse using t he symmetry property of inverse functions.
Hint
The graphs are symmetric about the line
Answer
Restricting Domains
As we have seen, does not have an inverse function be cause it is not one-to-one. However, we can choose a su bset of the
domain of such that the function is one-to-one. Thi s subset is called a restricted domain. By restricting the domain of, we can
define a new function such that the domain of is t he restricted domain of and for all in the domai n of. Then we
can define an inverse function for on that domain. For example, since is one-to-one on the interval, we can define
a new function such that the domain of is and for all in its domain. Since is a one-to-one function, it has an
inverse function, given by the formula. On the other hand, the function is also one-to-one on the domain
. Therefore, we could also define a new function such that the domain of is and for all in the domain
of. Then is a one-to-one function and must also ha ve an inverse. Its inverse is given by the formula (Figure
Figure: (a) For restricted to,. (b) For restricted to,.
Consider the function.
a. Sketch the graph of and use the horizontal line test to show that is not one-to-one.Exercise
Example: Restricting the Domain

2.8.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881b. Show that is one-to-one on the restricted domain. Deter mine the domain and range for the inverse of on this
restricted domain and find a formula for.
Solution
a) The graph of is the graph of shifted left unit. Since there exists a horizontal line intersecting the graph more than
once, is not one-to-one.
b) On the interval is one-to-one.
The domain and range of are given by the range and domain of, respectively. Therefore, the domain of is and
the range of is. To find a formula for, solve th e equation for If, then.
Since we are restricting the domain to the interval whe re, we need. Therefore,. Interchanging
and, we write and conclude that.
Consider restricted to the domain. Verify that i s one-to-one on this domain. Determine the domain an d
range of the inverse of and find a formula for.
Hint
The domain and range of is given by the range and domain of, respectively. To find, solve for.
Answer
The domain of is. The range of is. The inverse fu nction is given by the formula.Exercise

2.8.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881Key Concepts
For a function to have an inverse, the function must be on e-to-one. Given the graph of a function, we can determine whet her the
function is one-to-one by using the horizontal line test.
If a function is not one-to-one, we can restrict the dom ain to a smaller domain where the function is one-to-one and then define
the inverse of the function on the smaller domain.
For a function and its inverse for all in the domai n of and for all in the domain of.
Since the trigonometric functions are periodic, we need to restrict their domains to define the inverse trigonome tric functions.
The graph of a function and its inverse are symmetri c about the line
Key Equations
Inverse function
for all in and for all in.
Glossary
horizontal line test
a function is one-to-one if and only if every horizon tal line intersects the graph of, at most, once
inverse function
for a function, the inverse function satisfies if
inverse trigonometric functions
the inverses of the trigonometric functions are defined o n restricted domains where they are one-to-one functions
one-to-one function
a function is one-to-one if if
restricted domain
a subset of the domain of a function
Key Concepts
A function is a mapping from a set of inputs to a set o f outputs with exactly one output for each input.
If no domain is stated for a function the domain is consi dered to be the set of all real numbers for which the fu nction
is defined.
When sketching the graph of a function each vertical l ine may intersect the graph, at most, once.
A function may have any number of zeros, but it has, at mo st, one -intercept.
To define the composition, the range of must be cont ained in the domain of.
Even functions are symmetric about the -axis whereas odd fu nctions are symmetric about the origin.
Key Equations
Composition of two functions
Absolute value function
Glossary
absolute value function

2.8.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83881composite function
given two functions and, a new function, denoted, such th at
decreasing on the interval
a function decreasing on the interval if, for all if
dependent variable
the output variable for a function
domain
the set of inputs for a function
even function
a function is even if for all in the domain of
function
a set of inputs, a set of outputs, and a rule for mapping e ach input to exactly one output
graph of a function
the set of points such that is in the domain of and
increasing on the interval
a function increasing on the interval if for all if
independent variable
the input variable for a function
odd function
a function is odd if for all in the domain of
range
the set of outputs for a function
symmetry about the origin
the graph of a function is symmetric about the origin if is on the graph of whenever is on the graph
symmetry about the -axis
the graph of a function is symmetric about the -axis i f is on the graph of whenever is on the graph
table of values
a table containing a list of inputs and their corresponding outputs
vertical line test
given the graph of a function, every vertical line inter sects the graph, at most, once
zeros of a function
when a real number is a zero of a function
This page titled 2.8: Functions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Edwin “Jed” Herman &
Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.1: Review of Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
1.4: Inverse Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

2.8.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838762.8.1: Basic Functions
Calculate the slope of a linear function and interpret i ts meaning.
Recognize the degree of a polynomial.
Find the roots of a quadratic polynomial.
Describe the graphs of basic odd and even polynomial fun ctions.
Identify a rational function.
Describe the graphs of power and root functions.
Explain the difference between algebraic and transcende ntal functions.
Graph a piecewise-defined function.
Sketch the graph of a function that has been shifted, str etched, or reflected from its initial graph position.
We have studied the general characteristics of funct ions, so now let’s examine some specific classes of func tions. We begin by
reviewing the basic properties of linear and quadratic functions, and then generalize to include higher-d egree polynomials. By
combining root functions with polynomials, we can def ine general algebraic functions and distinguish them from the transcendental
functions we examine later in this chapter. We finis h the section with examples of piecewise-defined functi ons and take a look at
how to sketch the graph of a function that has been shi fted, stretched, or reflected from its initial form.
Linear Functions and Slope
The easiest type of function to consider is a linear function. Linear functions have the form, where and are
constants. In Figure, we see examples of linear funct ions when a is positive, negative, and zero. Note that if, the graph
of the line rises as increases. In other words, is inc reasing on. If, the graph of the line falls as
increases. In this case, is decreasing on. If, the lin e is horizontal.
Figure: These linear functions are increasing or decre asing on and one function is a horizontal line.
As suggested by Figure, the graph of any linear funct ion is a line. One of the distinguishing features of a line is its slope. The
slope is the change in for each unit change in. The slop e measures both the steepness and the direction of a line. If the slope is
positive, the line points upward when moving from left to right. If the slope is negative, the line points d ownward when moving
from left to right. If the slope is zero, the line is horizontal. To calculate the slope of a line, we nee d to determine the ratio of the
change in versus the change in. To do so, we choose any two points and on the line and calculate. In
Figure, we see this ratio is independent of the points ch osen.Learning Objectives

2.8.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: For any linear function, the slope is indepe ndent of the choice of points and on the
line.
Consider line passing through points and. Let an d denote the changes in and
,respectively. The slope of the line is
We now examine the relationship between slope and the f ormula for a linear function. Consider the linear fun ction given by the
formula. As discussed earlier, we know the graph of a linear function is given by a line. We can use our d efinition of
slope to calculate the slope of this line. As shown, we can determine the slope by calculating for any po ints
and on the line. Evaluating the function at, we see that is a point on this line. Evaluating this fun ction at
, we see that is also a point on this line. Therefore, the sl ope of this line is
We have shown that the coefficient is the slope of t he line. We can conclude that the formula describes a line with
slope. Furthermore, because this line intersects the -axis at the point, we see that the -intercept for this linear function is
. We conclude that the formula tells us the slope,, and the -intercept,, for this line. Since we often us e the
symbol to denote the slope of a line, we can write
to denote the slope-intercept form of a linear function.
Sometimes it is convenient to express a linear functio n in different ways. For example, suppose the graph of a linear function
passes through the point and the slope of the line is. Since any other point on the graph of must sa tisfy the
equation
this linear function can be expressed by writingDefinition: Slope of a Linear Function

2.8.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876We call this equation the point-slope equation for that linear function.
Since every nonvertical line is the graph of a linea r function, the points on a nonvertical line can be d escribed using the slopeintercept or point-slope equations. However, a vertica l line does not represent the graph of a function a nd cannot be expressed in
either of these forms. Instead, a vertical line is d escribed by the equation for some constant. Since neither the slopeintercept form nor the point-slope form allows for vertic al lines, we use the notation
where are both not zero, to denote the standard form of a line.
Consider a line passing through the point with slope. Th e equation
is the point-slope equation for that line.
Consider a line with slope and -intercept The equatio n
is an equation for that line in slope-intercept form.
The standard form of a line is given by the equation
where and are both not zero. This form is more general be cause it allows for a vertical line,.
Consider the line passing through the points and, as sh own in Figure.
Figure: Finding the equation of a linear function wi th a graph that is a line between two given points.
1. Find the slope of the line.
2. Find an equation for this linear function in point-slope form.
3. Find an equation for this linear function in slope-inte rcept form.
Solution
1. The slope of the line isDefinition: Point-Slope Equation, and the Slope-Intercept Form and Standard Form of the Equation of a Line
Example: Finding the Slope and Equations of Lines

2.8.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838762. To find an equation for the linear function in p oint-slope form, use the slope and choose any point on the line. If
we choose the point, we get the equation
3. To find an equation for the linear function in s lope-intercept form, solve the equation in part b. for. When we do this, we
get the equation
Consider the line passing through points and.
a. Find the slope of the line.
b. Find an equation of that line in point-slope form.
c. Find an equation of that line in slope-intercept form.
Hint
The slope.
Answer a
Answer b
The point-slope form is.
Answer c
The slope-intercept form is.
Jessica leaves her house at 5:50 a.m. and goes for a 9- mile run. She returns to her house at 7:08 a.m. Answer th e following
questions, assuming Jessica runs at a constant pace.
a. Describe the distance (in miles) Jessica runs as a line ar function of her run time (in minutes).
b. Sketch a graph of.
c. Interpret the meaning of the slope.
Solution
a. At time, Jessica is at her house, so. At time min utes, Jessica has finished running mi, so
. The slope of the linear function is
The -intercept is, so the equation for this linear func tion is
b. To graph, use the fact that the graph passes through t he origin and has slope Exercise
Example:

2.8.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
c. The slope describes the distance (in miles) Jessica run s per minute, or her average velocity.
Polynomials
A linear function is a special type of a more general class of functions: polynomials. A polynomial funct ion is any function that can
be written in the form
for some integer and constants, where. In the case when, we allow for; if, the
function is called the zero function. The value is called the degree of the polynomial; the constant is called the
leading coefficient. A linear function of the form is a polynomial of degree 1 if and degree 0 if. A
polynomial of degree 0 is also called a constant function. A polynomial function of degree 2 is called a quadratic function. In
particular, a quadratic function has the form
where. A polynomial function of degree is called a cubic function.
Power Functions
Some polynomial functions are power functions. A power function is any function of the form, where and are any
real numbers. The exponent in a power function can be any real number, but here we consider the case when t he exponent is a
positive integer. (We consider other cases later.) If the exponent is a positive integer, then is a polyn omial. If is even,
then is an even function because if is even. If i s odd, then is an odd function
because if is odd (Figure).

2.8.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: (a) For any even integer, is an even functio n. (b) For any odd integer, is an odd function.
Behavior at Infinity
To determine the behavior of a function as the inpu ts approach infinity, we look at the values as the i nputs,, become larger.
For some functions, the values of approach a finite number. For example, for the function, the values
become closer and closer to zero for all values of as they get larger and larger. For this function, we s ay “ approaches two as
goes to infinity,” and we write as. The line is a horizontal asymptote for the function
because the graph of the function gets closer to the line as gets larger.
For other functions, the values may not approach a f inite number but instead may become larger for all values of as they get
larger. In that case, we say “ approaches infinity as approaches infinity,” and we write as. For example, f or
the function, the outputs become larger as the in puts get larger. We can conclude that the function
approaches infinity as approaches infinity, and we wr ite as. The behavior as and the meaning of
as or can be defined similarly. We can describe what happens to the values of as and as
as the end behavior of the function.
To understand the end behavior for polynomial funct ions, we can focus on quadratic and cubic functions. The behavior for higherdegree polynomials can be analyzed similarly. Consid er a quadratic function. If, the values as
. If, the values as. Since the graph of a quadrat ic function is a parabola, the parabola opens
upward if.; the parabola opens downward if (Figure).
Now consider a cubic function. If, then as and as. If,
then as and as. As we can see from both of these gr aphs, the leading term of the polynomial
determines the end behavior (Figure).

2.8.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: (a) For a quadratic function, if the leadin g coefficient,the parabola opens upward. If, the p arabola opens
downward. (b) For a cubic function, if the leading coefficient, the values as and the values as
. If the leading coefficient, the opposite is true.
Zeros of Polynomial Functions
Another characteristic of the graph of a polynomial function is where it intersects the -axis. To determine where a function
intersects the -axis, we need to solve the equation fo r. In the case of the linear function, the -inter cept is
given by solving the equation. In this case, we see th at the -intercept is given by. In the case of a qu adratic
function, finding the -intercept(s) requires finding the zeros of a quadratic equation:. In some cases, it is easy to
factor the polynomial to find the zeros. If not, we mak e use of the quadratic formula.
Consider the quadratic equation
where. The solutions of this equation are given by the quadratic formula
If the discriminant, Equation tells us there are two real numbers that satisfy the quadratic equation. If
, this formula tells us there is only one solution, and it is a real number. If, no real numbers satisf y the
quadratic equation.
In the case of higher-degree polynomials, it may be more complicated to determine where the graph inters ects the -axis. In some
instances, it is possible to find the -intercepts by factoring the polynomial to find its zeros. In othe r cases, it is impossible to
calculate the exact values of the -intercepts. Howeve r, as we see later in the text, in cases such as this, we can use analytical tools
to approximate (to a very high degree) where the -in tercepts are located. Here we focus on the graphs of p olynomials for which
we can calculate their zeros explicitly.
For the following functions,
a.
b. The Quadratic Formula
Example: Graphing Polynomial Functions

2.8.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876i. describe the behavior of as,
ii. find all zeros of, and
iii. sketch a graph of.
Solution
1. The function is a quadratic function.
1. Because, as
2. To find the zeros of, use the quadratic formula. The zero s are
3. To sketch the graph of,use the information from your previous answers and combine it with the fact t hat the
graph is a parabola opening downward.
2. The function is a cubic function.
1. Because, as,. As,.
2. To find the zeros of, we need to factor the polynomial. Fir st, when we factor out of all the terms, we find
Then, when we factor the quadratic function, we find
Therefore, the zeros of are.
3. Combining the results from parts i. and ii., draw a rough sketch of.

2.8.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Consider the quadratic function Find the zeros of. Doe s the parabola open upward or downward?
Hint
Use the quadratic formula.
Answer
The zeros are. The parabola opens upward.
Algebraic Functions
By allowing for quotients and fractional powers in pol ynomial functions, we create a larger class of functi ons. An algebraic
function is one that involves addition, subtraction, multipli cation, division, rational powers, and roots. Two types of algebraic
functions are rational functions and root functions.
Just as rational numbers are quotients of integers, ra tional functions are quotients of polynomials. In p articular, a rational function
is any function of the form,where and are polynomials. For example,
and
are rational functions. A root function is a power function of the form, where is a positive integer greater than one.
For example, is the square-root function and is th e cube-root function. By allowing for
compositions of root functions and rational function s, we can create other algebraic functions. For example, is an
algebraic function.
For each of the following functions, find the domain and ra nge.
a.
b. Exercise
Example: Finding Domain and Range for Algebraic Functions

2.8.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876Solution
1. It is not possible to divide by zero, so the doma in is the set of real numbers such that. To find t he range, we need
to find the values for which there exists a real number such that
When we multiply both sides of this equation by, we see that m ust satisfy the equation
From this equation, we can see that must satisfy
If y=, this equation has no solution. On the other hand, as long as,
satisfies this equation. We can conclude that the range o f is.
2. To find the domain of, we need. When we factor, we write. This inequality holds if
and only if both terms are positive or both terms are negativ e. For both terms to be positive, we need to find such tha t
and
These two inequalities reduce to and. Therefore, the set must be part of the domain. For both
terms to be negative, we need
and
These two inequalities also reduce to and. There ar e no values of that satisfy both of these inequalit ies. Thus,
we can conclude the domain of this function is
If, then. Therefore,, and the range of is
Find the domain and range for the function
Hint
The denominator cannot be zero. Solve the equation for to find the range.
Answer
The domain is the set of real numbers such that. Th e range is the set.
The root functions have defining characteristics dep ending on whether is odd or even. For all even integ ers, the
domain of is the interval. For all odd integers, the domain of is the set of all real numbers. Since
for odd integers, is an odd function if is odd. See t he graphs of root functions for different values of
in Figure.Exercise

2.8.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: (a) If is even, the domain of is. (b) If is odd, the domain of is and the
function is an odd function.
For each of the following functions, determine the domain o f the function.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a. You cannot divide by zero, so the domain is the set of va lues such that. Therefore, the domain is.
b. You need to determine the values of for which the de nominator is zero. Since for all real numbers, the
denominator is never zero. Therefore, the domain is
c. Since the square root of a negative number is not a re al number, the domain is the set of values for which.
Therefore, the domain is
d. The cube root is defined for all real numbers, so the do main is the interval
Find the domain for each of the following functions: and.
Hint
Determine the values of when the expression in the de nominator of is nonzero, and find the values of whe n the
expression inside the radical of is nonnegative.
Answer
The domain of is. The domain of is
Transcendental Functions
Thus far, we have discussed algebraic functions. Some f unctions, however, cannot be described by basic algebr aic operations.
These functions are known as transcendental functions because they are said to “transcend,” or go beyond, algebra. The most
common transcendental functions are trigonometric, e xponential, and logarithmic functions. A trigonometric function relates the
ratios of two sides of a right triangle. They are (W e discuss trigonometric functions later in
the chapter.) An exponential function is a function of the form, where the base. A logarithmic function i s a
function of the form for some constant where if a nd only if. (We also discuss
exponential and logarithmic functions later in the chap ter.)Example: Finding Domains for Algebraic Functions
Exercise

2.8.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876Classify each of the following functions, a. through c., a s algebraic or transcendental.
a.
b.
c.
Solution
a. Since this function involves basic algebraic operation s only, it is an algebraic function.
b. This function cannot be written as a formula that involves only basic algebraic operations, so it is transcendenta l. (Note that
algebraic functions can only have powers that are rationa l numbers.)
c. As in part b, this function cannot be written using a formula involving basic algebraic operations only; therefore, t his
function is transcendental.
Is an algebraic or a transcendental function?
Answer
Algebraic
Piecewise-Defined Functions
Sometimes a function is defined by different formulas on different parts of its domain. A function with this property is known as a
piecewise-defined function. The absolute value functio n is an example of a piecewise-defined function beca use the formula
changes with the sign of:
Other piecewise-defined functions may be represented b y completely different formulas, depending on the p art of the domain in
which a point falls. To graph a piecewise-defined func tion, we graph each part of the function in its respec tive domain, on the same
coordinate system. If the formula for a function is d ifferent for and, we need to pay special attention to what happens at
when we graph the function. Sometimes the graph needs t o include an open or closed circle to indicate the value of the
function at. We examine this in the next example.
Sketch a graph of the following piecewise-defined function:
Solution
Graph the linear function on the interval and grap h the quadratic function on the interval.
Since the value of the function at is given by the formula, we see that. To indicate this on the
graph, we draw a closed circle at the point. The valu e of the function is given by for all, but not at
. To indicate this on the graph, we draw an open circle a t.Example: Classifying Algebraic and Transcendental Functions
Exercise:
Example: Graphing a Piecewise-Defined Function

2.8.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: This piecewise-defined function is linear for and quadratic for
2) Sketch a graph of the function
Solution:
In a big city, drivers are charged variable rates f or parking in a parking garage. They are charged $1 0 for the first hour or any
part of the first hour and an additional $2 for eac h hour or part thereof up to a maximum of $30 for t he day. The parking garage
is open from 6 a.m. to 12 midnight.
a. Write a piecewise-defined function that describes the cost to park in the parking garage as a function of ho urs parked.
b. Sketch a graph of this function
Solution
1.Since the parking garage is open 18 hours each day, the domain for this function is. The cost to park a car at
this parking garage can be described piecewise by the functi on
2.The graph of the function consists of several horizon tal line segments.Example: Parking Fees Described by a Piecewise-Defined Function

2.8.1.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
The cost of mailing a letter is a function of the we ight of the letter. Suppose the cost of mailing a lett er is for the first ounce
and for each additional ounce. Write a piecewise-defi ned function describing the cost as a function of t he weight for
, where is measured in cents and is measured in ounces.
Hint
The piecewise-defined function is constant on the interva ls
Answer
Transformations of Functions
We have seen several cases in which we have added, subt racted, or multiplied constants to form variations of simple functions. In
the previous example, for instance, we subtracted 2 from the argument of the function to get the function.
This subtraction represents a shift of the function two units to the right. A shift, horizontally or vert ically, is a type of
transformation of a function. Other transformations include horizontal and vertical scal ings, and reflections about the axes.
A vertical shift of a function occurs if we add or s ubtract the same constant to each output. For, the graph of is a
shift of the graph of up units, whereas the graph of is a shift of the graph of down units. For example, t he
graph of the function is the graph of shifted up units; the graph of the function is the graph of
shifted down units (Figure).Exercise

2.8.1.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: (a) For, the graph of is a vertical shift u p units of the graph of. (b) For, the graph
of is a vertical shift down c units of the graph of.
A horizontal shift of a function occurs if we add or subtract the same constant to each input. For, the graph of is a
shift of the graph of to the left units; the grap h of is a shift of the graph of to the right unit s. Why does the
graph shift left when adding a constant and shift rig ht when subtracting a constant? To answer this questio n, let’s look at an
example.
Consider the function and evaluate this function a t. Since and, the graph of
is the graph of shifted left units. Similarly, the graph of is the graph of shifted right units
(Figure).
Figure: (a) For, the graph of is a horizontal shift left units of the graph of. (b) For, the
graph of is a horizontal shift right units of the gr aph of
A vertical scaling of a graph occurs if we multiply a ll outputs of a function by the same positive consta nt. For, the graph of
the function is the graph of scaled vertically by a factor of. If, the values of the outputs for t he function are
larger than the values of the outputs for the funct ion; therefore, the graph has been stretched vertic ally. If, then the
outputs of the function are smaller, so the graph h as been compressed. For example, the graph of the func tion is
the graph of stretched vertically by a factor of 3, whereas the graph of is the graph of compressed
vertically by a factor of (Figure).

2.8.1.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: (a) If, the graph of is a vertical stretch of the graph of. (b) If, the graph of
is a vertical compression of the graph of.
The horizontal scaling of a function occurs if we mul tiply the inputs by the same positive constant. For, the graph of the
function is the graph of scaled horizontally by a factor of. If, the graph of is the graph of co mpressed
horizontally. If, the graph of is the graph of str etched horizontally. For example, consider the functi on
and evaluate at. Since, the graph of is the gra ph of compressed horizontally. The
graph of is a horizontal stretch of the graph of (Figu re).
Figure: (a) If, the graph of is a horizontal compr ession of the graph of. (b) If, the graph of
is a horizontal stretch of the graph of.
We have explored what happens to the graph of a func tion when we multiply by a constant to get a new fu nction.
We have also discussed what happens to the graph of a function when we multiply the independent variable by to get a
new function. However, we have not addressed what happe ns to the graph of the function if the constant is negative. If we
have a constant, we can write as a positive number m ultiplied by; but, what kind of transformation do we get when we
multiply the function or its argument by When we mu ltiply all the outputs by, we get a reflection abou t the -axis. When
we multiply all inputs by, we get a reflection about the -axis. For example, the graph of is the graph of
reflected about the -axis. The graph of is the graph of reflected about the -axis (Figure).

2.8.1.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: (a) The graph of is the graph of reflected about the -axis. (b) The graph of is the
graph of reflected about the -axis.
If the graph of a function consists of more than on e transformation of another graph, it is important to transform the graph in the
correct order. Given a function, the graph of the re lated function can be obtained from the graph of
by performing the transformations in the following or der.
Horizontal shift of the graph of. If, shift left. If sh ift right.
Horizontal scaling of the graph of by a factor of. If, r eflect the graph about the -axis.
Vertical scaling of the graph of by a factor of. If, r eflect the graph about the -axis.
Vertical shift of the graph of. If, shift up. If, shift d own.
We can summarize the different transformations and their related effects on the graph of a function in the followin g table.
Transformation of Effect of the graph of
Vertical shift up units
Vertical shift down units
Shift left by units
Shift right by units
Vertical stretch if;
vertical compression if
Horizontal stretch if;
horizontal compression if
Reflection about the -axis
Reflection about the -axis
For each of the following functions, a. and b., sketch a gra ph by using a sequence of transformations of a well-known fu nction.
a.
b.
Solution
1.Starting with the graph of, shift units to the left, reflect about the -axis, and then shift down units.Example: Transforming a Function

2.8.1.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876
Figure: The function can be viewed as a sequence of three transformations of the function.
2. Starting with the graph of reflect about the -axis, stre tch the graph vertically by a factor of 3, and move up 1 unit.
Figure: The function can be viewed as a sequence of t hree transformations of the function.
Describe how the function can be graphed using the graph o f and a sequence of transformations
Answer
Shift the graph to the left 1 unit, reflect about the -ax is, then shift down 4 units.
Key Concepts
The power function is an even function if n is even and, and it is an odd function if is odd.
The root function has the domain if n is even and t he domain if is odd. If is odd, then
is an odd function.
The domain of the rational function, where and are po lynomial functions, is the set of such that
Functions that involve the basic operations of addition, s ubtraction, multiplication, division, and powers are alge braic functions.
All other functions are transcendental. Trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic functions are examples of t ranscendental
functions.
A polynomial function with degree satisfies as. T he sign of the output as depends on the
sign of the leading coefficient only and on whether is even or odd.
Vertical and horizontal shifts, vertical and horizonta l scalings, and reflections about the - and -axes are ex amples of
transformations of functions.Exercise

2.8.1.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876Key Equations
Point-slope equation of a line
Slope-intercept form of a line
Standard form of a line
Polynomial function
Glossary
algebraic function
a function involving any combination of only the basic op erations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, divisio n, powers, and
roots applied to an input variable
cubic function
a polynomial of degree 3; that is, a function of the form, where
degree
for a polynomial function, the value of the largest expo nent of any term
linear function
a function that can be written in the form
logarithmic function
a function of the form for some base such that if an d only if
mathematical model
A method of simulating real-life situations with mathema tical equations
piecewise-defined function
a function that is defined differently on different par ts of its domain
point-slope equation
equation of a linear function indicating its slope an d a point on the graph of the function
polynomial function
a function of the form
power function
a function of the form for any positive integer
quadratic function
a polynomial of degree 2; that is, a function of the form where
rational function
a function of the form, where and are polynomials
root function

2.8.1.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83876a function of the form for any integer
slope
the change in for each unit change in
slope-intercept form
equation of a linear function indicating its slope an d -intercept
transcendental function
a function that cannot be expressed by a combination of b asic arithmetic operations
transformation of a function
a shift, scaling, or reflection of a function
This page titled 2.8.1: Basic Functions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Edwin “Jed”
Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.2: Basic Classes of Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

2.8.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838772.8.2: Trigonometric Functions
Convert angle measures between degrees and radians.
Recognize the triangular and circular definitions of the basic trigonometric functions.
Write the basic trigonometric identities.
Identify the graphs and periods of the trigonometric funct ions.
Describe the shift of a sine or cosine graph from the eq uation of the function.
Trigonometric functions are used to model many phen omena, including sound waves, vibrations of strings, alte rnating electrical
current, and the motion of pendulums. In fact, almost any repetitive, or cyclical, motion can be modeled by some combination of
trigonometric functions. In this section, we define the six basic trigonometric functions and look at som e of the main identities
involving these functions.
Radian Measure
To use trigonometric functions, we first must understa nd how to measure the angles. Although we can use both ra dians and
degrees, radians are a more natural measurement because they are rela ted directly to the unit circle, a circle with radiu s 1. The
radian measure of an angle is defined as follows. Give n an angle, let be the length of the corresponding arc on the unit circle
(Figure). We say the angle corresponding to the arc of le ngth 1 has radian measure 1.
Figure: The radian measure of an angle is the arc le ngth of the associated arc on the unit circle.
Since an angle of corresponds to the circumference o f a circle, or an arc of length, we conclude that a n angle with a degree
measure of has a radian measure of. Similarly, we see that is equivalent to radians. Table shows the
relationship between common degree and radian values.
Table: Common Angles Expressed in Degrees and Radians
Degrees Radians Degrees Radians
0 0 120
30 135
45 150
60 180
a. Express using radians.
b. Express rad using degrees.
SolutionLearning Objectives
Converting between Radians and Degrees

2.8.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877Use the fact that ° is equivalent to radians as a conversion factor (Table):
a. rad
b. rad = ⋅ = °
a. Express using radians.
b. Express rad using degrees.
Hint
radians is equal to 180°
Answer
a.
b. 330°
The Six Basic Trigonometric Functions
Trigonometric functions allow us to use angle measure s, in radians or degrees, to find the coordinates of a point on any circle—not
only on a unit circle—or to find an angle given a p oint on a circle. They also define the relationship between the sides and angles of
a triangle.
To define the trigonometric functions, first consider the unit circle centered at the origin and a point on the unit circle.
Let be an angle with an initial side that lies alon g the positive -axis and with a terminal side that is t he line segment. An
angle in this position is said to be in standard posit ion (Figure). We can then define the values of the si x trigonometric
functions for in terms of the coordinates and.
Figure: The angle is in standard position. The values of the trigonometric functions for are defined in t erms of the
coordinates and.
Let be a point on the unit circle centered at the origin. Let be an angle with an initial side along the positive axis and a terminal side given by the line segment. The trigonometric functions are then defined asExercise
Definition: Trigonometric functions

2.8.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877If and are undefined. If, then and are undefined.
We can see that for a point on a circle of radius with a corresponding angle, the coordinates and satisfy
and
The values of the other trigonometric functions can be expressed in terms of, and (Figure).
Figure: For a point on a circle of radius, the coor dinates and satisfy and.
Table shows the values of sine and cosine at the majo r angles in the first quadrant. From this table, we c an determine the
values of sine and cosine at the corresponding angles in the other quadrants. The values of the other trigo nometric functions are
calculated easily from the values of and
Table: Values of and at Major Angles in the First Quadrant
0 0 1
1 0
Evaluate each of the following expressions.
a.
b.
c.
Solution:
a) On the unit circle, the angle corresponds to the po int. Therefore,Example: Evaluating Trigonometric Functions

2.8.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877
b) An angle corresponds to a revolution in the negative di rection, as shown. Therefore,
c) An angle = = +. Therefore, this angle corresponds to more than one revolution, as shown. Knowing the fact t hat an
angle of corresponds to the point, we can conclude that
Evaluate and.
HintExercise

2.8.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877Look at angles on the unit circle.
Answer
As mentioned earlier, the ratios of the side lengths of a right triangle can be expressed in terms of the t rigonometric functions
evaluated at either of the acute angles of the trian gle. Let be one of the acute angles. Let be the l ength of the adjacent leg, be
the length of the opposite leg, and be the length o f the hypotenuse. By inscribing the triangle into a circle of radius, as shown
in Figure, we see that, and satisfy the following relation ships with:
Figure: By inscribing a right triangle in a circle, we can express the ratios of the side lengths in terms of the trigonometric
functions evaluated at.
A wooden ramp is to be built with one end on the groun d and the other end at the top of a short staircase. I f the top of the
staircase is ft from the ground and the angle betwe en the ground and the ramp is to be °, how long does the ramp need to
be?
Solution
Let denote the length of the ramp. In the following image, we see that needs to satisfy the equation. Solving
this equation for, we see that ≈ ft.
A house painter wants to lean a -ft ladder against a house. If the angle between the base of the ladder a nd the ground is to be
°, how far from the house should she place the base of the lad der?
Hint
Draw a right triangle with hypotenuse 20.
AnswerExample: Constructing a Wooden Ramp
Exercise

2.8.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8387710 ft
Trigonometric Identities
A trigonometric identity is an equation involving trigonometric functions t hat is true for all angles for which the functions a re
defined. We can use the identities to help us solve or si mplify equations. The main trigonometric identities are listed next.
Reciprocal identities
Pythagorean identities
Addition and subtraction formulas
Double-angle formulas
For each of the following equations, use a trigonometric identity to find all solutions.
a.
b.
Solution
a) Using the double-angle formula for, we see that is a so lution of
if and only if
which is true if and only ifTrigonometric Identities
Example: Solving Trigonometric Equations

2.8.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877To solve this equation, it is important to note that we need to factor the left-hand side and not divide both sides of the
equation by. The problem with dividing by is that it is possible that is zero. In fact, if we did divi de both
sides of the equation by, we would miss some of the so lutions of the original equation. Factoring the left- hand side
of the equation, we see that is a solution of this equatio n if and only if
Since when
and when
we conclude that the set of solutions to this equation i s
and
b) Using the double-angle formula for and the reciproca l identity for, the equation can be written as
To solve this equation, we multiply both sides by to eliminate the denominator, and say that if satisfi es this
equation, then satisfies the equation
However, we need to be a little careful here. Even if s atisfies this new equation, it may not satisfy the orig inal equation
because, to satisfy the original equation, we would need to be able to divide both sides of the equation by. However,
if, we cannot divide both sides of the equation by. Therefore, it is possible that we may arrive at ex traneous
solutions. So, at the end, it is important to check fo r extraneous solutions. Returning to the equation, i t is important that
we factor out of both terms on the left-hand side i nstead of dividing both sides of the equation by. Fa ctoring the
left-hand side of the equation, we can rewrite this equat ion as
Therefore, the solutions are given by the angles suc h that or. The solutions of the first equation are
The solutions of the second equation are After chec king for
extraneous solutions, the set of solutions to the equatio n is
and
with
Find all solutions to the equation
HintExercise

2.8.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877Use the double-angle formula for cosine (Equation).
Answer
for.
Prove the trigonometric identity
Solution:
We start with the Pythagorean identity (Equation)
Dividing both sides of this equation by we obtain
Since and, we conclude that
Prove the trigonometric identity
Answer
Divide both sides of the identity by.
Graphs and Periods of the Trigonometric Functions
We have seen that as we travel around the unit circl e, the values of the trigonometric functions repeat. We can see this pattern in the
graphs of the functions. Let be a point on the unit circle and let be the corresponding angle. Since th e angle and
correspond to the same point, the values of the tr igonometric functions at and at are the same. Conseq uently, the
trigonometric functions are periodic functions. The period of a function is defined to be the sm allest positive value such that
for all values in the domain of. The sine, cosine, secant, and cosecant functions have a period of. Since the
tangent and cotangent functions repeat on an interval of length, their period is (Figure).Example: Proving a Trigonometric Identity
Exercise

2.8.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877
Figure: The six trigonometric functions are periodic.
Just as with algebraic functions, we can apply transform ations to trigonometric functions. In particular, consi der the following
function:
In Figure, the constant causes a horizontal or phase shift. The factor changes the period. This transfor med sine function
will have a period. The factor results in a vertic al stretch by a factor of. We say is the “amplitude of.” The
constant causes a vertical shift.
Figure: A graph of a general sine function.
Notice in Figure that the graph of is the graph of shifted to the left units. Therefore, we can write
Similarly, we can view the graph of as the graph of sh ifted right units, and state that

2.8.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877A shifted sine curve arises naturally when graphing the number of hours of daylight in a given location as a function of the day of
the year. For example, suppose a city reports that June 2 1 is the longest day of the year with 15.7 hours and December 21 is the
shortest day of the year with 8.3 hours. It can be shown that the function
is a model for the number of hours of daylight as a func tion of day of the year (Figure).
Figure: The hours of daylight as a function of day of the year can be modeled by a shifted sine curve.
Sketch a graph of
Solution
This graph is a phase shift of to the right by uni ts, followed by a horizontal compression by a factor of 2, a
vertical stretch by a factor of 3, and then a vertical shi ft by 1 unit. The period of is.
Describe the relationship between the graph of and the graph of.
HintExample: Sketching the Graph of a Transformed Sine Curve
Exercise

2.8.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877The graph of can be sketched using the graph of and a s equence of three transformations.
Answer
To graph, the graph of needs to be compressed hor izontally by a factor of 4, then stretched
vertically by a factor of 3, then shifted down 5 units. The function will have a period of and an amplitude of 3.
Inverse Trigonometric Functions
The six basic trigonometric functions are periodic, and therefore they are not one-to-one. However, if we r estrict the domain of a
trigonometric function to an interval where it is on e-to-one, we can define its inverse. Consider the sin e function. The sine function
is one-to-one on an infinite number of intervals, b ut the standard convention is to restrict the domain to the interval. By
doing so, we define the inverse sine function on the do main such that for any in the interval, the inve rse sine
function tells us which angle in the interval sati sfies. Similarly, we can restrict the domains of the ot her
trigonometric functions to define inverse trigonometric functions, which are functions that tell us which angle in a c ertain interval
has a specified trigonometric value.
The inverse sine function, denoted or, and the inv erse cosine function, denoted or, are defined on the
domain as follows:
if and only if and;
if and only if and.
The inverse tangent function, denoted or, and inver se cotangent function, denoted or, are defined on
the domain as follows:
if and only if and;
if and only if and.
The inverse cosecant function, denoted or, and inve rse secant function, denoted or, are defined on the
domain as follows:
if and only if and;
if and only if and.
To graph the inverse trigonometric functions, we use the graphs of the trigonometric functions restricted to the domains defined
earlier and reflect the graphs about the line (Figure).Definition: inverse trigonometric functions

2.8.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877
Figure: The graph of each of the inverse trigonometr ic functions is a reflection about the line of the c orresponding
restricted trigonometric function.
When evaluating an inverse trigonometric function, t he output is an angle. For example, to evaluate, we n eed to find an
angle such that. Clearly, many angles have this pro perty. However, given the definition of, we need the an gle
that not only solves this equation, but also lies in the int erval. We conclude that.
We now consider a composition of a trigonometric funct ion and its inverse. For example, consider the two expr essions
and
For the first one, we simplify as follows:
For the second one, we have
The inverse function is supposed to “undo” the origina l function, so why isn’t Recalling our definition of inverse
functions, a function and its inverse satisfy the conditions for all in the domain of and for
all in the domain of, so what happened here? The is sue is that the inverse sine function,, is the inver se of the restricted
sine function defined on the domain. Therefore, for in the interval, it is true that. However, for
values of outside this interval, the equation does not ho ld, even though is defined for all real numbers.
What about Does that have a similar issue? The answer is no. Since the domain of is the interval, we
conclude that if and the expression is not defined for other values of. To summarize,
if
and

2.8.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877 if
Similarly, for the cosine function,
if
and
if
Similar properties hold for the other trigonometric f unctions and their inverses.
Evaluate each of the following expressions.
a.
b.
c.
d.
Solution
a. Evaluating is equivalent to finding the angle such that and. The angle
satisfies these two conditions. Therefore,.
b. First we use the fact that Then. Therefore,.
c. To evaluate,first use the fact that. Then we need to f ind the angle such that
and. Since satisfies both these conditions, we have.
d. Since, we need to evaluate. That is, we need to find the angle such that and
. Since satisfies both these conditions, we can conclude that
In many areas of science, engineering, and mathematic s, it is useful to know the maximum value a function c an obtain, even if
we don’t know its exact value at a given instant. For instance, if we have a function describing the strengt h of a roof beam, we
would want to know the maximum weight the beam can supp ort without breaking. If we have a function that descri bes the
speed of a train, we would want to know its maximum spe ed before it jumps off the rails. Safe design often dep ends on
knowing maximum values.
This project describes a simple example of a function with a maximum value that depends on two equation coe fficients. We
will see that maximum values can depend on several facto rs other than the independent variable.
1. Consider the graph in Figure of the function Desc ribe its overall shape. Is it periodic? How do you
know?
Figure: The graph of.Example: Evaluating Expressions Involving Inverse Trigonometric Functions
The Maximum Value of a Function

2.8.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877Using a graphing calculator or other graphing device, estimate the - and -values of the maximum point for the graph (the first
such point where). It may be helpful to express the -value as a multiple of
2. Now consider other graphs of the form for various v alues of and Sketch the graph when and
and find the - and -values for the maximum point. (Remember to express the -value as a multiple of, i f possible.)
Has it moved?
3. Repeat for Is there any relationship to what you foun d in part (2)?
4. Complete the following table, adding a few choices of y our own for and
0 1 3 4
1 0 4 3
1 1 1
1 2 1
2 1 12 5
2 2 5 12
5. Try to figure out the formula for the -values.
6. The formula for the -values is a little harder. The most helpful points from the table are (Hint: Co nsider
inverse trigonometric functions.)
7. If you found formulas for parts (5) and (6), show t hat they work together. That is, substitute the -value f ormula you found into
and simplify it to arrive at the -value formula you foun d.
Key Concepts
Radian measure is defined such that the angle associate d with the arc of length 1 on the unit circle has radian mea sure 1. An
angle with a degree measure of ° has a radian measure of rad.
For acute angles,the values of the trigonometric functio ns are defined as ratios of two sides of a right triangle in wh ich one of
the acute angles is.
For a general angle, let be a point on a circle of radi us corresponding to this angle. The trigonometric f unctions can
be written as ratios involving,, and.
The trigonometric functions are periodic. The sine, c osine, secant, and cosecant functions have period. The tangent and
cotangent functions have period.
Key Equations
Generalized sine function
Glossary
periodic function
a function is periodic if it has a repeating pattern as the values of move from left to right
radians
for a circular arc of length on a circle of radius 1, th e radian measure of the associated angle is
trigonometric functions
functions of an angle defined as ratios of the lengths of the sides of a right triangle

2.8.2.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83877trigonometric identity
an equation involving trigonometric functions that is true for all angles for which the functions in the equa tion are defined
This page titled 2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Edwin
“Jed” Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.3: Trigonometric Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
1.4: Inverse Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

2.8.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838782.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
Identify the form of an exponential function.
Explain the difference between the graphs of and.
Recognize the significance of the number.
Identify the form of a logarithmic function.
Explain the relationship between exponential and logari thmic functions.
Describe how to calculate a logarithm to a different base.
In this section we examine exponential and logarithm ic functions. We use the properties of these functio ns to solve equations
involving exponential or logarithmic terms, and we s tudy the meaning and importance of the number. We also define hyperbolic
and inverse hyperbolic functions, which involve combi nations of exponential and logarithmic functions. (Note that we present
alternative definitions of exponential and logarith mic functions in the chapter Applications of Integra tions, and prove that the
functions have the same properties with either definiti on.)
Exponential Functions
Recall the properties of exponents: If is a positive integer, then we define (with factors of). If is a n egative
integer, then for some positive integer, and we defi ne. Also, is defined to be. If is a rational number,
then, where and are integers and. For example,. Howe ver, how is defined if
is an irrational number? For example, what do we mean by? This is too complex a question for us to answer fully right now;
however, we can make an approximation.
Table: Values of for a List of Rational Numbers Appr oximating
1.4 1.41 1.414 1.4142 1.41421 1.414213
2.639 2.65737 2.66475 2.665119 2.665138 2.665143
In Table, we list some rational numbers approaching, and the values of for each rational number are presented as
well. We claim that if we choose rational numbers ge tting closer and closer to, the values of get clo ser and closer to some
number. We define that number to be.
Suppose a particular population of bacteria is known t o double in size every hours. If a culture starts wi th bacteria, the
number of bacteria after hours is. The number of bacteria after hours is. In general,
the number of bacteria after hours is. Letting, we see that the number of bacteria after t hours is
. Find the number of bacteria after hours, hours, and hours.
Solution
The number of bacteria after 6 hours is given by
The number of bacteria after hours is given by
The number of bacteria after hours is given by bact eria.Learning Objectives
Example: Bacterial Growth

2.8.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878Given the exponential function, evaluate and.
Answer
Graphing Exponential Functions
For any base,, the exponential function is defined for all real numbers and. Therefore, the domain of
is and the range is. To graph, we note that for, is increasing on and as,
whereas as. On the other hand, if, is decreasing on and as whereas
as (Figure).
Figure: If, then is increasing on. If, then is de creasing on.
Note that exponential functions satisfy the general l aws of exponents. To remind you of these laws, we state them as r ules.
For any constants,, and for all and
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Use the laws of exponents to simplify each of the following exp ressions.
a.
b.
Soution
a. We can simplify as follows:
b. We can simplify as follows:Exercise
Laws of Exponents
Example: Using the Laws of Exponents

2.8.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878Use the laws of exponents to simplify.
Hint
Answer
The Number e
A special type of exponential function appears frequ ently in real-world applications. To describe it, conside r the following example
of exponential growth, which arises from compounding interest in a savings account. Suppose a person invests dollars in a
savings account with an annual interest rate, compounde d annually. The amount of money after 1 year is
The amount of money after years is
More generally, the amount after years is
If the money is compounded 2 times per year, the amount of money after half a year is
The amount of money after year is
After years, the amount of money in the account is
More generally, if the money is compounded times pe r year, the amount of money in the account after ye ars is given by the
function
What happens as To answer this question, we let and write
and examine the behavior of as, using a table of value s (Table).
Table: Values of as
10 100 1000 10,000 100,000 1,000,000
2.5937 2.7048 2.71692 2.71815 2.718268 2.718280
Looking at this table, it appears that is approachin g a number between and as. In fact, does
approach some number as. We call this number. To six dec imal places of accuracy,Exercise

2.8.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878The letter was first used to represent this number b y the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler during the 17 20s. Although
Euler did not discover the number, he showed many impo rtant connections between and logarithmic functions. We still use
the notation today to honor Euler’s work because it appears in many areas of mathematics and because we can use it in many
practical applications.
Returning to our savings account example, we can conc lude that if a person puts dollars in an account a t an annual interest rate,
compounded continuously, then. This function may be familiar. Since functions involving base arise often in
applications, we call the function the natural exponential function. Not only is this function interesting because of th e
definition of the number, but also, as discussed next, its gra ph has an important property.
Since, we know is increasing on. In Figure, we show a graph of along with a tangent line
to the graph of at. We give a precise definition of tangent line in the next chapter; but, informally, we say a tangent line to a
graph of at is a line that passes through the poin t and has the same “slope” as at that point. The function
is the only exponential function with tangent line at that has a slope of As we see later in the text, h aving this
property makes the natural exponential function the mos t simple exponential function to use in many instances.
Figure: The graph of has a tangent line with slope at.
Logarithmic Functions
Using our understanding of exponential functions, we ca n discuss their inverses, which are the logarithmic f unctions. These come
in handy when we need to consider any phenomenon that varies over a wide range of values, such as the pH scale in chemistry or
decibels in sound levels.
The exponential function is one-to-one, with domain and range. Therefore, it has an inve rse function,
called the logarithmic function with base. For any, the logarithmic function with base, denoted, has do main
and range,and satisfies
if and only if.
For example,
since,
since,
since for any base.
Furthermore, since and are inverse functions,Leonhard Euler

2.8.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878and
The most commonly used logarithmic function is the f unction. Since this function uses natural as its bas e, it is called the
natural logarithm. Here we use the notation or to mean. For example,
Since the functions and are inverses of each other,
and,
and their graphs are symmetric about the line (Figure).
Figure: The functions and are inverses of each other, so their graphs are symmetric about the line.
In general, for any base,, the function is symmet ric about the line with the function. Using
this fact and the graphs of the exponential functions, we graph functions for several values of (Figure).
Figure: Graphs of are depicted for.
Before solving some equations involving exponential an d logarithmic functions, let’s review the basic properties of logarithms.
If, and is any real number, then
Product property
Quotient propertyProperties of Logarithms

2.8.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878Power property
Solve each of the following equations for.
a.
b.
Solution
a. Applying the natural logarithm function to both sides of the equation, we have
Using the power property of logarithms,
Therefore,
b. Multiplying both sides of the equation by,we arrive at th e equation
Rewriting this equation as
we can then rewrite it as a quadratic equation in:
Now we can solve the quadratic equation. Factoring this equation, we obtain
Therefore, the solutions satisfy and. Taking the natural logarithm of both sides gives us the solutions.
Solve
Hint
First solve the equation for
Answer
Solve each of the following equations for.
a. Example: Solving Equations Involving Exponential Functions
Exercise
Example: Solving Equations Involving Logarithmic Functions

2.8.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878b.
c.
Solution
a. By the definition of the natural logarithm function,
if and only if.
Therefore, the solution is.
b. Using the product (Equation) and power (Equation) properties of logarithmic functions, rewrite the le ft-hand
side of the equation as
Therefore, the equation can be rewritten as
or
The solution is.
c. Using the power property (Equation) of logarithmic fun ctions, we can rewrite the equation as.
Using the quotient property (Equation), this becomes
Therefore,, which implies. We should then check for any ex traneous solutions.
Solve.
Hint
First use the power property, then use the product property o f logarithms.
Answer
When evaluating a logarithmic function with a calcul ator, you may have noticed that the only options are or, called the
common logarithm, or, which is the natural logarithm. However, exponen tial functions and logarithm functions can be
expressed in terms of any desired base. If you need to use a calculator to evaluate an expression with a d ifferent base, you can
apply the change-of-base formulas first. Using this c hange of base, we typically write a given exponential or logarithmic function
in terms of the natural exponential and natural logarit hmic functions.Exercise

2.8.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878Let, and.
1. for any real number.
If, this equation reduces to.
2. for any real number.
If, this equation reduces to.
Use a calculating utility to evaluate with the change-o f-base formula presented earlier.
Solution
Use the second equation with and:.
Use the change-of-base formula and a calculating utility t o evaluate.
Hint
Use the change of base to rewrite this expression in terms o f expressions involving the natural logarithm function.
Answer
In 1935, Charles Richter developed a scale (now known a s the Richter scale) to measure the magnitude of an earthquake. The
scale is a base-10 logarithmic scale, and it can be described as follows: Consider one earthquake with mag nitude on the
Richter scale and a second earthquake with magnitude on the Richter scale. Suppose, which means the earth quake
of magnitude is stronger, but how much stronger is it t han the other earthquake?
Figure: (credit: modification of work by Robb Hanna wacker, NPS)
A way of measuring the intensity of an earthquake is by using a seismograph to measure the amplitude of t he earthquake
waves. If is the amplitude measured for the first ea rthquake and is the amplitude measured for the seco nd earthquake,
then the amplitudes and magnitudes of the two earthquake s satisfy the following equation:
Consider an earthquake that measures 8 on the Richter scale a nd an earthquake that measures 7 on the Richter scale. Then,
Therefore,
,Rule: Change-of-Base Formulas
Example: Changing Bases
Exercise
Example: The Richter Scale for Earthquakes

2.8.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878which implies or. Since is 10 times the size of, we say that the first earthquake is 10 times as
intense as the second earthquake. On the other hand, i f one earthquake measures 8 on the Richter scale and another measures 6,
then the relative intensity of the two earthquakes sati sfies the equation
Therefore,.That is, the first earthquake is 100 times mor e intense than the second earthquake.
How can we use logarithmic functions to compare the re lative severity of the magnitude 9 earthquake in Jap an in 2011 with the
magnitude 7.3 earthquake in Haiti in 2010?
Solution
To compare the Japan and Haiti earthquakes, we can use an equ ation presented earlier:
Therefore,, and we conclude that the earthquake in J apan was approximately 50 times more intense than th e
earthquake in Haiti.
Compare the relative severity of a magnitude earthqua ke with a magnitude earthquake.
Hint
Answer
The magnitude earthquake is roughly times as severe a s the magnitude earthquake.
Key Concepts
The exponential function is increasing if and decre asing if. Its domain is and its range is.
The logarithmic function is the inverse of. Its dom ain is and its range is
The natural exponential function is and the natural l ogarithmic function is
Given an exponential function or logarithmic function in base, we can make a change of base to convert this function to any
base, We typically convert to base.
Glossary
base
the number in the exponential function and the loga rithmic function
exponent
the value in the expression
natural exponential function
the function
natural logarithm
the function
number e
as gets larger, the quantity gets closer to some rea l number; we define that real number to be the value of i s
approximately Exercise

2.8.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83878This page titled 2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Edwin “Jed” Herman & Gilbert Strang (OpenStax) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts
platform.
1.5: Exponential and Logarithmic Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.

2.8.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838792.8.4: Properties_of_Logarithms
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Use the properties of logarithms
Use the Change of Base Formula
Before you get started, take this readiness quiz.
1. Evaluate: a. b..
If you missed this problem, review Example 5.14.
2. Write with a rational exponent:.
If you missed this problem, review Example 8.27.
3. Round to three decimal places:.
If you missed this problem, review Example 1.34.
Use the Properties of Logarithms
Now that we have learned about exponential and logarit hmic functions, we can introduce some of the propertie s of logarithms.
These will be very helpful as we continue to solve both exp onential and logarithmic equations.
The first two properties derive from the definition of logarithms. Since, we can convert this to logarithm ic form and get
. Also, since, we get.
Properties of Logarithms
In the next example we could evaluate the logarithm by converting to exponential form, as we have done pre viously, but
recognizing and then applying the properties saves tim e.
Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:
a.
b.
Solution:
a.
Use the property,.
b.
Use the property,.Learning Objectives
Definition
Example

2.8.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b.
Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b.
The next two properties can also be verified by convertin g them from exponential form to logarithmic form, or th e reverse.
The exponential equation converts to the logarithm ic equation, which is a true statement for positive values
for only.
The logarithmic equation converts to the exponential e quation, which is also a true statement.
These two properties are called inverse properties bec ause, when we have the same base, raising to a power “undo es” the log and
taking the log “undoes” raising to a power. These two properties show the composition of functions. Both ended up with the
identity function which shows again that the exponential a nd logarithmic functions are inverse functions.
Inverse Properties of Logarithms
For and,
In the next example, apply the inverse properties of logar ithms.
Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:
a.
b.
Solution:
a.
Use the property,.
b.Exercise
Exercise
Definition
Example

2.8.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Use the property,.
Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b.
Evaluate using the properties of logarithms:
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b.
There are three more properties of logarithms that wi ll be useful in our work. We know exponential functio ns and logarithmic
function are very interrelated. Our definition of lo garithm shows us that a logarithm is the exponent of the equivalent exponential.
The properties of exponents have related properties for e xponents.
In the Product Property of Exponents,, we see that to multiply the same base, we add the exponents. The Product
Property of Logarithms, tells us to take the log of a product, we add the log of the factors.
Product Property of Logarithms
If and then
The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms.
We use this property to write the log of a product as a sum of the logs of each factor.
Use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logari thm as a sum of logarithms. Simplify, if possible:
a.
b.
Solution:
a.Exercise
Exercise
Definition
Example

2.8.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Use the Product Property,.
b.
Use the Product Property,.
Simplify be evaluating,.
Use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logari thm as a sum of logarithms. Simplify, if possible:
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b.
Use the Product Property of Logarithms to write each logari thm as a sum of logarithms. Simplify, if possible:
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b.
Similarly, in the Quotient Property of Exponents,, we see that to divide the same base, we subtract the expo nents. The
Quotient Property of Logarithms, tells us to take the log of a quotient, we subtract the log of the
numerator and denominator.
Quotient Property of Logarithms
If and then
The logarithm of a quotient is the difference of the lo garithms.
Note that.
We use this property to write the log of a quotient as a diff erence of the logs of each factor.Exercise
Exercise
Definition

2.8.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logar ithm as a difference of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.
a.
b.
Solution:
a.
Use the Quotient Property,.
Simplify.
b.
Use the Quotient Property,.
Simplify.
Use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logar ithm as a difference of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b.
Use the Quotient Property of Logarithms to write each logar ithm as a difference of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b.
The third property of logarithms is related to the Po wer Property of Exponents,, we see that to raise a powe r to a
power, we multiply the exponents. The Power Property of Logarithms, tells us to take the log of a number
raised to a power, we multiply the power times the log of th e number.Example
Exercise
Exercise

2.8.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Power Property of Logarithms
If and is any real number then,
The log of a number raised to a power as the product product of the power times the log of the number.
We use this property to write the log of a number ra ised to a power as the product of the power times the log of the number. We
essentially take the exponent and throw it in front of t he logarithm.
Use the Power Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a product of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.
a.
b.
Solution:
a.
Use the Power Property,.
b.
Use the Power Property,.
Use the Power Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a product of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.
a.
b.
Answer
a.
b. 100
Use the Power Property of Logarithms to write each logarithm as a product of logarithms. Simplify, if possible.
a.
b.
Answer
a. Definition
Example
Exercise
Exercise

2.8.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879b.
We summarize the Properties of Logarithms here for ea sy reference. While the natural logarithms are a sp ecial case of these
properties, it is often helpful to also show the natural logarithm version of each property.
Properties of Logarithms
If and is any real number then,
Table 10.4.1
Property Base Base
Inverse Properties
Product Property of Logarithms
Quotient Property of Logarithms
Power Property of Logarithms
Now that we have the properties we can use them to “expa nd” a logarithmic expression. This means to write the logarithm as a sum
or difference and without any powers.
We generally apply the Product and Quotient Properties bef ore we apply the Power Property.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify, if possible.
Solution:
Use the Product Property,.
Use the Power Property,, on the last two terms. Simplify.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify, if possible.
Answer
Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify, if possible.
Answer
When we have a radical in the logarithmic expression, it is helpful to first write its radicand as a rational expone nt.Example
Exercise
Exercise

2.8.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify, if possible.
Solution
Rewrite the radical with a rational exponent.
Use the Power Property,.
Use the Quotient Property,.
Use the Product Property,, in the second term.
Use the Power Property,, inside the parentheses.
Simplify by distributing.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify, if possible.
Answer
Use the Properties of Logarithms to expand the logarithm. Simplify, if possible.
Answer
The opposite of expanding a logarithm is to condens e a sum or difference of logarithms that have the s ame base into a single
logarithm. We again use the properties of logarithms to help us, but in reverse.
To condense logarithmic expressions with the same base into one logarithm, we start by using the Power Propert y to get the
coefficients of the log terms to be one and then the Pr oduct and Quotient Properties as needed.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarith m. Simplify, if possible.
Solution:
The log expressions all have the same base,.Example
Exercise
Exercise
Example

2.8.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879The first two terms are added, so we use the Product Property,.
Since the logs are subtracted, we use the Quotient Property,.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarith m. Simplify, if possible.
Answer
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarith m. Simplify, if possible.
Answer
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarith m. Simplify, if possible.
Solution:
The log expressions have the same base,.
Use the Power Property,.
The terms are added, so we use the Product Property,.
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarith m. Simplify, if possible.
Answer
Use the Properties of Logarithms to condense the logarith m. Simplify, if possible.
Answer
Use the Change-of-Base Formula
To evaluate a logarithm with any other base, we can use the Change-of-Base Formula. We will show how this is derived.Exercise
Exercise
Example
Exercise
Exercise

2.8.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879The Change-of-Base Formula introduces a new base. Thi s can be any base we want where. Because our calculat ors
have keys for logarithms base and base, we will rewrite the Change-of-Base Formula with the new base as or.
Change-of-Base Formula
For any logarithmic bases and,
When we use a calculator to find the logarithm value, we usually round to three decimal places. This gives us an approximate value
and so we use the approximately equal symbol.
Rounding to three decimal places, approximate.
Solution:
Table 10.4.2

Use the Change-of-Base Formula.
Identify and. Choose for.
Enter the expression in the calculator using the log button
for base. Round to three decimal places.
Rounding to three decimal places, approximate.
Answer
Rounding to three decimal places, approximate.
AnswerDefinition
Example
Exercise
Exercise

2.8.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879In the previous section, we derived two important prope rties of logarithms, which allowed us to solve some basi c exponential and
logarithmic equations.
Inverse Properties:
Exponential Property:
Change of Base:
While these properties allow us to solve a large numb er of problems, they are not sufficient to solve all problems involving
exponential and logarithmic equations.
Sum of Logs Property:
Difference of Logs Property:
It’s just as important to know what properties logarith ms do not satisfy as to memorize the valid propertie s listed above. In
particular, the logarithm is not a linear function, which m eans that it does not distribute:
To help in this process we offer a proof of Equation to help solidify our new rules and show how they follow f rom properties
you’ve already seen.
Let and.
By definition of the logarithm, and.
Using these expressions,
Using exponent rules on the right,
Taking the log of both sides, and utilizing the inverse pro perty of logs,
Replacing and with their definition establishes the res ultproperties of logs
properties of logs
Proof

2.8.4.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879The proof for the difference property is very similar.
With these properties, we can rewrite expressions involv ing multiple logs as a single log, or break an express ion involving a single
log into expressions involving multiple logs.
Write as a single logarithm.
Solution
Using the sum of logs property on the first two terms,
This reduces our original expression to
Then using the difference of logs property,
Evaluate without a calculator by first rewriting as a single logarithm.
Solution
On the first term, we can use the exponent property of logs to write
With the expression reduced to a sum of two logs,, we can util ize the sum of logs property
Since, we can evaluate this log without a calculator:
Without a calculator evaluate by first rewriting as a single l ogarithm:
Answer
Rewrite as a sum or difference of logs
Solution
First, noticing we have a quotient of two expressions, we can utilize the difference property of logs to writeExample
Example
Exercise
Example

2.8.4.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879
Then seeing the product in the first term, we use the sum pr operty
Finally, we could use the exponent property on the first term
Interestingly, solving exponential equations was not the reason logarithms were originally developed.
Historically, up until the advent of calculators and computers, the power of logarithms was that these log
properties reduced multiplication, division, roots, or powers to be evaluated using addition, subtraction,
division and multiplication, respectively, which are mu ch easier to compute without a calculator. Large
books were published listing the logarithms of numbe rs, such as in the table to the right. To find the pro duct
of two numbers, the sum of log property was used. Suppos e for example we didn’t know the value of 2
times 3. Using the sum property of logs:
Using the log table,
We can then use the table again in reverse, looking for 0.7781513 as an output of the logarithm. From that we can det ermine:
By using addition and the table of logs, we were able to dete rmine.
Likewise, to compute a cube root like
So.
Although these calculations are simple and insignific ant, they illustrate the same idea that was used for hundreds of years as an
efficient way to calculate the product, quotient, roo ts, and powers of large and complicated numbers, eith er using tables of
logarithms or mechanical tools called slide rules.
These properties still have other practical applications f or interpreting changes in exponential and logarithmic r elationships.
Recall that in chemistry, the pH scale is used for quantifying acidic
If the concentration of hydrogen ions in a liquid is dou bled, what is the effect on pH?
Solution
Suppose is the original concentration of hydrogen io ns, and is the original pH of the liquid, so. If the
concentration is doubled, the new concentration is. The n the pH of the new liquid is
Using the sum property of logs,
Since, the new pH isExample

2.8.4.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879When the concentration of hydrogen ions is doubled, the p H decreases by 0.301.
Log properties in Solving Equations
The logarithm properties often arise when solving prob lems involving logarithms. First, we’ll look at a simple r log equation.
Solve.
Solution
To solve for, we need to get it out from inside the log functio n. There are two ways we can approach this.
Method 1: Rewrite as an exponential.
Recall that since the common log is base 10, can be rewritten as the exponential. Likewise,
can be rewritten in exponential form as
Method 2: Exponentiate both sides.
If, then. Using this idea, since, then. Use the i nverse property of logs to
rewrite the left side and get.
Using either method, we now need to solve. Evaluate to get
Add 6 to both sides
Divide both sides by 2
Occasionally the solving process will result in extrane ous solutions – answers that are outside the domain o f the original
equation. In this case, our answer looks fine.
Solve.
Solution
In order to rewrite in exponential form, we need a sin gle logarithmic expression on the left side of the equation. Using the
difference property of logs, we can rewrite the left side:
Rewriting in exponential form reduces this to an algebraic equation:
Multiply both sides by
Combine like termsExample
Example

2.8.4.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Divide by 50
Checking this answer in the original equation, we can verify there are no domain issues, and this answer is correct.
Solve.
Answer
Move both logs to one side
Use the difference property of logs
Factor
Simplify
Rewrite as an exponential
Add 2 to both sides
Solve.
Solution
Use the sum of logs property on the right
Expand
We have a log on both side of the equation this tim e. Rewriting in exponential form would be tricky, so ins tead we can
exponentiate both sides.
Use the inverse property of logsExercise
Example

2.8.4.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Move terms to one side
Factor
Checking our answers, notice that evaluating the ori ginal equation at would result in us evaluating, wh ich is
undefined. That answer is outside the domain of the or iginal equation, so it is an extraneous solution and we discard it. There is
one solution:.
More complex exponential equations can often be solv ed in more than one way. In the following example, we will solve the same
problem in two ways – one using logarithm properties, and the other using exponential properties.
In 2008, the population of Kenya was approximately 38.8 million, and was growing by 2.64% each year, while the population
of Sudan was approximately 41.3 million and growing by 2.24% each year(World Bank, World Development Indicat ors, as
reported on http://www.google.com/publicdata, retrieved August 24, 2010). If these trends continu e, when will the population
of Kenya match that of Sudan?
Solution
We start by writing an equation for each population in te rms of, the number of years after 2008.
To find when the populations will be equal, we can set the equa tions equal
For our first approach, we take the log of both sides of the equation.
Utilizing the sum property of logs, we can rewrite each sid e,
Then utilizing the exponent property, we can pull the vari ables out of the exponent
Moving all the terms involving to one side of the equa tion and the rest of the terms to the other side,
Factoring out the on the left,
Dividing to solve for
It will be 15.991 years until the populations will be equal.Example

2.8.4.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Solve the problem above by rewriting before taking the log.
Solution
Starting at the equation
Divide to move the exponential terms to one side of th e equation and the constants to the other side
Using exponent rules to group on the left,
Taking the log of both sides
Utilizing the exponent property on the left,
Dividing gives
While the answer does not immediately appear identica l to that produced using the previous method, note t hat by using the
difference property of logs, the answer could be rewritten:
While both methods work equally well, it often require s fewer steps to utilize algebra before taking logs, rather than relying solely
on log properties.
Tank A contains 10 liters of water, and 35% of the wate r evaporates each week. Tank B contains 30 liters of wat er, and 50% of
the water evaporates each week. In how many weeks will the tank s contain the same amount of water?
Answer
Tank A:. Tank B:
Solving A(t) = B(t),
Using the method from Example 8bExample
Exercise

2.8.4.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Regroup
Simplify
Take the log of both sides
Use the exponent property of logs
Divide and evaluate
Important Topics of this Section
Inverse
Exponential
Change of base
Sum of logs property
Difference of logs property
Access these online resources for additional instruction a nd practice with using the properties of logarithms.
Using Properties of Logarithms to Expand Logs
Using Properties of Logarithms to Condense Logs
Change of Base
Key Concepts
Inverse Properties of Logarithms
For and
Product Property of Logarithms
If and, then,
The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms.
Quotient Property of Logarithms
If and, then,
The logarithm of a quotient is the difference of the lo garithms.
Power Property of Logarithms
If and is any real number then,
The log of a number raised to a power is the product of the power times the log of the number.

2.8.4.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83879Properties of Logarithms Summary
If and is any real number then,
Table 10.4.1
Property Base Base
Inverse Properties
Product Property of Logarithms
Quotient Property of Logarithms
Power Property of Logarithms
Change-of-Base Formula
For any logarithmic bases and, and,
This page titled 2.8.4: Properties_of_Logarithms is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.5: Use the Properties of Logarithms by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/intermediate-algebra -2e.
4.4: Logarithmic Properties by David Lippman & Melonie Rasmussen is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
http://www.opentextbookstore.com/details.php?id=30.

2.8.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838802.8.5: Exponential and Logarithmic Models
While we have explored some basic applications of ex ponential and logarithmic functions, in this sectio n we explore some
important applications in more depth.
Radioactive Decay
In an earlier section, we discussed radioactive decay – the idea that radioactive isotopes change over tim e. One of the common
terms associated with radioactive decay is half-life.
The half-life of a radioactive isotope is the time it takes for half the substance to decay.
Given the basic exponential growth/decay equation, h alf-life can be found by solving for when half the o riginal amount
remains; by solving, or more simply. Notice how the initial amount is irrelevant when solving for half-life.
Bismuth-210 is an isotope that decays by about 13% each d ay. What is the half-life of Bismuth-210?
Solution
We were not given a starting quantity, so we could eit her make up a value or use an unknown constant to rep resent the starting
amount. To show that starting quantity does not affect the result, let us denote the initial quantity by the constant a. Then the
decay of Bismuth-210 can be described by the equation.
To find the half-life, we want to determine when the remain ing quantity is half the original:. Solving,
Divide by,
Take the log of both sides
Use the exponent property of logs
Divide to solve for
This tells us that the half-life of Bismuth-210 is approx imately 5 days.
Cesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years. If yo u begin with 200 mg of cesium-137, how much will remain after 30 years?
60 years? 90 years?
SolutionDefinition: Half Life
Example
Example

2.8.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880Since the half-life is 30 years, after 30 years, half the o riginal amount, 100 mg, will remain.
After 60 years, another 30 years have passed, so during that second 30 years, another half of the substance wil l decay, leaving
50 mg.
After 90 years, another 30 years have passed, so another hal f of the substance will decay, leaving 25 mg.
Cesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years. Find the annua l decay rate.
Solution
Since we are looking for an annual decay rate, we will u se an equation of the form. We know that after 30
years, half the original amount will remain. Using this inform ation
Dividing by
Taking the 30 root of both sides
Subtracting one from both sides,
This tells us cesium-137 is decaying at an annual rate of 2.2 84% per year.
Chlorine-36 is eliminated from the body with a biolog ical half-life of 10 days (www.ead.anl.gov/pub/doc/chlo rine.pdf). Find
the daily decay rate.
Answer
or 6.7% is the daily rate of decay.
Carbon-14 is a radioactive isotope that is present i n organic materials, and is commonly used for datin g historical artifacts.
Carbon-14 has a half-life of 5730 years. If a bone fra gment is found that contains 20% of its original car bon-14, how old is the
bone?
Solution
To find how old the bone is, we first will need to find an equation for the decay of the carbon-14. We could either use a
continuous or annual decay formula, but opt to use the continuous decay formula since it is more commo n in scientific texts.
The half life tells us that after 5730 years, half the ori ginal substance remains. Solving for the rate,
Dividing by Example
Exercise
Example

2.8.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880Taking the natural log of both sides
Use the inverse property of logs on the right side
Divide by 5730
Now we know the decay will follow the equation. To find how old the bone fragment is that contains 20% of
the original amount, we solve for so that.
The bone fragment is about 13,300 years old.
In Example 2, we learned that Cesium-137 has a half-li fe of about 30 years. If you begin with 200 mg of ce sium-137, will it
take more or less than 230 years until only 1 milligram r emains?
Answer
Less than 230 years, 229.3157 to be exact.
Doubling Time
For decaying quantities, we asked how long it takes for half the substance to decay. For growing quantities we might ask how long
it takes for the quantity to double.
The doubling time of a growing quantity is the time it takes for the quantit y to double.
Given the basic exponential growth equation, doublin g time can be found by solving for when the original quantity has
doubled; by solving, or more simply. Like with dec ay, the initial amount is irrelevant when solving fo r doublingExercise
Definition: Doubling Time

2.8.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880time.
Cancer cells sometimes increase exponentially. If a c ancerous growth contained 300 cells last month and 3 60 cells this month,
how long will it take for the number of cancer cells to dou ble?
Solution
Defining to be time in months, with corresponding to this month, we are given two pieces of data: this month, (0, 360),
and last month, (-1, 300).
From this data, we can find an equation for the growth. Using t he form, we know immediately a = 360, giving
. Substituting in (-1, 300),
This gives us the equation
To find the doubling time, we look for the time when we will ha ve twice the original amount, so when.
months for the number of cancer cells to double.
Use of a new social networking website has been growing e xponentially, with the number of new members doubling e very 5
months. If the site currently has 120,000 users and this trend continues, how many users will the site have in 1 year?
Solution
We can use the doubling time to find a function tha t models the number of site users, and then use tha t equation to answer the
question. While we could use an arbitrary a as we have before for the initial amount, in this c ase, we know the initial amount
was 120,000.
If we use a continuous growth equation, it would look l ike, measured in thousands of users after t months. Based
on the doubling time, there would be 240 thousand users after 5 months. This allows us to solve for the continuous growth rat e:Example
Example

2.8.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880Now that we have an equation,, we can predict the number of users a fter 12 months:
So after 1 year, we would expect the site to have around 6 33,140 users.
If tuition at a college is increasing by 6.6% each year, how many years will it take for tuition to double?
Answer
Solving, it will take years, or approximately 11 years, for tuition to double.
Newton’s Law of Cooling
When a hot object is left in surrounding air that is at a lower temperature, the object’s temperature will decrease exponentially,
leveling off towards the surrounding air temperature. This "leveling off" will correspond to a horizontal asymptote in the graph of
the temperature function. Unless the room temperature is zero, this will correspond to a vertical shift of the generic exponential
decay function.
The temperature of an object,, in surrounding air with t emperature will behave according to the formula
Where
is time
is a constant determined by the initial temperature of the object
is a constant, the continuous rate of cooling of the obj ect
While an equation of the form could be used, the continuou s growth form is more common.
A cheesecake is taken out of the oven with an ideal internal temperature of 165 degrees Fahrenheit, and is placed into a 35
degree refrigerator. After 10 minutes, the cheesecake has cooled to 150 degrees. If you must wait until th e cheesecake has
cooled to 70 degrees before you eat it, how long will you have to wait?
Solution
Since the surrounding air temperature in the refriger ator is 35 degrees, the cheesecake’s temperature will d ecay exponentially
towards 35, following the equationExercise
Definition: Newton’s Law of Cooling
Example

2.8.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880We know the initial temperature was 165, so. Substituting in these values,
We were given another pair of data,, which we can use to sol ve for
Together this gives us the equation for cooling:
Now we can solve for the time it will take for the temperatur e to cool to 70 degrees.
It will take about 107 minutes, or one hour and 47 m inutes, for the cheesecake to cool. Of course, if you like your cheesecake
served chilled, you’d have to wait a bit longer.
A pitcher of water at 40 degrees Fahrenheit is placed into a 70 degree room. One hour later the temperatu re has risen to 45
degrees. How long will it take for the temperature to rise to 60 degrees?
Answer
. Substituting (0, 40), we find. Substituting (1, 45), we solve
to getExercise

2.8.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880Solving gives
Logarithmic Scales
For quantities that vary greatly in magnitude, a stand ard scale of measurement is not always effective, an d utilizing logarithms can
make the values more manageable. For example, if the average distances from the sun to the major bodies in our solar system are
listed, you see they vary greatly.
Planet Distance (millions of km)
Mercury 58
Venus 108
Earth 150
Mars 228
Jupiter 779
Saturn 1430
Uranus 2880
Neptune 4500
Placed on a linear scale – one with equally spaced values – the se values get bunched up.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500
However, computing the logarithm of each value and plo tting these new values on a number line results in a m ore manageable
graph, and makes the relative distances more apparen t.(It is interesting to note the large gap between Mars and Jupiter on the log
number line. The asteroid belt is located there, whi ch scientists believe is a planet that never formed b ecause of the effects of the
gravity of Jupiter.)

2.8.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880Planet Distance (millions of km) log(distance)
Mercury 58 1.76
Venus 108 2.03
Earth 150 2.18
Mars 228 2.36
Jupiter 779 2.89
Saturn 1430 3.16
Uranus 2880 3.46
Neptune 4500 3.65
Sometimes, as shown above, the scale on a logarithmic num ber line will show the log values, but more commonly th e original
values are listed as powers of 10, as shown below.
Estimate the value of point on the log scale above
The point appears to be half way between -2 and -1 in log value, so if is the value of this point,
Rewriting in exponential form,
Place the number 6000 on a logarithmic scale.
Solution
Since, this point would belong on the log scale about here:Example
Example

2.8.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880
Plot the data in the table below on a logarithmic sca le (From http://www.epd.gov.hk/epd/noise_educ...1/intro_5.html, retrieved
Oct 2, 2010).
Source of Sound/Noise Approximate Sound Pressure in Pa (micro Pascals)
Launching of the Space Shuttle 2000,000,000
Full Symphony Orchestra 2000,000
Diesel Freight Train at High Speed at 25 m 200,000
Normal Conversation 20,000
Soft Whispering at 2 m in Library 2,000
Unoccupied Broadcast Studio 200
Softest Sound a human can hear 20
Answer
Notice that on the log scale above Example 8, the vis ual distance on the scale between points and and b etween and is the
same. When looking at the values these points corresp ond to, notice is ten times the value of, and is ten times the value of.
A visual difference between points corresponds to a relat ive (ratio) change between the corresponding values.
Logarithms are useful for showing these relative chang es. For example, comparing $1,000,000 to $10,000, the fir st is 100 times
larger than the second.
Likewise, comparing $1000 to $10, the first is 100 times larger than the second.
When one quantity is roughly ten times larger than another, we say it is one order of magnitude larger. In both cases described
above, the first number was two orders of magnitude larger th an the second.
Notice that the order of magnitude can be found as t he common logarithm of the ratio of the quantities. On the log scale above, B is
one order of magnitude larger than, and is one order o f magnitude larger than.Exercise

2.8.5.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880Given two values and, to determine how many orders of magnitude is greater than,
Difference in orders of magnitude = log(
On the log scale above Example 8, how many orders of magn itude larger is than?
Solution
The value corresponds to
The value corresponds to
The relative change is. The log of this value is 3.
is three orders of magnitude greater than, which ca n be seen on the log scale by the visual difference b etween the points on
the scale.
Using the table from Try it Now #5, what is the differenc e of order of magnitude between the softest sound a h uman can hear
and the launching of the space shuttle?
Answer
. The sound pressure in Pa created by launching the s pace shuttle is 8 orders of magnitude greater than the
sound pressure in Pa created by the softest sound a human ear can hear.
Earthquakes
An example of a logarithmic scale is the Moment Magni tude Scale (MMS) used for earthquakes. This scale is commo nly and
mistakenly called the Richter Scale, which was a very similar s cale succeeded by the MMS.
For an earthquake with seismic moment, a measurement of earth movement, the MMS value, or magnitude of the
earthquake, is
Where is a baseline measure for the seismic moment.
If one earthquake has a MMS magnitude of 6.0, and anoth er has a magnitude of 8.0, how much more powerful (in t erms of
earth movement) is the second earthquake?
Solution
Since the first earthquake has magnitude 6.0, we can f ind the amount of earth movement for that quake, whi ch we'll denote.
The value of is not particularity relevant, so we will no t replace it with its value.Definition: Orders of magnitude
Example
Exercise
Moment Magnitude Scale
Example

2.8.5.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880This tells us the first earthquake has about times more earth movement than the baseline measure.
Doing the same with the second earthquake,, with a magnitude of 8.0,
Comparing the earth movement of the second earthquake to the first,
The second value's earth movement is 1000 times as lar ge as the first earthquake.
One earthquake has magnitude of 3.0. If a second eart hquake has twice as much earth movement as the first earthquake, find
the magnitude of the second quake.
Solution
Since the first quake has magnitude 3.0,
Solving for,Example

2.8.5.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83880Since the second earthquake has twice as much earth mov ement, for the second quake,
Finding the magnitude,
The second earthquake with twice as much earth movement will have a magnitude of about 3.2.
In fact, using log properties, we could show that whene ver the earth movement doubles, the magnitude will incr ease by about
0.201:
This illustrates the most important feature of a log scale: that the quantity being considered will to t he scale value,
and vice versa.
Important Topics of this Section
Radioactive decay
Half life
Doubling time
Newton’s law of cooling
Logarithmic Scales
Orders of Magnitude
Moment Magnitude scale
This page titled 2.8.5: Exponential and Logarithmic Models is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by David Lippman & Melonie Rasmussen (The OpenTextBookStore) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the
LibreTexts platform.
4.6: Exponential and Logarithmic Models by David Lippman & Melonie Rasmussen is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
http://www.opentextbookstore.com/details.php?id=30.

2.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83905SECTION OVERVIEW
2.9: Vectors
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
2.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
2.9.5: Algebra of Vectors
2.9.6: Products of Vectors
2.9.7: Further Topics
2.9.E: Practice
2.9: Vectors is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.9.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838972.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
Convert angle measures between degrees and radians.
Recognize the triangular and circular definitions of the basic trigonometric functions.
Write the basic trigonometric identities.
Identify the graphs and periods of the trigonometric funct ions.
Describe the shift of a sine or cosine graph from the eq uation of the function.
Trigonometric functions are used to model many phen omena, including sound waves, vibrations of strings, alte rnating electrical
current, and the motion of pendulums. In fact, almost any repetitive, or cyclical, motion can be modeled by some combination of
trigonometric functions. In this section, we define the six basic trigonometric functions and look at som e of the main identities
involving these functions.
Radian Measure
To use trigonometric functions, we first must understa nd how to measure the angles. Although we can use both ra dians and
degrees, radians are a more natural measurement because they are rel ated directly to the unit circle, a circle with radi us 1.
Moreove, radian is the SI unit for angles. The radian m easure of an angle is defined as follows. Given an angl e, let be the length
of the corresponding arc on the unit circle (Figure). We say the angle corresponding to the arc of length 1 has radian measure
1.
Figure: The radian measure of an angle is the arc le ngth of the associated arc on the unit circle.
Since an angle of corresponds to the circumference o f a circle, or an arc of length, we conclude that a n angle with a degree
measure of has a radian measure of. Similarly, we see that is equivalent to radians. Table shows the
relationship between common degree and radian values.
Table: Common Angles Expressed in Degrees and Radians
Degrees Radians Degrees Radians
0 0 120
30 135
45 150
60 180
a. Express using radians.
b. Express rad using degrees.Learning Objectives
Converting between Radians and Degrees

2.9.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897Solution
Use the fact that ° is equivalent to radians as a conversion factor (Table):
a.
b. rad = ⋅ = °
a. Express using radians.
b. Express rad using degrees.
Hint
radians is equal to 180°
Answer
a.
b. 330°
The Six Basic Trigonometric Functions
Trigonometric functions allow us to use angle measure s, in radians or degrees, to find the coordinates of a point on any circle—not
only on a unit circle—or to find an angle given a p oint on a circle. They also define the relationship between the sides and angles of
a triangle.
To define the trigonometric functions, first consider the unit circle centered at the origin and a point on the unit circle.
Let be an angle with an initial side that lies alon g the positive -axis and with a terminal side that is t he line segment. An
angle in this position is said to be in standard posit ion (Figure). We can then define the values of the si x trigonometric
functions for in terms of the coordinates and.
Figure: The angle is in standard position. The values of the trigonometric functions for are defined in t erms of the
coordinates and.Exercise

2.9.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897Let be a point on the unit circle centered at the origin. Let be an angle with an initial side along the positive axis and a terminal side given by the line segment. The trigonometric functions are then defined as
If and are undefined. If, then and are undefined.
We can see that for a point on a circle of radius with a corresponding angle, the coordinates and satisfy
and
The values of the other trigonometric functions can be expressed in terms of, and (Figure).
Figure: For a point on a circle of radius, the coor dinates and satisfy and.
Table shows the values of sine and cosine at the majo r angles in the first quadrant. From this table, we c an determine the
values of sine and cosine at the corresponding angles in the other quadrants. The values of the other trigo nometric functions are
calculated easily from the values of and
Table: Values of and at Major Angles in the First Quadrant
0 0 1
1 0Definition: Trigonometric functions

2.9.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897Evaluate each of the following expressions.
a.
b.
c.
Solution:
a) On the unit circle, the angle corresponds to the po int. Therefore,
b) An angle corresponds to a revolution in the negative di rection, as shown. Therefore,
c) An angle = = +. Therefore, this angle corresponds to more than one revolution, as shown. Knowing the fact t hat an
angle of corresponds to the point, we can conclude thatExample: Evaluating Trigonometric Functions

2.9.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897
Evaluate and.
Hint
Look at angles on the unit circle.
Answer
As mentioned earlier, the ratios of the side lengths of a right triangle can be expressed in terms of the t rigonometric functions
evaluated at either of the acute angles of the trian gle. Let be one of the acute angles. Let be the l ength of the adjacent leg, be
the length of the opposite leg, and be the length o f the hypotenuse. By inscribing the triangle into a circle of radius, as shown
in Figure, we see that, and satisfy the following relation ships with:
Figure: By inscribing a right triangle in a circle, we can express the ratios of the side lengths in terms of the trigonometric
functions evaluated at.
A wooden ramp is to be built with one end on the groun d and the other end at the top of a short staircase. I f the top of the
staircase is ft from the ground and the angle betwe en the ground and the ramp is to be °, how long does the ramp need toExercise
Example: Constructing a Wooden Ramp

2.9.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897be?
Solution
Let denote the length of the ramp. In the following image, we see that needs to satisfy the equation. Solving
this equation for, we see that ≈ ft.
A house painter wants to lean a -ft ladder against a house. If the angle between the base of the ladder a nd the ground is to be
°, how far from the house should she place the base of the lad der?
Hint
Draw a right triangle with hypotenuse 20.
Answer
10 ft
Trigonometric Identities
A trigonometric identity is an equation involving trigonometric functions t hat is true for all angles for which the functions a re
defined. We can use the identities to help us solve or si mplify equations. The main trigonometric identities are listed next.
Reciprocal identities
Pythagorean identities
Addition and subtraction formulas
Double-angle formulasExercise
Trigonometric Identities

2.9.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897For each of the following equations, use a trigonometric identity to find all solutions.
a.
b.
Solution
a) Using the double-angle formula for, we see that is a so lution of
if and only if
which is true if and only if
To solve this equation, it is important to note that we need to factor the left-hand side and not divide both sides of the
equation by. The problem with dividing by is that it is possible that is zero. In fact, if we did divi de both
sides of the equation by, we would miss some of the so lutions of the original equation. Factoring the left- hand side
of the equation, we see that is a solution of this equatio n if and only if
Since when
and when
we conclude that the set of solutions to this equation i s
and
b) Using the double-angle formula for and the reciproca l identity for, the equation can be written as
To solve this equation, we multiply both sides by to eliminate the denominator, and say that if satisfi es this
equation, then satisfies the equation
However, we need to be a little careful here. Even if s atisfies this new equation, it may not satisfy the orig inal equation
because, to satisfy the original equation, we would need to be able to divide both sides of the equation by. However,
if, we cannot divide both sides of the equation by. Therefore, it is possible that we may arrive at ex traneousExample: Solving Trigonometric Equations

2.9.1.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897solutions. So, at the end, it is important to check fo r extraneous solutions. Returning to the equation, i t is important that
we factor out of both terms on the left-hand side i nstead of dividing both sides of the equation by. Fa ctoring the
left-hand side of the equation, we can rewrite this equat ion as
Therefore, the solutions are given by the angles such that. The solutions of the first equation are
The solutions of the second equation are After chec king for
extraneous solutions, the set of solutions to the equatio n is
and
with
Find all solutions to the equation
Hint
Use the double-angle formula for cosine (Equation).
Answer
for.
Prove the trigonometric identity
Solution:
We start with the Pythagorean identity (Equation)
Dividing both sides of this equation by we obtain
Since and, we conclude that
Prove the trigonometric identity
Answer
Divide both sides of the identity by.Exercise
Example: Proving a Trigonometric Identity
Exercise

2.9.1.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897Graphs and Periods of the Trigonometric Functions
We have seen that as we travel around the unit circl e, the values of the trigonometric functions repeat. We can see this pattern in the
graphs of the functions. Let be a point on the uni t circle and let θ be the corresponding angle. Since the angle and
correspond to the same point, the values of the tr igonometric functions at and at are the same. Conseq uently, the
trigonometric functions are periodic functions. The period of a function is defined to be the smal lest positive value p such that
for all values in the domain of. The sine, cosine, secant, and cosecant functions have a period of. Since the
tangent and cotangent functions repeat on an interval of length, their period is (Figure).
Figure: The six trigonometric functions are periodic.
Just as with algebraic functions, we can apply transform ations to trigonometric functions. In particular, consi der the following
function:
In Figure, the constant causes a horizontal or phase shift. The factor changes the period. This transfor med sine function
will have a period. The factor results in a vertic al stretch by a factor of. We say is the “amplitude of.” The
constant causes a vertical shift.

2.9.1.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897
Figure: A graph of a general sine function.
Notice in Figure that the graph of is the graph of shifted to the left units. Therefore, we can write
Similarly, we can view the graph of as the graph of sh ifted right units, and state that
A shifted sine curve arises naturally when graphing the number of hours of daylight in a given location as a function of the day of
the year. For example, suppose a city reports that June 2 1 is the longest day of the year with 15.7 hours and December 21 is the
shortest day of the year with 8.3 hours. It can be shown that the function
is a model for the number of hours of daylight as a func tion of day of the year (Figure).
Figure: The hours of daylight as a function of day of the year can be modeled by a shifted sine curve.
Sketch a graph of
Solution
This graph is a phase shift of to the right by uni ts, followed by a horizontal compression by a factor of 2, a
vertical stretch by a factor of 3, and then a vertical shi ft by 1 unit. The period of is.Example: Sketching the Graph of a Transformed Sine Curve

2.9.1.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897
Describe the relationship between the graph of and the graph of.
Hint
The graph of can be sketched using the graph of and a s equence of three transformations.
Answer
To graph, the graph of needs to be compressed hor izontally by a factor of 4, then stretched
vertically by a factor of 3, then shifted down 5 units. The function will have a period of and an amplitude of 3.
Key Concepts
Radian measure is defined such that the angle associate d with the arc of length 1 on the unit circle has radian mea sure 1. An
angle with a degree measure of ° has a radian measure of rad.
For acute angles,the values of the trigonometric functio ns are defined as ratios of two sides of a right triangle in wh ich one of
the acute angles is.
For a general angle, let be a point on a circle of radi us corresponding to this angle. The trigonometric f unctions can
be written as ratios involving,, and.
The trigonometric functions are periodic. The sine, c osine, secant, and cosecant functions have period. The tangent and
cotangent functions have period.
Glossary
periodic function
a function is periodic if it has a repeating pattern as the values of move from left to right
radians
for a circular arc of length on a circle of radius 1, th e radian measure of the associated angle is
trigonometric functions
functions of an angle defined as ratios of the lengths of the sides of a right triangle
trigonometric identity
an equation involving trigonometric functions that is true for all angles for which the functions in the equa tion are definedExercise

2.9.1.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897Contributors and Attributions
Template:ContribOpenStaxCalc
Pythagorean Identities
Double-Angle Identities
Half-Angle Identities
Angle Sum and Difference Identities
Angle Reflections and Shifts
Graphs of the Trigonometric Functions
Figure_APP_005.jpg" style="width: 975px; height: 513px; " width="975px" height="513px"
src=" https://math.libretexts.org/@api/dek...re_APP_005.jpg " />

2.9.1.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897
Figure_APP_007n.jpg" style="width: 975px; height: 444px;" width="975px" height="444px"
src=" https://math.libretexts.org/@api/dek...e_APP_007n.jpg " />

2.9.1.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897Trigonometric Identities
Pythagorean Identities
Even-Odd Identities
Cofunction Identities
Fundamental Identities
Sum and Difference Identities
Double-Angle Formulas
Half-Angle Formulas
Reduction Formulas

2.9.1.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83897Product-to-Sum Formulas
Sum-to-Product Formulas
Law of Sines
Law of Cosines
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
1.3: Trigonometric Functions by Edwin “Jed” Herman, Gilbert Strang is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-1.
14.3.2: Trigonometric Functions is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0.
14.3.3: Trigonometric Identities is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0.
14: Appendix by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/precalculus.

2.9.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838982.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
Use right triangles to evaluate trigonometric functions.
Find function values for 30°(),45°(),and 60°().
Use equal cofunctions of complementary angles.
Use the definitions of trigonometric functions of any a ngle.
Use right-triangle trigonometry to solve applied probl ems.
Mt. Everest, which straddles the border between China an d Nepal, is the tallest mountain in the world. Measuring its height is no
easy task and, in fact, the actual measurement has bee n a source of controversy for hundreds of years. The m easurement process
involves the use of triangles and a branch of mathema tics known as trigonometry. In this section, we will defin e a new group of
functions known as trigonometric functions, and find out how they can be used to measure heights, such as those of the tallest
mountains.
We can defined the sine and cosine of an angle in ter ms of the coordinates of a point on the unit circle intersected by the terminal
side of the angle:
In this section, however, we will see another way to define t rigonometric functions using properties of right triangles.
Using Right Triangles to Evaluate Trigonometric Functions
We can used a unit circle to define the trigonometric functions. In this section, we use definitions so that we can app ly them to right
triangles. The value of the sine or cosine function of is its value at radians. First, we need to create our right triangle. Figure
shows a point on a unit circle of radius 1. If we dro p a vertical line segment from the point to the x-axis, we have a
right triangle whose vertical side has length and wh ose horizontal side has length. We can use this righ t triangle to redefine sine,
cosine, and the other trigonometric functions as ratios of t he sides of a right triangle.
Figure: Graph of quarter circle with radius of 1. In scribed triangle with an angle of t. Point of (x,y) i s at intersection of
terminal side of angle and edge of circle.
We know
Likewise, we know
These ratios still apply to the sides of a right trian gle when no unit circle is involved and when the tria ngle is not in standard
position and is not being graphed using coordinates. To be able to use these ratios freely, we will give t he sides more general
names: Instead of,we will call the side between the gi ven angle and the right angle the adjacent side to angle. (Adjacent means
“next to.”) Instead of,we will call the side most dista nt from the given angle the opposite side from angle. And instead of,we
will call the side of a right triangle opposite the righ t angle the hypotenuse. These sides are labeled in Figure.Learning Objectives

2.9.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83898
Figure: The sides of a right triangle in relation to angle.
Understanding Right Triangle Relationships
Given a right triangle with an acute angle of,
A common mnemonic for remembering these relationshi ps is SohCahToa, formed from the first letters of “ Sine is opposite over
hypotenuse, Cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, Tangent is opposite over adjacent.”
1. Find the sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypoten use.
2. Find the cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse.
3. Find the tangent is the ratio of the opposite side to the adj acent side.
Given the triangle shown in Figure, find the value of.
Figure: A right triangle with side lengths of 8, 15, and 17. Angle alpha also labeled which is opposite to the side labeled
8.
Solution
The side adjacent to the angle is 15, and the hypotenuse of t he triangle is 17, so via Equation:
Given the triangle shown in Figure, find the value of.1
how to: Given the side lengths of a right triangle and one of the acute angles, find the sine, cosine, and
tangent of that angle
Example: Evaluating a Trigonometric Function of a Right Triangle
Exercise

2.9.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83898
Figure: A right triangle with sides of 7, 24, and 25. Also labeled is angle t which is opposite the side labe led 7.
Answer
Relating Angles and Their Functions
When working with right triangles, the same rules apply regardless of the orientation of the triangle. In fa ct, we can evaluate the six
trigonometric functions of either of the two acute an gles in the triangle in Figure. The side opposite on e acute angle is the
side adjacent to the other acute angle, and vice versa.
Figure: The side adjacent to one angle is opposite the other.
We will be asked to find all six trigonometric funct ions for a given angle in a triangle. Our strategy is to find the sine, cosine, and
tangent of the angles first. Then, we can find the oth er trigonometric functions easily because we know that the reciprocal of sine is
cosecant, the reciprocal of cosine is secant, and the rec iprocal of tangent is cotangent.
1. If needed, draw the right triangle and label the angle provided.
2. Identify the angle, the adjacent side, the side opposite the angle, and the hypotenuse of the right triangle.
3. Find the required function:
sine as the ratio of the opposite side to the hypotenuse
cosine as the ratio of the adjacent side to the hypotenuse
tangent as the ratio of the opposite side to the adjacent side
secant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the adjacent sid e
cosecant as the ratio of the hypotenuse to the opposite s ide
cotangent as the ratio of the adjacent side to the opposite s ide
Using the triangle shown in Figure, evaluate and.
Figure: Right triangle with sides of 3, 4, and 5. Ang le alpha is also labeled which is opposite the side labe led 4.
Solutionhow to: Given the side lengths of a right triangle, evaluate the six trigonometric functions of one of the acute
angles
Example: Evaluating Trigonometric Functions of Angles Not in Standard Position

2.9.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83898Using the triangle shown in Figure, evaluate and.
Figure: Right triangle with sides 33, 56, and 65. Ang le t is also labeled which is opposite to the side label ed 33.
Answer
Finding Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths
Here we use unit circle relationships to evaluate trian gles that contain special angles. We do this because when we evaluate the
special angles in trigonometric functions, they have relatively friendly values, values that contain ei ther no or just one square root
in the ratio. Therefore, these are the angles often used in math and science problems. We will use multiple s of and,
however, remember that when dealing with right triangles, we a re limited to angles between.
Suppose we have a triangle, which can also be described as a triangle. The sides have lengths in the relatio n
The sides of a triangle, which can also be described as a triangle, have lengths in the relation
These relations are shown in Figure.Exercise

2.9.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83898
Figure: Side lengths of special triangles
We can then use the ratios of the side lengths to eval uate trigonometric functions of special angles.
1. Use the side lengths shown in Figure for the special an gle you wish to evaluate.
2. Use the ratio of side lengths appropriate to the functio n you wish to evaluate.
Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of, us ing side lengths.
Solution
Find the exact value of the trigonometric functions of us ing side lengths.
Answer
Using Equal Co-function of Complements
If we look more closely at the relationship between t he sine and cosine of the special angles relative to the unit circle, we will
notice a pattern. In a right triangle with angles of and, we see that the sine of, namely, is also the cosine of, while the
sine of, namely is also the cosine of (Figure).Given trigonometric functions of a special angle, evaluate using side lengths.
Example: Evaluating Trigonometric Functions of Special Angles Using Side Lengths
Exercise

2.9.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83898
Figure: The sine of equals the cosine of and vice ve rsa.
This result should not be surprising because, as we see f rom Figure, the side opposite the angle of is also t he side adjacent
to, so and are exactly the same ratio of the same t wo sides, and Similarly, and are also the
same ratio using the same two sides, and.
The interrelationship between the sines and cosines o f and also holds for the two acute angles in any r ight triangle, since in
every case, the ratio of the same two sides would const itute the sine of one angle and the cosine of the o ther. Since the three angles
of a triangle add to π, π,and the right angle is, t he remaining two angles must also add up to. That me ans that a right triangle
can be formed with any two angles that add to —in oth er words, any two complementary angles. So we may state a cofunction
identity: If any two angles are complementary, the sine of on e is the cosine of the other, and vice versa. This i dentity is illustrated in
Figure.
Figure: Co-function identity of sine and cosine of co mplementary angles
Using this identity, we can state without calculating, fo r instance, that the sine of equals the cosine of, and that the sine of
equals the cosine of. We can also state that if, for a certain angle then as well.
The co-function identities in radians are listed in Table.
Table CO-FUNCTION IDENTITIES

2.9.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838981. To find the sine of the complementary angle, find the cos ine of the original angle.
2. To find the cosine of the complementary angle, find the sine of the original angle.
If find.
Solution
According to the cofunction identities for sine and cos ine,
So
If find
Solution
Using Trigonometric Functions
In previous examples, we evaluated the sine and cosine in triangles where we knew all three sides. But the re al power of righttriangle trigonometry emerges when we look at triangles in which we know an angle but do not know all the sides.
1. For each side, select the trigonometric function that has the unknown side as either the numerator or the denomi nator. The
known side will in turn be the denominator or the numerat or.
2. Write an equation setting the function value of the kno wn angle equal to the ratio of the corresponding sides.
3. Using the value of the trigonometric function and the k nown side length, solve for the missing side length.
Find the unknown sides of the triangle in Figure.
Figure: A right triangle with sides a, c, and 7. Angl e of 30 degrees is also labeled which is opposite the sid e labeled 7.how to: Given the sine and cosine of an angle, find the sine or cosine of its complement.
Example: Using Cofunction Identities
Exercise
how to: Given a right triangle, the length of one side, and the measure of one acute angle, find the remaining
sides
Example: Finding Missing Side Lengths Using Trigonometric Ratios

2.9.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83898Solution
We know the angle and the opposite side, so we can use the ta ngent to find the adjacent side.
We rearrange to solve for.
We can use the sine to find the hypotenuse.
Again, we rearrange to solve for.
A right triangle has one angle of and a hypotenuse of 20. Find the unknown sides and angle of the triangle.
Answer
missing angle is
Using Right Triangle Trigonometry to Solve Applied Problems
Right-triangle trigonometry has many practical appli cations. For example, the ability to compute the len gths of sides of a triangle
makes it possible to find the height of a tall obje ct without climbing to the top or having to extend a tape measure along its height.
We do so by measuring a distance from the base of th e object to a point on the ground some distance away, where we can look up
to the top of the tall object at an angle. The angle of elevation of an object above an observer relative to the obser ver is the angle
between the horizontal and the line from the object to the observer's eye. The right triangle this positi on creates has sides that
represent the unknown height, the measured distance f rom the base, and the angled line of sight from the ground to the top of the
object. Knowing the measured distance to the base of th e object and the angle of the line of sight, we can use trigonometric
functions to calculate the unknown height. Similarly, we can form a triangle from the top of a tall object by looking downward. The
angle of depression of an object below an observer relative to the obse rver is the angle between the horizontal and the lin e from
the object to the observer's eye. See Figure.
Figure: Diagram of a radio tower with line segments e xtending from the top and base of the tower to a poi nt on the ground
some distance away. The two lines and the tower form a right triangle. The angle near the top of the towe r is the angle of
depression. The angle on the ground at a distance from the tower is the angle of elevation.Exercise:

2.9.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838981. Make a sketch of the problem situation to keep track of k nown and unknown information.
2. Lay out a measured distance from the base of the obj ect to a point where the top of the object is clearly visible.
3. At the other end of the measured distance, look up to the t op of the object. Measure the angle the line of sight makes wi th
the horizontal.
4. Write an equation relating the unknown height, the measur ed distance, and the tangent of the angle of the line of sight.
5. Solve the equation for the unknown height.
To find the height of a tree, a person walks to a poin t 30 feet from the base of the tree. She measures an angle of 57° 57°
between a line of sight to the top of the tree and the gro und, as shown in Figure. Find the height of the tree.
Figure: A tree with angle of 57 degrees from vantage point. Vantage point is 30 feet from tree.
Solution
We know that the angle of elevation is and the adjacent side is 30 ft long. The opposite side is the unknown heigh t.
The trigonometric function relating the side opposit e to an angle and the side adjacent to the angle is the tangent. So we will
state our information in terms of the tangent of, lett ing be the unknown height.
The tree is approximately 46 feet tall.
How long a ladder is needed to reach a windowsill 50 fe et above the ground if the ladder rests against the building making an
angle of with the ground? Round to the nearest foot.
Answer
About 52 ft
Key Equations
Co-function Identitieshow to: Given a tall object, measure its height indirectly
Example: Measuring a Distance Indirectly2
Exercise:

2.9.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83898Glossary
adjacent side
in a right triangle, the side between a given angle and the r ight angle
angle of depression
the angle between the horizontal and the line from the ob ject to the observer’s eye, assuming the object is positio ned lower than
the observer
angle of elevation
the angle between the horizontal and the line from the ob ject to the observer’s eye, assuming the object is positio ned higher than
the observer
opposite side
in a right triangle, the side most distant from a given ang le
hypotenuse
the side of a right triangle opposite the right angle
Other ways are "Oscar Had A Heap Of Apples" though this way you need to know sine, cosine, and tangent are in tha t order, or
"Studying Our Homework Can Always Help To Obtain Achievement." Wolfram Math has some more alternatives to
SOHCAHTOA which might be preferred by some.
A famous example of measuring indirectly does not re quire trigonometry but is nevertheless an interesting tale. That tale is about
Thales and his technique to measure the pyramid with the shadow of a stick (or himself). There is some question if it really
happened or not, though the technique was actually correct regardless.
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
5.4: Right Triangle Trigonometry by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/precalculus.
14.3.1: Basic Trigonometry is licensed CC BY 4.0.1

2.9.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/838992.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
Vectors are essential to physics and engineering. Many fundamental physical quantities are vectors, includin g displacement,
velocity, force, and electric and magnetic vector fi elds. Scalar products of vectors define other fundam ental scalar physical
quantities, such as energy. Vector products of vecto rs define still other fundamental vector physical q uantities, such as torque and
angular momentum. In other words, vectors are a compone nt part of physics in much the same way as sentences a re a component
part of literature.
Figure: A signpost gives information about distances and directions to towns or to other locations relative to the location of
the signpost. Distance is a scalar quantity. Knowing the distance alone is not enough to get to the town; we must also know the
direction from the signpost to the town. The directio n, together with the distance, is a vector quantity c ommonly called the
displacement vector. A signpost, therefore, gives infor mation about displacement vectors from the signpost to towns. (credit:
modification of work by “studio tdes”/Flickr)
In introductory physics, vectors are Euclidean quanti ties that have geometric representations as arrows in one dimension (in a line),
in two dimensions (in a plane), or in three dimensions (in space). They can be added, subtracted, or multiplied.
Describe the difference between vector and scalar quantit ies.
Identify the magnitude and direction of a vector.
Explain the effect of multiplying a vector quantity by a scalar.
Describe how one-dimensional vector quantities are added or subtracted.
Explain the geometric construction for the addition or subtraction of vectors in a plane.
Distinguish between a vector equation and a scalar equation.
Many familiar physical quantities can be specified comp letely by giving a single number and the appropriat e unit. For example, “a
class period lasts 50 min” or “the gas tank in my car holds 65 L” or “the distance between two posts is 10 0 m.” A physical quantity
that can be specified completely in this manner is called a scalar quantity. Scalar is a synonym of “number.” Time, mass, distance,
length, volume, temperature, and energy are examples of scalar quantities.
Scalar quantities that have the same physical units c an be added or subtracted according to the usual rul es of algebra for numbers.
For example, a class ending 10 min earlier than 50 m in lasts 50 min − 10 min = 40 min. Similarly, a 60-ca l serving of corn
followed by a 200-cal serving of donuts gives 60 cal + 200 cal = 260 cal of energy. When we multiply a scal ar quantity by a
number, we obtain the same scalar quantity but with a larger (or smaller) value. For example, if yesterday’s breakfast had 200 cal of
energy and today’s breakfast has four times as much e nergy as it had yesterday, then today’s breakfast ha s 4(200 cal) = 800 cal of
energy. Two scalar quantities can also be multiplied o r divided by each other to form a derived scalar qu antity. For example, if a
train covers a distance of 100 km in 1.0 h, its speed is 100.0 km/1.0 h = 27.8 m/s, where the speed is a der ived scalar quantity
obtained by dividing distance by time.
Many physical quantities, however, cannot be described completely by just a single number of physical uni ts. For example, when
the U.S. Coast Guard dispatches a ship or a helicopter for a rescue mission, the rescue team must know not on ly the distance to the
distress signal, but also the direction from which the signal is coming so they can get to its origin as qu ickly as possible. PhysicalLearning Objectives

2.9.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899quantities specified completely by giving a number of units (magnitude) and a direction are called vector quantities. Examples of
vector quantities include displacement, velocity, pos ition, force, and torque. In the language of mathema tics, physical vector
quantities are represented by mathematical objects called vectors (Figure). We can add or subtract two vectors, and we can
multiply a vector by a scalar or by another vector, but we cannot divide by a vector. The operation of d ivision by a vector is not
defined.
Figure: We draw a vector from the initial point or origin (called the “tail” of a vector) to the end o r terminal point (called the
“head” of a vector), marked by an arrowhead. Magnit ude is the length of a vector and is always a positive scalar quantity. (credit:
modification of work by Cate Sevilla)
Let’s examine vector algebra using a graphical meth od to be aware of basic terms and to develop a qualit ative understanding. In
practice, however, when it comes to solving physics pro blems, we use analytical methods. Analytical methods are m ore simple
computationally and more accurate than graphical me thods. From now on, to distinguish between a vector and a scalar quantity, we
adopt the common convention that a letter with an ar row above it denotes a vector, and a letter without an arrow denotes a scalar.
For example, a distance of 2.0 km, which is a scalar qua ntity, is denoted by d = 2.0 km, whereas a displaceme nt of 2.0 km in some
direction, which is a vector quantity, is denoted by.
Suppose you tell a friend on a camping trip that you have discovered a terrific fishing hole 6 km from yo ur tent. It is unlikely your
friend would be able to find the hole easily unless you also communicate the direction in which it can be found with respect to your
campsite. You may say, for example, “Walk about 6 km northeast from my tent.” The key concept here is th at you have to give not
one but two pieces of information—namely, the distance or m agnitude (6 km) and the direction (northeast).
Displacement is a general term used to describe a ch ange in position, such as during a trip from the tent to the fishing hole.
Displacement is an example of a vector quantity. If you walk from the tent (location A) to the hole (locat ion B), as shown in Figure
, the vector, representing your displacement, is drawn as the arrow that originates at point A and e nds at point B. The
arrowhead marks the end of the vector. The direction of the displacement vector is the direction of th e arrow. The length of the
arrow represents the magnitude (or size) D of vector. Here, D = 6 km. Since the magni tude of a vector is its length, which is a
positive number, the magnitude is also indicated by placing the absolute value notation around the symbo l that denotes the vector;
so, we can write equivalently that D ≡ | |. To solve a v ector problem graphically, we need to draw the vector to scale. For
example, if we assume 1 unit of distance (1 km) is re presented in the drawing by a line segment of length u = 2 cm, then the total
displacement in this example is represented by a vecto r of length d = 6u = 6(2 cm) = 12 cm, as shown in Fig ure. Notice that
here, to avoid confusion, we used D = 6 km to denote t he magnitude of the actual displacement and d = 12 cm to denote the length
of its representation in the drawing.
Figure: The displacement vector from point A (the in itial position at the campsite) to point B (the final position at the fishing
hole) is indicated by an arrow with origin at point A and end at point B. The displacement is the same for any of the actual paths
(dashed curves) that may be taken between points A and B.

2.9.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899
Figure: A displacement of magnitude 6 km is drawn to scale as a vector of length 12 cm when the length of 2 cm
represents 1 unit of displacement (which in this case is 1 km).
Suppose your friend walks from the campsite at A to th e fishing pond at B and then walks back: from the fishi ng pond at B to the
campsite at A. The magnitude of the displacement vec tor from A to B is the same as the magnitude of the displacement vector
from B to A (it equals 6 km in both cases), so we can write =. However, vector is not equal to vector
because these two vectors have different directions: ≠. In Figure 2.3, vector would be represented by a v ector with
an origin at point B and an end at point A, indicatin g vector points to the southwest, which is exactly 18 0° opposite to the
direction of vector. We say that vector is antiparallel to vector and write =, where the minus sign
indicates the antiparallel direction.
Two vectors that have identical directions are said to be parallel vectors —meaning, they are parallel to each other. Two parallel
vectors and are equal, denoted by =, if and onl y if they have equal magnitudes | | = | |. Two vectors with directions
perpendicular to each other are said to be orthogonal vectors. These relations between vectors are illustrated in Figure.
Figure: Various relations between two vectors and. (a) ≠ because A ≠ B. (b) ≠ because they are not p arallel
and A ≠ B. (c) ≠ because they have different dire ctions (even though | | = | | = A). (d) = becau se they are parallel
and have identical magnitudes A = B. (e) ≠ because they have different directions (are not parallel); h ere, their directions differ
by 90° —meaning, they are orthogonal.
Two motorboats named Alice and Bob are moving on a lake. Given the information about th eir velocity vectors in each of the
following situations, indicate whether their velocity vect ors are equal or otherwise.
a. Alice moves north at 6 knots and Bob moves west at 6 knots.
b. Alice moves west at 6 knots and Bob moves west at 3 knots.
c. Alice moves northeast at 6 knots and Bob moves south at 3 knots.
d. Alice moves northeast at 6 knots and Bob moves southwest at 6 knots.
e. Alice moves northeast at 2 knots and Bob moves closer to the shore northeast at 2 knots.
2.9.3.1 Algebra of Vectors in One Dimension
Vectors can be multiplied by scalars, added to other vectors, or subtracted from other vectors. We can illustrate these vector
concepts using an example of the fishing trip seen in Figure.Exercise 2.1

2.9.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899
Figure: Displacement vectors for a fishing trip. (a) St opping to rest at point C while walking from camp (p oint A) to the
pond (point B). (b) Going back for the dropped tack le box (point D). (c) Finishing up at the fishing pond.
Suppose your friend departs from point A (the campsite) and walks in the direction to point B (the fishing pond), but, along the
way, stops to rest at some point C located three-quarte rs of the distance between A and B, beginning from po int A (Figure).
What is his displacement vector when he reaches poi nt C? We know that if he walks all the way to B, his di splacement vector
relative to A is, which has magnitude D = 6 km and a direction of northeast. If he walks only a 0.75 fra ction of the total
distance, maintaining the northeasterly direction, a t point C he must be 0.75 D = 4.5 km away from the cam psite at A. So, his
displacement vector at the rest point C has magnitu de D = 4.5 km = 0.75 D and is parallel to the displa cement vector. All
of this can be stated succinctly in the form of the fo llowing vector equation:
In a vector equation, both sides of the equation are vectors. The previous equation is an example of a ve ctor multiplied by a
positive scalar (number) = 0.75. The result,, of su ch a multiplication is a new vector with a direction p arallel to the direction
of the original vector. In general, when a vector i s multiplied by a positive scalar, the result is a n ew vector that is
parallel to:
The magnitude | | of this new vector is obtained by mu ltiplying the magnitude | | of the original vector, a s expressed by the scalar
equation:
In a scalar equation, both sides of the equation are numbers. Equation is a scalar equation because the magnitudes of vectors
are scalar quantities (and positive numbers). If th e scalar is negative in the vector equation Equation, then the magnitud e |
| of the new vector is still given by Equation, but the direction of the new vector is antiparallel to the direction of.
These principles are illustrated in Figure by two exa mples where the length of vector is 1.5 units. When = 2, the new
vector = 2 has length B = 2A = 3.0 units (twice as long as the original vector) and is parallel to the original vector. When =
−2, the new vector = −2 has length C = |−2| A = 3.0 units (twice as long as the original vector) and is antiparallel to the original
vector.
Figure: Algebra of vectors in one dimension. (a) Mult iplication by a scalar. (b) Addition of two vectors (is called the
resultant of vectors (and (). (c) Subtraction of two vectors (is the difference of vectors (and).
Now suppose your fishing buddy departs from point A (th e campsite), walking in the direction to point B (th e fishing hole), but he
realizes he lost his tackle box when he stopped to r est at point C (located three-quarters of the distan ce between A and B, beginningAB
AB
AC AB

2.9.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899from point A). So, he turns back and retraces his steps in the direction toward the campsite and finds the b ox lying on the path at
some point D only 1.2 km away from point C (see Figure). What is his displacement vector when he finds the box at
point D? What is his displacement vector from point D to the hole? We have already established that at r est point C his
displacement vector is = 0.75. Starting at point C, he walks southwest (toward the campsite), which means his new
displacement vector from point C to point D is anti parallel to. Its magnitude | | is D = 1.2 km = 0.2 D, so his
second displacement vector is = −0.2. His total di splacement relative to the campsite is the vector sum of the two
displacement vectors: vector (from the campsite to the rest point) and vector (from the rest point to the point where he
finds his box):
The vector sum of two (or more vectors is called the resultant vector or, for short, the resultant. When the vectors on the righthand-side of Equation are known, we can find the resultant as follows:
When your friend finally reaches the pond at B, his d isplacement vector from point A is the vector sum o f his displacement
vector from point A to point D and his displacement vector from point D to the fishing hole: = + (see
Figure). This means his displacement vector is the dif ference of two vectors:
Notice that a difference of two vectors is nothing mo re than a vector sum of two vectors because the second term in Equation
is vector (which is antiparallel to). When we substit ute Equation into Equation, we obtain the
second displacement vector:
This result means your friend walked D = 0.45 D = 0.45(6.0 km) = 2.7 km from the point where he finds his tac kle box to the
fishing hole.
When vectors and lie along a line (that is, in one dimension), such as in the camping example, their re sultant = + and
their difference = − both lie along the same dir ection. We can illustrate the addition or subtractio n of vectors by drawing the
corresponding vectors to scale in one dimension, as shown in Figure.
To illustrate the resultant when and are two parall el vectors, we draw them along one line by placing th e origin of one vector at
the end of the other vector in head-to-tail fashion (see Figure (\PageIndex{6b}\)). The magnitude of this resultant is the sum of their
magnitudes: R = A + B. The direction of the resultant is parallel to both vectors. When vector is antipar allel to vector, we draw
them along one line in either head-to-head fashion (Figure (\PageIndex{6c}\)) or tail-to-tail fashion. T he magnitude of the vector
difference, then, is the absolute value D = |A − B| of the difference of their magnitudes. The direction of the difference vector is
parallel to the direction of the longer vector.
In general, in one dimension—as well as in higher dim ensions, such as in a plane or in space—we can add an y number of vectors
and we can do so in any order because the addition of vect ors is commutative,
and associative,
Moreover, multiplication by a scalar is distributive:
We used the distributive property in Equation and Eq uation.
When adding many vectors in one dimension, it is conve nient to use the concept of a unit vector. A unit vector, which is denoted
by a letter symbol with a hat, such as, has a magnitu de of one and does not have any physical unit so th at | | ≡ u = 1. The onlyCD AB
DB AB

2.9.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899role of a unit vector is to specify direction. For exa mple, instead of saying vector has a magnitude of 6. 0 km and a direction of
northeast, we can introduce a unit vector that point s to the northeast and say succinctly that = (6.0 km). Then the
southwesterly direction is simply given by the unit vector. In this way, the displacement of 6.0 km in the southwesterly direction
is expressed by the vector
A long measuring stick rests against a wall in a phys ics laboratory with its 200-cm end at the floor. A la dybug lands on the 100cm mark and crawls randomly along the stick. It first walks 15 cm toward the floor, then it walks 56 cm toward the wall, then it
walks 3 cm toward the floor again. Then, after a brief stop, it continues for 25 cm toward the floor and then, again, it crawls up
19 cm toward the wall before coming to a complete res t (Figure). Find the vector of its total displacement and its final
resting position on the stick.
Strategy
If we choose the direction along the stick toward the floor as the direction of unit vector, then the d irection toward the floor is
and the direction toward the wall is. The ladybug makes a total of five displacements:
The total displacement is the resultant of all its d isplacement vectors.
Figure: Five displacements of the ladybug. Note that i n this schematic drawing, magnitudes of displacements ar e not
drawn to scale. (credit: modification of work by “Per sian Poet Gal”/Wikimedia Commons)
Solution
The resultant of all the displacement vectors is
In this calculation, we use the distributive law given b y Equation 2.2.9. The result reads that the total displacement vecto r
points away from the 100-cm mark (initial landing sit e) toward the end of the meter stick that touches the wall. The end that
touches the wall is marked 0 cm, so the final position o f the ladybug is at the (100 – 32) cm = 68-cm mark.Example: A Ladybug Walker

2.9.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899A cave diver enters a long underwater tunnel. When he r displacement with respect to the entry point is 20 m, she accidentally
drops her camera, but she doesn’t notice it missing un til she is some 6 m farther into the tunnel. She swims back 10 m but
cannot find the camera, so she decides to end the di ve. How far from the entry point is she? Taking the posi tive direction out of
the tunnel, what is her displacement vector relative to the entry point?
2.9.3.2 Algebra of Vectors in Two Dimensions
When vectors lie in a plane—that is, when they are in two dimensions—they can be multiplied by scalars, adde d to other vectors,
or subtracted from other vectors in accordance with the general laws expressed by Equation 2.2.1, Equation 2..2.2, Equation 2.2.7,
and Equation 2.2.8. However, the addition rule for two vectors in a plane becomes more complicated than the rule for vector
addition in one dimension. We have to use the laws of geometry to construct resultant vectors, followed by trigonometry to find
vector magnitudes and directions. This geometric ap proach is commonly used in navigation (Figure). In t his section, we
need to have at hand two rulers, a triangle, a protra ctor, a pencil, and an eraser for drawing vectors to s cale by geometric
constructions.
Figure: In navigation, the laws of geometry are used to draw resultant displacements on nautical maps.
For a geometric construction of the sum of two vectors in a plane, we follow the parallelogram rule. Suppose two vectors and
are at the arbitrary positions shown in Figure. Tran slate either one of them in parallel to the beginni ng of the other vector, so
that after the translation, both vectors have their origins at the same point. Now, at the end of vector we draw a line parallel to
vector and at the end of vector we draw a line para llel to vector (the dashed lines in Figure). In thi s way, we obtain a
parallelogram. From the origin of the two vectors we d raw a diagonal that is the resultant of the two vecto rs: = + (Figure
). The other diagonal of this parallelogram is the v ector difference of the two vectors = −, as shown in Figure.
Notice that the end of the difference vector is placed a t the end of vector.
Figure: The parallelogram rule for the addition of two vectors. Make the parallel translation of each ve ctor to a point where
their origins (marked by the dot) coincide and constr uct a parallelogram with two sides on the vectors and the other two sides
(indicated by dashed lines) parallel to the vectors. (a) Draw the resultant vector along the diagonal of the parallelogram from the
common point to the opposite corner. Length R of the resultant vector is not equal to the sum of the magni tudes of the two vectors.
(b) Draw the difference vector = − along the dia gonal connecting the ends of the vectors. Place the o rigin of vector at the
end of vector and the end (arrowhead) of vector a t the end of vector. Length D of the difference ve ctor is not equal to the
difference of magnitudes of the two vectors.
It follows from the parallelogram rule that neither the magnitude of the resultant vector nor the magni tude of the difference vector
can be expressed as a simple sum or difference of ma gnitudes A and B, because the length of a diagonal c annot be expressed as a
simple sum of side lengths. When using a geometric con struction to find magnitudes | | and | |, we have to us e trigonometry laws
for triangles, which may lead to complicated algebra. There are two ways to circumvent this algebraic compl exity. One way is toExercise 2.2

2.9.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899use the method of components, which we examine in the next section. The other way is to draw the vectors t o scale, as is done in
navigation, and read approximate vector lengths and angles (directions) from the graphs. In this section we examine the second
approach.
If we need to add three or more vectors, we repeat the parallelogram rule for the pairs of vectors until we find the resultant of all of
the resultants. For three vectors, for example, we first find the resultant of vector 1 and vector 2, and then we find the resultant of
this resultant and vector 3. The order in which we sele ct the pairs of vectors does not matter because the operation of vector
addition is commutative and associative (see Equation 2.2.7 and Equation 2.2.8). Before we state a general rule that follows from
repetitive applications of the parallelogram rule, let’ s look at the following example.
Suppose you plan a vacation trip in Florida. Departing from Tallahassee, the state capital, you plan to visi t your uncle Joe in
Jacksonville, see your cousin Vinny in Daytona Beach, s top for a little fun in Orlando, see a circus performan ce in Tampa, and visit
the University of Florida in Gainesville. Your route ma y be represented by five displacement vectors,,,, and, which are
indicated by the red vectors in Figure. What is your total displacement when you reach Gainesville? The to tal displacement
is the vector sum of all five displacement vectors, which may be found by using the parallelogram rule f our times. Alternatively,
recall that the displacement vector has its beginnin g at the initial position (Tallahassee) and its end at the final position
(Gainesville), so the total displacement vector can be drawn directly as an arrow connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville (see the
green vector in Figure). When we use the parallelogr am rule four times, the resultant we obtain is exactl y this green vector
connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville: = + + + +.
Figure: When we use the parallelogram rule four time s, we obtain the resultant vector = + + + +, wh ich is the
green vector connecting Tallahassee with Gainesville.
Drawing the resultant vector of many vectors can be g eneralized by using the following tail-to-head geomet ric construction.
Suppose we want to draw the resultant vector of four vec tors,,, and (Figure). We select any one of the v ectors as
the first vector and make a parallel translation of a second vector to a position where the origin (“tai l”) of the second vector
coincides with the end (“head”) of the first vector. Th en, we select a third vector and make a parallel trans lation of the third vector
to a position where the origin of the third vector c oincides with the end of the second vector. We repeat this procedure until all the
vectors are in a head-to-tail arrangement like the one shown in Figure. We draw the resultant vector by connecting the
origin (“tail”) of the first vector with the end (“he ad”) of the last vector. The end of the resultant ve ctor is at the end of the last
vector. Because the addition of vectors is associative and commutative, we obtain the same resultant vector regardless of which
vector we choose to be first, second, third, or fourth in th is construction.

2.9.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899
Figure: Tail-to-head method for drawing the resultan t vector = + + +. (a) Four vectors of different magnitudes
and directions. (b) Vectors in (a) are translated to n ew positions where the origin (“tail”) of one vector is at the end (“head”) of
another vector. The resultant vector is drawn from th e origin (“tail”) of the first vector to the end (“h ead”) of the last vector in this
arrangement.
The three displacement vectors,, and in Figure ar e specified by their magnitudes A = 10.0, B = 7.0, an d C = 8.0,
respectively, and by their respective direction angle s with the horizontal direction = 35°, = −110°, and = 30°. The
physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Ch oose a convenient scale and use a ruler and a protrac tor to find the
following vector sums: (a) = +, (b) = −, and (c) = − +.
Figure: Vectors used in Example and in the Exercise f eature that follows.
Strategy
In geometric construction, to find a vector means t o find its magnitude and its direction angle with the horizontal direction. The
strategy is to draw to scale the vectors that appear on the right-hand side of the equation and construc t the resultant vector.
Then, use a ruler and a protractor to read the magni tude of the resultant and the direction angle. For pa rts (a) and (b) we use the
parallelogram rule. For (c) we use the tail-to-head meth od.
Solution
For parts (a) and (b), we attach the origin of vector to the origin of vector, as shown in Figure, and co nstruct a
parallelogram. The shorter diagonal of this paralle logram is the sum +. The longer of the diagonals i s the difference −.
We use a ruler to measure the lengths of the diagona ls, and a protractor to measure the angles with the horizontal. For the
resultant, we obtain R = 5.8 cm and ≈ 0°. For the dif ference, we obtain D = 16.2 cm and = 49.3°, which are shown
in Figure.
Figure: Using the parallelogram rule to solve (a) (fi nding the resultant, red) and (b) (finding the diffe rence, blue).
For (c), we can start with vector −3 and draw the remai ning vectors tail-to-head as shown in Figure. In vecto r
addition, the order in which we draw the vectors is unimp ortant, but drawing the vectors to scale is very impor tant. Next, we
draw vector from the origin of the first vector to the end of the last vector and place the arrowhead a t the end of. We use aExample: Geometric Construction of the Resultant

2.9.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83899ruler to measure the length of, and find that its m agnitude is S = 36.9 cm. We use a protractor and find that its direction angle
is = 52.9°. This solution is shown in Figure.
Figure: Using the tail-to-head method to solve (c) (f inding vector, green).
Using the three displacement vectors,, and in Figure, choose a convenient scale, and use a ruler and a p rotractor
to find vector given by the vector equation = + −.
This page titled 2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.1: Prelude to Vectors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
2.2: Scalars and Vectors (Part 1) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.
2.3: Scalars and Vectors (Part 2) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.Exercise 2.3

2.9.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839002.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
Describe vectors in two and three dimensions in terms of their components, using unit vectors along the axes.
Distinguish between the vector components of a vector and the scalar components of a vector.
Explain how the magnitude of a vector is defined in terms of the components of a vector.
Identify the direction angle of a vector in a plane.
Explain the connection between polar coordinates and Ca rtesian coordinates in a plane.
Vectors are usually described in terms of their comp onents in a coordinate system. Even in everyday lif e we naturally invoke the
concept of orthogonal projections in a rectangular coordinate system. For example, if you ask someone for d irections to a particular
location, you will more likely be told to go 40 km east an d 30 km north than 50 km in the direction 37° north of east.
In a rectangular (Cartesian) xy-coordinate system in a plane, a point in a plane is described by a pair of coordinates (x, y). In a
similar fashion, a vector in a plane is described b y a pair of its vector coordinates. The x-coordinat e of vector is called its xcomponent and the y-coordinate of vector is called its y-component. The vector x-component is a vector denoted by. The
vector y-component is a vector denoted by. In the Cartesian system, the x and y vector components of a vector are the
orthogonal projections of this vector onto the - and -axes, respectively. In this way, following the parallelog ram rule for vector
addition, each vector on a Cartesian plane can be expresse d as the vector sum of its vector components:
As illustrated in Figure, vector is the diagonal of t he rectangle where the x-component is the side paral lel to the x-axis
and the y-component is the side parallel to the y-axis. Vector component is orthogonal to vector component.
Figure: Vector in a plane in the Cartesian coordina te system is the vector sum of its vector x- and y-compo nents. The xvector component is the orthogonal projection of ve ctor onto the x-axis. The y-vector component is the orthogonal
projection of vector onto the y-axis. The numbers A and A that multiply the unit vectors are the scalar c omponents of the
vector.
It is customary to denote the positive direction on the x-axis by the unit vector and the positive dir ection on the y-axis by the unit
vector. Unit vectors of the axes, and, define two or thogonal directions in the plane. As shown in Figure, the x- and ycomponents of a vector can now be written in terms of the u nit vectors of the axes:
The vectors and defined by Equation 2.11 are the v ector components of vector. The numbers A and A th at define the
vector components in Equation are the scalar components of vector. Combining Equation with Equation,
we obtain the component form of a vector:Learning Objectives
x y
x y

2.9.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83900If we know the coordinates of the origin point of a vector (where b stands for “beginning”) and the coor dinates e(x, y) of
the end point of a vector (where e stands for “end”), we can obtain the scalar components of a vector simpl y by subtracting the
origin point coordinates from the end point coordin ates:
A mouse pointer on the display monitor of a compute r at its initial position is at point (6.0 cm, 1.6 cm) with respect to the
lower left-side corner. If you move the pointer to an icon located at point (2.0 cm, 4.5 cm), what is the disp lacement vector of
the pointer?
Strategy
The origin of the xy-coordinate system is the lower le ft-side corner of the computer monitor. Therefore, t he unit vector on the
x-axis points horizontally to the right and the unit vector on the y-axis points vertically upward. The o rigin of the
displacement vector is located at point b(6.0, 1.6) and the end of the displacement vector is located at point e(2.0, 4.5).
Substitute the coordinates of these points into Equatio n to find the scalar components D and D of the disp lacement
vector. Finally, substitute the coordinates into Equa tion to write the displacement vector in the vector component
form.
Solution
We identify x = 6.0, x = 2.0, y = 1.6, and y = 4.5, wher e the physical unit is 1 cm. The scalar x- and y-compo nents of the
displacement vector are
The vector component form of the displacement vector is
This solution is shown in Figure.
Figure: The graph of the displacement vector. The ve ctor points from the origin point at to the end poi nt at.
Significance
Notice that the physical unit—here, 1 cm—can be plac ed either with each component immediately before the unit vector or
globally for both components, as in Equation. Often, the lat ter way is more convenient because it is simpler.
The vector x-component = −4.0 = 4.0() of the displa cement vector has the magnitude | | = |− 4.0|| | = 4.0 because the
magnitude of the unit vector is | | = 1. Notice, too, t hat the direction of the x-component is, which is an tiparallel to the
direction of the +x-axis; hence, the x-component vec tor points to the left, as shown in Figure. The scala r xcomponent of vector is D = −4.0. Similarly, the vect or y-component = of the displacement vector has m agnitude |
| = |2.9|| | = 2.9 because the magnitude of the unit vector is | | = 1. The direction of the y-component is, which is parallele e
Example: Displacement of a Mouse Pointer
x y
b e b e
x

2.9.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83900to the direction of the +y-axis. Therefore, the y-comp onent vector points up, as seen in Figure. The scala r ycomponent of vector is D = + 2.9. The displacement vect or is the resultant of its two vector components.
The vector component form of the displacement vector Equation tells us that the mouse pointer has been moved on the
monitor 4.0 cm to the left and 2.9 cm upward from its initial position.
A blue fly lands on a sheet of graph paper at a poi nt located 10.0 cm to the right of its left edge and 8.0 cm above its bottom
edge and walks slowly to a point located 5.0 cm from t he left edge and 5.0 cm from the bottom edge. Choose the rectangular
coordinate system with the origin at the lower left-si de corner of the paper and find the displacement ve ctor of the fly. Illustrate
your solution by graphing.
When we know the scalar components A and A of a vecto r, we can find its magnitude A and its direction ang le. The
direction angle —or direction, for short—is the angle the vector for ms with the positive direction on the x-axis. The ang le is
measured in the counterclockwise direction from the + x-axis to the vector (Figure). Because the lengths A, A, and A form
a right triangle, they are related by the Pythagorean the orem:
This equation works even if the scalar components of a vector are negative. The direction angle of a vec tor is defined via the
tangent function of angle in the triangle shown in Figure:
Figure: For vector, its magnitude A and its directio n angle are related to the magnitudes of its scalar c omponents
because A, A, and A form a right triangle.
When the vector lies either in the first quadrant o r in the fourth quadrant, where component A is positi ve (Figure), the angle
in Equation) is identical to the direction angle. For vectors in the fourth quadrant, angle is negat ive, which means that
for these vectors, direction angle is measured clockwi se from the positive x-axis. Similarly, for vectors i n the second quadrant,
angle is negative. When the vector lies in either th e second or third quadrant, where component A is neg ative, the direction angle
is = + 180° (Figure).y
Exercise 2.4
x y
x y
x y
x
x

2.9.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83900
Figure: Scalar components of a vector may be positive or negative. Vectors in the first quadrant (I) have both scalar
components positive and vectors in the third quadrant have both scalar components negative. For vectors in qu adrants II and III, the
direction angle of a vector is = + 180°.
You move a mouse pointer on the display monitor fro m its initial position at point (6.0 cm, 1.6 cm) to an icon located at point
(2.0 cm, 4.5 cm). What is the magnitude and direction of the displacement vector of the pointer?
Strategy
In Example, we found the displacement vector of th e mouse pointer (see Equation). We identify its scal ar
components D = −4.0 cm and D = + 2.9 cm and substitute into Equation and Equation to find the magnitude D
and direction, respectively.
Solution
The magnitude of vector is
The direction angle is
Vector lies in the second quadrant, so its direction angle is
If the displacement vector of a blue fly walking on a sheet of graph paper is cm, find its magnitude and
direction.
In many applications, the magnitudes and directions o f vector quantities are known and we need to find the resultant of many
vectors. For example, imagine 400 cars moving on the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco in a strong wind. Eac h car gives the
bridge a different push in various directions and we would like to know how big the resultant push can possib ly be. We have
already gained some experience with the geometric co nstruction of vector sums, so we know the task of finding the resultant by
drawing the vectors and measuring their lengths and an gles may become intractable pretty quickly, leading to huge errors. Worries
like this do not appear when we use analytical methods. The very first step in an analytical approach is to find vector components
when the direction and magnitude of a vector are known.Example: Magnitude and Direction of the Displacement Vector
x y
Exercise 2.5

2.9.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83900Let us return to the right triangle in Figure. The quotient of the adjacent side A to the hypotenuse A is the cosine function of
direction angle, A /A = cos, and the quotient of th e opposite side A to the hypotenuse A is the sine fu nction of, A /A = sin
. When magnitude A and direction are known, we can solve these relations for the scalar components:
When calculating vector components with Equation, c are must be taken with the angle. The direction angle of a vector is
the angle measured counterclockwise from the positive direction on the x-axis to the vect or. The clockwise measurement gives a
negative angle.
A rescue party for a missing child follows a search dog named Trooper. Trooper wanders a lot and makes many trial sniffs
along many different paths. Trooper eventually finds the child and the story has a happy ending, but his d isplacements on
various legs seem to be truly convoluted. On one of t he legs he walks 200.0 m southeast, then he runs nor th some 300.0 m. On
the third leg, he examines the scents carefully for 50.0 m in the direction 30° west of north. On the fourt h leg, Trooper goes
directly south for 80.0 m, picks up a fresh scent an d turns 23° west of south for 150.0 m. Find the scalar components of
Trooper’s displacement vectors and his displacement vec tors in vector component form for each leg.
Strategy
Let’s adopt a rectangular coordinate system with the positive x-axis in the direction of geographic east, with the positive ydirection pointed to geographic north. Explicitly, the unit vector of the x-axis points east and the u nit vector of the y-axis
points north. Trooper makes five legs, so there are fiv e displacement vectors. We start by identifying their magnitudes and
direction angles, then we use Equation to find the s calar components of the displacements and Equation for the
displacement vectors.
Solution
On the first leg, the displacement magnitude is L = 2 00.0 m and the direction is southeast. For direction an gle we can take
either 45° measured clockwise from the east direction or 45° + 270° measured counterclockwise from the east direction. With
the first choice, = −45°. With the second choice, = + 315 °. We can use either one of these two angles. The compone nts are
The displacement vector of the first leg is
On the second leg of Trooper’s wanderings, the magnit ude of the displacement is L = 300.0 m and the directi on is north. The
direction angle is = + 90°. We obtain the following resul ts:
On the third leg, the displacement magnitude is L = 50.0 m and the direction is 30° west of north. The dir ection angle
measured counterclockwise from the eastern direction is = 30° + 90° = + 120°. This gives the following answers:x
x y y
A
Example: Components of Displacement Vectors

2.9.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83900On the fourth leg of the excursion, the displacement m agnitude is L = 80.0 m and the direction is south. The direction angle
can be taken as either = −90° or \(\theta_{4} = + 270°. We obtain
On the last leg, the magnitude is L = 150.0 m and the angl e is = −23° + 270° = + 247° (23° west of south), which gives
If Trooper runs 20 m west before taking a rest, what is his dis placement vector?
2.9.4.1 Polar Coordinates
To describe locations of points or vectors in a plan e, we need two orthogonal directions. In the Cartesian coordinate system these
directions are given by unit vectors and along the x-axis and the y-axis, respectively. The Cartesian co ordinate system is very
convenient to use in describing displacements and ve locities of objects and the forces acting on them. However, it becomes
cumbersome when we need to describe the rotation of ob jects. When describing rotation, we usually work in th e polar coordinate
system.
In the polar coordinate system, the location of point P in a plane is given by two polar coordinates (Figure). The first polar
coordinate is the radial coordinate r, which is the distance of point P from the origin. T he second polar coordinate is an angle
that the radial vector makes with some chosen directi on, usually the positive x-direction. In polar coordin ates, angles are measured
in radians, or rads. The radial vector is attached at t he origin and points away from the origin to point P. T his radial direction is
described by a unit radial vector. The second unit vector is a vector orthogonal to the radial direct ion. The positive + direction
indicates how the angle changes in the counterclockwi se direction. In this way, a point P that has coordin ates (x, y) in the
rectangular system can be described equivalently in the polar coordinate system by the two polar coordina tes (r,). Equation 2.4.13
is valid for any vector, so we can use it to express th e x- and y-coordinates of vector. In this way, we obt ain the connection
between the polar coordinates and rectangular coordinates of point P:
Figure: Using polar coordinates, the unit vector def ines the positive direction along the radius r (radial direction) and,
orthogonal to it, the unit vector defines the positi ve direction of rotation by the angle.4
Exercise 2.6

2.9.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83900A treasure hunter finds one silver coin at a locati on 20.0 m away from a dry well in the direction 20° no rth of east and finds
one gold coin at a location 10.0 m away from the well in the direction 20° north of west. What are the pol ar and rectangular
coordinates of these findings with respect to the well?
Strategy
The well marks the origin of the coordinate system an d east is the +x-direction. We identify radial distanc es from the locations
to the origin, which are r = 20.0 m (for the silver co in) and r = 10.0 m (for the gold coin). To find the angular coordinates, we
convert 20° to radians: 20° = =. We use Equation to f ind the x- and y-coordinates of the coins.
Solution
The angular coordinate of the silver coin is =, whe reas the angular coordinate of the gold coin is = − =. Hence,
the polar coordinates of the silver coin are (r,) = (20.0 m,) and those of the gold coin are (r,) = (1 0.0 m, \frac{8 \pi}
{9}\)). We substitute these coordinates into Equatio n to obtain rectangular coordinates. For the gold co in, the
coordinates are
For the silver coin, the coordinates are
2.9.4.2 Vectors in Three Dimensions
To specify the location of a point in space, we need three coordinates (x, y, z), where coordinates x and y specify locations in a
plane, and coordinate z gives a vertical positions ab ove or below the plane. Three-dimensional space has thre e orthogonal
directions, so we need not two but three unit vectors t o define a three-dimensional coordinate system. In th e Cartesian coordinate
system, the first two unit vectors are the unit vector of the x-axis and the unit vector of the y-axis. The third unit vector is the
direction of the z-axis (Figure). The order in which the axes are labeled, which is the order in which the three unit vectors
appear, is important because it defines the orientat ion of the coordinate system. The order x-y-z, which is equivalent to the order -, defines the standard right-handed coordinate system (positive orientation).
Figure: Three unit vectors define a Cartesian system in three-dimensional space. The order in which these uni t vectors
appear defines the orientation of the coordinate syste m. The order shown here defines the right-handed orie ntation.
In three-dimensional space, vector has three vector components: the x-component = A, which is the part of vector along
the x-axis; the y-component = A, which is the part of along the y-axis; and the z-component = A, wh ich is the part of
the vector along the z-axis. A vector in three-dimensio nal space is the vector sum of its three vector components (Figure):Example: Polar Coordinates
S G
S G
x
y z

2.9.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83900If we know the coordinates of its origin b(x, y, z) an d of its end e(x y, z), its scalar components are obtai ned by taking their
differences: A and A are given by
and the z-component is given by
Magnitude A is obtained by generalizing Equation 2.4.8 to three dimensions:
This expression for the vector magnitude comes from a pplying the Pythagorean theorem twice. As seen in Figure, the
diagonal in the xy-plane has length and its square adds to the square A to give A. Note that when the z-c omponent is
zero, the vector lies entirely in the xy-plane and its desc ription is reduced to two dimensions.
Figure: A vector in three-dimensional space is the vec tor sum of its three vector components.
During a takeoff of IAI Heron (Figure), its position wit h respect to a control tower is 100 m above the groun d, 300 m to
the east, and 200 m to the north. One minute later, it s position is 250 m above the ground, 1200 m to the east, and 2100 m to
the north. What is the drone’s displacement vector wi th respect to the control tower? What is the magnitu de of its displacement
vector?
Figure: The drone IAI Heron in flight. (credit: SSgt Reynaldo Ramon, USAF)
Strategy
We take the origin of the Cartesian coordinate syste m as the control tower. The direction of the +x-axis i s given by unit vector
to the east, the direction of the +y-axis is given by unit vector to the north, and the direction of th e +z-axis is given by unit
vector, which points up from the ground. The drone’s first position is the origin (or, equivalently, the b eginning) of the
displacement vector and its second position is the end o f the displacement vector.
Solution
We identify b(300.0 m, 200.0 m, 100.0 m) and e(480.0 m, 370.0 m, 250.0m), and use Equation 2.4.4 and Equation to
find the scalar components of the drone’s displacement v ector:b b b e e e
x y
z2 2
Example: Takeoff of a Drone

2.9.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83900We substitute these components into Equation to find t he displacement vector:
We substitute into Equation to find the magnitude of the displacement:
If the average velocity vector of the drone in the displacement in Example 2.7 is = (15.0 + 31.7 + 2.5) m/s, what is the
magnitude of the drone’s velocity vector?
This page titled 2.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector (Part 1) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
2.5: Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector (Part 2) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.Exercise 2.7

2.9.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839012.9.5: Algebra of Vectors
Apply analytical methods of vector algebra to find result ant vectors and to solve vector equations for unknown vectors.
Interpret physical situations in terms of vector expre ssions.
Vectors can be added together and multiplied by scal ars. Vector addition is associative (Equation 2.2.8) and commutative (Equation
2.2.7), and vector multiplication by a sum of scalars is di stributive (Equation 2.2.9). Also, scalar multiplication by a sum of vectors
is distributive:
In this equation, is any number (a scalar). For exampl e, a vector antiparallel to vector = A + A + A c an be expressed
simply by multiplying by the scalar = −1:
In a Cartesian coordinate system where denotes geogra phic east, denotes geographic north, and denotes alti tude above sea
level, a military convoy advances its position throu gh unknown territory with velocity = (4.0 + 3.0 + 0.1) km/h. If the
convoy had to retreat, in what geographic direction would i t be moving?
Solution
The velocity vector has the third component = (+ 0.1 km/h), which says the convoy is climbing at a rate of 100 m/h
through mountainous terrain. At the same time, its velo city is 4.0 km/h to the east and 3.0 km/h to the nort h, so it moves on the
ground in direction tan (3 /4) ≈ 37° north of east. If the convoy had to retreat, its new velocity vector would have to be
antiparallel to and be in the form, where is a pos itive number. Thus, the velocity of the retreat woul d be =
(−4.0 − 3.0 − 0.1) km/h. The negative sign of th e third component indicates the convoy would be desc ending. The
direction angle of the retreat velocity is tan (−3 − 4) ≈ 37° south of west. Therefore, the convoy would b e moving on the
ground in direction 37° south of west while descending on it s way back.
The generalization of the number zero to vector alg ebra is called the null vector, denoted by. All components of the null vector
are zero, = 0 + 0 + 0, so the null vector has no leng th and no direction.
Two vectors and are equal vectors if and only if their difference is the null vector: = − = (A + A + A) − (B +
B + B) = (A − B) + (A − B) + (A − B). This vec tor equation means we must have simultaneously A − B = 0, A −
B = 0, and A − B = 0. Hence, we can write if and only if the corresponding components of vectors and are equal:
Two vectors are equal when their corresponding scalar c omponents are equal. Resolving vectors into their sca lar components (i.e.,
finding their scalar components) and expressing them analytically in vector component form (given by Equation 2.5.4) allows us to
use vector algebra to find sums or differences of many vectors analytically (i.e., without using graphical methods). For example, to
find the resultant of two vectors and, we simply add them c omponent by component, as follows:
In this way, using Equation, scalar components of t he resultant vector = R + R + R are the sums of c orresponding
scalar components of vectors and:Learning Objectives
x y z
Example: Direction of Motion
−1
−1
x y z x
y z x x y y z z x x y
y z z
x y z

2.9.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83901Analytical methods can be used to find components of a resultant of many vectors. For example, if we are to sum up N vectors,
,, …,, where each vector is = F + F + F, the resultant vector is
Therefore, scalar components of the resultant vector are
Having found the scalar components, we can write the resultant in vector component form:
Analytical methods for finding the resultant and, in general, for solving vector equations are very impo rtant in physics because
many physical quantities are vectors. For example, we use this method in kinematics to find resultant displac ement vectors and
resultant velocity vectors, in mechanics to find res ultant force vectors and the resultants of many deri ved vector quantities, and in
electricity and magnetism to find resultant electric or magnetic vector fields.
In many physical situations, we often need to know the d irection of a vector. For example, we may want to know th e direction of a
magnetic field vector at some point or the directio n of motion of an object. We have already said direct ion is given by a unit vector,
which is a dimensionless entity—that is, it has no phys ical units associated with it. When the vector in ques tion lies along one of
the axes in a Cartesian system of coordinates, the an swer is simple, because then its unit vector of direct ion is either parallel or
antiparallel to the direction of the unit vector of an axis. For example, the direction of vector = −5 m is unit vector = −. The
general rule of finding the unit vector of direction fo r any vector is to divide it by its magnitude V:
We see from this expression that the unit vector of d irection is indeed dimensionless because the numerato r and the denominator in
Equation have the same physical unit. In this way, Equ ation allows us to express the unit vector of direct ion in terms
of unit vectors of the axes. Example 2.7.6 illustrates this principle.
Three displacement vectors,, and in a plane (Figure 2.3.6) are specified by their magnitudes A = 10.0, B = 7.0, and C =
8.0, respectively, and by their respective direction angles with the horizontal direction = 35°, = −110 °, and = 30°. The
physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Re solve the vectors to their scalar components and fin d the following vector
sums:
a. = + +,
b. = −, and
c. = − 3 +.
Strategy
First, we use Equation 2.4.13 to find the scalar components of each vector and th en we express each vector in its vector
component form given by. Then, we use analytical methods of vector algebra to find the resultants.
Solutionkx ky kz
Example: Analytical Computation of a Resultant

2.9.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83901We resolve the given vectors to their scalar components:
For (a) we may substitute directly into Equation 2.6.7 to find the scalar components of the resultant:
Therefore, the resultant vector is cm. For (b), we may want to write the vector difference as
Hence the difference vector is cm.
For (c), we can write vector in the following explicit fo rm:
Then, the scalar components of are
The vector is cm.
Significance
Having found the vector components, we can illustrate the vectors by graphing or we can compute magnitude s and direction
angles, as shown in Figure. Results for the magnitudes in (b) and (c) can be compared with results for the sa me
problems obtained with the graphical method, shown in Figure 2.3.7 and Figure 2.3.8. Notice that the analytical method
produces exact results and its accuracy is not limite d by the resolution of a ruler or a protractor, as i t was with the graphical
method used in Example 2.3.2 for finding this same resultant.
Figure: Graphical illustration of the solutions obtain ed analytically.
Three displacement vectors,, and (Figure 2.3.6) are specified by their magnitudes A = 10.00, B = 7.0 0, and F = 20.00,
respectively, and by their respective direction angl es with the horizontal direction = 35°, = −110°, an d = 110°. The
physical units of the magnitudes are centimeters. Use t he analytical method to find vector = + 2 −. Ve rify that G =
28.15 cm and that = −68.65°.Exercise 2.8

2.9.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83901Four dogs named Astro, Balto, Clifford, and Dug play a tu g-of-war game with a toy (Figure). Astro pulls on the t oy in
direction = 55° south of east, Balto pulls in direc tion = 60° east of north, and Clifford pulls in direc tion = 55° west of
north. Astro pulls strongly with 160.0 units of force (N), which we abbreviate as A = 160.0 N. Balto pulls even st ronger than
Astro with a force of magnitude B = 200.0 N, and Cliffor d pulls with a force of magnitude C = 140.0 N. When Dug pulls on
the toy in such a way that his force balances out th e resultant of the other three forces, the toy does n ot move in any direction.
With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on t he toy for this to happen?
Figure: Four dogs play a tug-of-war game with a toy.
Strategy
We assume that east is the direction of the positive x-axis and north is the direction of the positive y- axis. As in Example
, we have to resolve the three given forces — (the pull from Astro), (the pull from Balto), and (the p ull from
Clifford)—into their scalar components and then fin d the scalar components of the resultant vector = + +. When the
pulling force from Dug balances out this resultant, the sum of and must give the null vector + =. This means that
= so the pull from Dug must be antiparallel to.
Solution
The direction angles are = = −55°, = 90° − = 30°, and = 90° + = 145°, and substituting them into Equation
2.4.13 gives the scalar components of the three given forces:
Now we compute scalar components of the resultant vector:
The antiparallel vector to the resultant is
The magnitude of Dug's pulling force isExample: The Tug-of-War Game

2.9.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83901The direction of Dug's pulling force is
Dug pulls in the direction 18.1° south of west because both components are negative, which means the pull v ector lies in the
third quadrant (Figure 2.4.4).
Suppose that Balto in Example leaves the game to att end to more important matters, but Astro, Clifford, an d Dug
continue playing. Astro and Clifford’s pull on the to y does not change, but Dug runs around and bites on t he toy in a different
place. With how big a force and in what direction must Dug pull on the toy now to balance out the combined pulls from
Clifford and Astro? Illustrate this situation by drawing a ve ctor diagram indicating all forces involved.
Find the magnitude of the vector that satisfies the equa tion 2 − 6 + 3 = 2, = − 2 and = − +.
Strategy
We first solve the given equation for the unknown vec tor. Then we substitute and; group the terms alon g each of the
three directions,, and; and identify the scalar components C, C, and C. Finally, we substitute into Equation 2.5.6 to find
magnitude C.
Solution
The components are C =, C =, and C =, and substituting in to Equation 2.5.6 gives
Starting at a ski lodge, a cross-country skier goes 5.0 km north, then 3.0 km west, and finally 4.0 km southwest before taking a
rest. Find his total displacement vector relative to t he lodge when he is at the rest point. How far and in what direction must he
ski from the rest point to return directly to the lodge?
Strategy
We assume a rectangular coordinate system with the or igin at the ski lodge and with the unit vector poin ting east and the unit
vector pointing north. There are three displacement s:,, and. We identify their magnitudes as D = 5.0 km, D = 3.0
km, and D = 4.0 km. We identify their directions a re the angles = 90°, = 180°, and = 180° + 45° = 225 °. We resolve
each displacement vector to its scalar components an d substitute the components into Equation 2.6.5 to obtain the scalar
components of the resultant displacement from the l odge to the rest point. On the way back from the rest point to the lodge,
the displacement is = −. Finally, we find the magnitude and direction of.Exercise 2.9
Example: Vector Algebra
x y z
x y z
Example: Displacement of a Skier
1 2

2.9.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83901Solution
Scalar components of the displacement vectors are
Scalar components of the net displacement vector are
Hence, the skier’s net displacement vector is = D + D = (−5.8 + 2.2)km. On the way back to the lodge, his
displacement is = − = −(−5.8 + 2.2)km = (5.8 − 2.2)km. Its magnitude is B = = km =
6.2 km and its direction angle is = tan = −20.8°. Ther efore, to return to the lodge, he must go 6.2 km in a direction
about 21° south of east.
Significance
Notice that no figure is needed to solve this problem by the analytical method. Figures are required when using a graphical
method; however, we can check if our solution makes sen se by sketching it, which is a useful final step in solv ing any vector
problem.
A jogger runs up a flight of 200 identical steps to t he top of a hill and then runs along the top of the hill 50.0 m before he stops
at a drinking fountain (Figure). His displacement ve ctor from point A at the bottom of the steps to poin t B at the
fountain is = (−90.0 + 30.0)m. What is the height an d width of each step in the flight? What is the actual distance the
jogger covers? If he makes a loop and returns to point A, what is his net displacement vector?
Figure: A jogger runs up a flight of steps.
Strategy
The displacement vector is the vector sum of the jog ger’s displacement vector along the stairs (from poi nt A at the
bottom of the stairs to point T at the top of the st airs) and his displacement vector on the top of the hill (from point T at the
top of the stairs to the fountain at point B). We mus t find the horizontal and the vertical components o f. If each step has
width w and height h, the horizontal component of mu st have a length of 200w and the vertical component must have a
length of 200h. The actual distance the jogger cover s is the sum of the distance he runs up the stairs and the distance of 50.0 m
that he runs along the top of the hill.
Solution
In the coordinate system indicated in Figure, the jo gger’s displacement vector on the top of the hill is = (−50.0 m)
. His net displacement vector isx y
−1
Example: Displacement of a Jogger

2.9.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83901Therefore, his displacement vector along the stairs is
Its scalar components are D = −40.0 m and D = 30.0 m. Therefo re, we must have
Hence, the step width is w = = 0.2 m = 20 cm, and the s tep height is w = = 0.15 m = 15 cm. The distance tha t the
jogger covers along the stairs is
Thus, the actual distance he runs is D + D = 50.0 m + 50.0 m = 100.0 m. When he makes a loop and comes bac k from the
fountain to his initial position at point A, the tota l distance he covers is twice this distance,or 200.0 m. However, his net
displacement vector is zero, because when his final position is the same as his initial position, the sc alar components of his net
displacement vector are zero (Equation 2.4.4).
In many physical situations, we often need to know the d irection of a vector. For example, we may want to know th e direction of a
magnetic field vector at some point or the directio n of motion of an object. We have already said direct ion is given by a unit vector,
which is a dimensionless entity—that is, it has no phys ical units associated with it. When the vector in ques tion lies along one of
the axes in a Cartesian system of coordinates, the an swer is simple, because then its unit vector of direct ion is either parallel or
antiparallel to the direction of the unit vector of an axis. For example, the direction of vector = -5 m is unit vector = -. The
general rule of finding the unit vector of direction fo r any vector is to divide it by its magnitude V:
We see from this expression that the unit vector of d irection is indeed dimensionless because the numerato r and the denominator in
Equation have the same physical unit. In this way, Equ ation allows us to express the unit vector of direct ion in terms
of unit vectors of the axes. The following example illustra tes this principle.
If the velocity vector of the military convoy in Example 2.6.1 is = (4.000 + 3.000 + 0.100)km/h, what is the unit vector
of its direction of motion.
Strategy
The unit vector of the convoy’s direction of motion is the unit vector that is parallel to the veloci ty vector. The unit vector is
obtained by dividing a vector by its magnitude, in accorda nce with Equation.
Solution
The magnitude of the vector is
To obtain the unit vector, divide by its magnitude:ATx ATy
AT TB
Label '2.26' multiply defined
Example: The Unit Vector of Direction

2.9.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83901Significance
Note that when using the analytical method with a calc ulator, it is advisable to carry out your calculati ons to at least three
decimal places and then round off the final answer t o the required number of significant figures, which i s the way we
performed calculations in this example. If you roun d off your partial answer too early, you risk your fi nal answer having a huge
numerical error, and it may be far off from the exact a nswer or from a value measured in an experiment.
Verify that vector obtained in Example is indeed a unit vector by computing its magnitude. If the co nvoy in Example
2.6.1 was moving across a desert flatland—that is, if the th ird component of its velocity was zero—what is the uni t vector of its
direction of motion? Which geographic direction does i t represent?
2.9.5.1 Contributors
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 2.9.5: Algebra of Vectors is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.6: Algebra of Vectors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-1.
2.7: Algebra of Vectors Examples by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-1.Exercise 2.10

2.9.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839022.9.6: Products of Vectors
Explain the difference between the scalar product and the vector product of two vectors.
Determine the scalar product of two vectors.
Determine the vector product of two vectors.
Describe how the products of vectors are used in physics.
A vector can be multiplied by another vector but ma y not be divided by another vector. There are two ki nds of products of vectors
used broadly in physics and engineering. One kind of m ultiplication is a scalar multiplication of two vectors. Taking a scalar
product of two vectors results in a number (a scalar), as its name indicates. Scalar products are used to de fine work and energy
relations. For example, the work that a force (a vector) performs on an object while causing its displacemen t (a vector) is defined as
a scalar product of the force vector with the displa cement vector. A quite different kind of multiplicat ion is a vector multiplication
of vectors. Taking a vector product of two vectors returns as a result a vector, as its name suggests. Vector products ar e used to
define other derived vector quantities. For example, i n describing rotations, a vector quantity called torque is defined as a vector
product of an applied force (a vector) and its lever arm (a vector). It is important to distinguish between these two kinds of vector
multiplications because the scalar product is a scalar qu antity and a vector product is a vector quantity.
2.9.6.1 The Scalar Product of Two Vectors (the Dot Product)
Scalar multiplication of two vectors yields a scalar product.
The scalar product of two vectors and is a number defi ned by the equation
where is the angle between the vectors (shown in Figure). The scalar product is also called the dot product because of
the dot notation that indicates it.
In the definition of the dot product, the direction of angle does not matter, and can be measured from either of the two vectors
to the other because = =. The dot product is a ne gative number when 90° < ≤ 180° and is a positive
number when 0° ≤ < 90°. Moreover, the dot product of two parallel vectors is = AB cos 0° = AB, and the dot product of two
antiparallel vectors is = AB cos 180° = −AB. The scalar product of two orthogonal vectors vanishes: = AB co s 90° = 0.
The scalar product of a vector with itself is the square o f its magnitude:
Figure: The scalar product of two vectors. (a) The an gle between the two vectors. (b) The orthogonal proj ection A of
vector onto the direction of vector. (c) The orth ogonal projection B of vector onto the direction o f vector.
For the vectors shown in Figure 2.3.6, find the scalar product.
StrategyLearning Objectives
Definition: Scalar Product (Dot Product)
Example: The Scalar Product

2.9.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902From Figure 2.3.6, the magnitudes of vectors and are A = 10.0 and F = 20.0. Angle, between them, is the difference:
= 110° − 35° = 75°. Substituting these values into Equation gives the scalar product.
Solution
A straightforward calculation gives us
For the vectors given in Figure 2.3.6, find the scalar products and.
In the Cartesian coordinate system, scalar products of the unit vector of an axis with other unit vectors of axes always vanish
because these unit vectors are orthogonal:
In these equations, we use the fact that the magnitud es of all unit vectors are one: = 1. For unit vectors o f the axes,
Equation gives the following identities:
The scalar product can also be interpreted as either the product of B with the projection A of vector o nto the direction of
vector (Figure (b)) or the product of A with the proje ction B of vector onto the direction of vector (Figure (c)):
For example, in the rectangular coordinate system in a plane, the scalar x-component of a vector is its dot product with the unit
vector, and the scalar y-component of a vector is its dot pr oduct with the unit vector:
Scalar multiplication of vectors is communtative,
and obeys the distributive law:
We can use the commutative and distributive laws to derive various relations for vectors, such as expressing the dot product of two
vectors in terms of their scalar components.
For vector in a rectangular coordinate system, use Equation through Equation to show
that and.
When the vectors in Equation are given in their vector component forms,Exercise 2.11
Exercise 2.12

2.9.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902we can compute their scalar product as follows:
Since scalar products of two different unit vectors of axes give zero, and scalar products of unit vectors with themselves give one
(see Equation and Equation), there are only three nonzero terms in this expression. Thus, the scalar p roduct simplifies
to
We can use Equation for the scalar product in term s of scalar components of vectors to find the angle b etween two vectors.
When we divide Equation by AB, we obtain the equation for cos, into which we substitute Equation:
Angle between vectors and is obtained by taking the inverse cosine of the expression in Equation.
Three dogs are pulling on a stick in different dire ctions, as shown in Figure. The first dog pulls with for ce = (10.0 −
20.4 + 2.0)N, the second dog pulls with force = (−1 5.0 − 6.2)N, and the third dog pulls with force = (5.0 + 12.5
)N. What is the angle between forces and?
Figure: Three dogs are playing with a stick.
Strategy
The components of force vector are F = 10.0 N, F = −2 0.4 N, and F = 2.0 N, whereas those of force vector are F =
−15.0 N, F = 0.0 N, and F = −6.2 N. Computing the scala r product of these vectors and their magnitudes, and substituting
into Equation gives the angle of interest.
Solution
The magnitudes of forces and are
and
Substituting the scalar components into Equation yields the scalar productExample
1x 1y 1z 2x
2y 2z

2.9.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902Finally, substituting everything into Equation gives the angle
Significance
Notice that when vectors are given in terms of the uni t vectors of axes, we can find the angle between them wi thout knowing
the specifics about the geographic directions the uni t vectors represent. Here, for example, the +x-directio n might be to the east
and the +y-direction might be to the north. But, the angle between the forces in the problem is the same i f the +x-direction is to
the west and the +y-direction is to the south.
Find the angle between forces and in Example.
When force pulls on an object and when it causes its d isplacement, we say the force performs work. The amoun t of work
the force does is the scalar product. If the stick i n Example moves momentarily and gets displaced by ve ctor =
(−7.9 − 4.2)cm, how much work is done by the third dog in E xample?
Strategy
We compute the scalar product of displacement vector with force vector = (5.0 + 12.5)N, which is the p ull from the
third dog. Let’s use W to denote the work done by force on displacement.
Solution
Calculating the work is a straightforward application of th e dot product:
Significance
The SI unit of work is called the joule (J), where 1 J = 1 N · m. The unit cm · N can be written as 10 m · N = 10 J, so the
answer can be expressed as W = −0.9875 J ≈ −1.0 J.
How much work is done by the first dog and by the second dog i n Example on the displacement in Example?
2.9.6.2 The Vector Products of Two Vectors (the Cross Product)
Vector multiplication of two vectors yields a vector pro duct.
The vector product of two vectors and is denoted b y × and is often referred to as a cross product. The vector product
is a vector that has its direction perpendicular to both vectors and. In other words, vector × is perpe ndicular to the
plane that contains vectors and, as shown in Figure. The magnitude of the vector product is defined asExercise 2.13
Example: The Work of a Force
−2 −2
Exercise 2.14
Vector Product (Cross Product)

2.9.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902where angle, between the two vectors, is measured from vector (first vector in the product) to vector (s econd vector in
the product), as indicated in Figure, and is between 0° a nd 180°.
According to Equation, the vector product vanishes for pairs of vectors that are either parallel (= 0 °) or antiparallel (=
180°) because sin 0° = sin 180° = 0.
Figure: The vector product of two vectors is drawn in three-dimensional space. (a) The vector product is a vector
perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and. Small squares drawn in perspective mark right angles between and,
and between and so that if and lie on the floor, vector points vertically upward to the ceiling. (b) The vector product
is a vector antiparallel to vector.
On the line perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and there are two alternative directions— either up or down, as
shown in Figure —and the direction of the vector prod uct may be either one of them. In the standard right -handed
orientation, where the angle between vectors is measure d counterclockwise from the first vector, vector poi nts upward, as
seen in Figure (a). If we reverse the order of multipli cation, so that now comes first in the product, then ve ctor must
point downward, as seen in Figure (b). This means that vectors and are antiparallel to each other and that
vector multiplication is not commutative but anticommutative. The anticommutative property means the vector product reverses
the sign when the order of multiplication is reversed:
The corkscrew right-hand rule is a common mnemonic used to determine the directi on of the vector product. As shown in Figure
, a corkscrew is placed in a direction perpendicular to the plane that contains vectors and, and its han dle is turned in the
direction from the first to the second vector in th e product. The direction of the cross product is given by the progression of the
corkscrew.
Figure: The corkscrew right-hand rule can be used to determine the direction of the cross product. Place a corkscrew
in the direction perpendicular to the plane that co ntains vectors and, and turn it in the direction fr om the first to the second
vector in the product. The direction of the cross pro duct is given by the progression of the corkscrew. (a) Upward movement means
the cross-product vector points up. (b) Downward movem ent means the cross-product vector points downward.

2.9.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902The mechanical advantage that a familiar tool calle d a wrench provides (Figure) depends on magnitude F of the appli ed
force, on its direction with respect to the wrench ha ndle, and on how far from the nut this force is appli ed. The distance R from
the nut to the point where force vector is attached is called the lever arm and is represented by the radial vector. The
physical vector quantity that makes the nut turn is called torque (denoted by), and it is the vector product of the lever arm
with the force:.
To loosen a rusty nut, a 20.00-N force is applied to the wrench handle at angle = 40° and at a distance o f 0.25 m from the nut,
as shown in Figure (a). Find the magnitude and directio n of the torque applied to the nut. What would the ma gnitude and
direction of the torque be if the force were applied at angle = 45°, as shown in Figure (b)? For what value of angle
does the torque have the largest magnitude?
Figure: A wrench provides grip and mechanical advant age in applying torque to turn a nut. (a) Turn coun terclockwise to
loosen the nut. (b) Turn clockwise to tighten the nut.
Strategy
We adopt the frame of reference shown in Figure, wher e vectors and lie in the xy-plane and the origin is at the
position of the nut. The radial direction along vec tor (pointing away from the origin) is the referenc e direction for measuring
the angle because is the first vector in the vect or product =. Vector must lie along the z-axis be cause this is the
axis that is perpendicular to the xy-plane, where bot h and lie. To compute the magnitude, we use Equat ion. To
find the direction of, we use the corkscrew right-hand rul e (Figure).
Solution
For the situation in (a), the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the positive direction of the z-axi s. Physically, it
means the torque vector points out of the page, pe rpendicular to the wrench handle. We identify F = 20.0 0 N and R = 0.25 m,
and compute the magnitude using Equation:
For the situation in (b), the corkscrew rule gives the direction of in the negative direction of the z-ax is. Physically, it
means the vector points into the page, perpendicular to the wrench handle. The magnitude of this torque is
The torque has the largest value when sin = 1, which happens when = 90°. Physically, it means the wrench is m ost
effective—giving us the best mechanical advantage—wh en we apply the force perpendicular to the wrench han dle. For the
situation in this example, this best-torque value is = RF = (0.25 m)(20.00 N) = 5.00 N • m.
Significance
When solving mechanics problems, we often do not need to use the corkscrew rule at all, as we’ll see now in t he following
equivalent solution. Notice that once we have identif ied that vector lies along the z-axis, we can write this vector in
terms of the unit vector of the z-axis:Example: The Torque of a Force

2.9.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902In this equation, the number that multiplies is the scalar z-component of the vector. In the computatio n of this
component, care must be taken that the angle is measur ed counterclockwise from (first vector) to (second vector)
Following this principle for the angles, we obtain RF sin (+ 40°) = + 3.2 N • m for the situation in (a), and we obtain RF sin
(−45°) = −3.5 N • m for the situation in (b). In the l atter case, the angle is negative because the graph in Figure indicates
the angle is measured clockwise; but, the same result is obtained when this angle is measured counterclockwis e because +(360°
− 45°) = + 315° and sin (+ 315°) = sin (−45°). In t his way, we obtain the solution without reference to the corkscrew rule. For
the situation in (a), the solution is = + 3.2 N • m; for the si tuation in (b), the solution is = −3.5 N • m.
For the vectors given in Figure 2.3.6, find the vector products and.
Similar to the dot product (Equation 2.8.10), the cross product has the following distributive prope rty:
The distributive property is applied frequently when vectors are expressed in their component forms, in te rms of unit vectors of
Cartesian axes. When we apply the definition of the c ross product, Equation, to unit vectors,, and t hat define the
positive x-, y-, and z-directions in space, we find that
All other cross products of these three unit vectors mu st be vectors of unit magnitudes because,, and ar e orthogonal. For
example, for the pair and, the magnitude is | | = ij sin 90° = (1)(1)(1) = 1. The direction of the vec tor product must be
orthogonal to the xy-plane, which means it must be a long the z-axis. The only unit vectors along the z-a xis are − or +. By the
corkscrew rule, the direction of vector must be para llel to the positive z-axis. Therefore, the result of the multiplication is
identical to +. We can repeat similar reasoning for t he remaining pairs of unit vectors. The results of these multiplications are
Notice that in Equation, the three unit vectors,, and appear in the cyclic order shown in a diagram in Figure (a).
The cyclic order means that in the product formula, follows and comes before, or follows and comes b efore, or follows
and comes before. The cross product of two different unit vectors is always a third unit vector. When two unit vectors in the cross
product appear in the cyclic order, the result of suc h a multiplication is the remaining unit vector, as i llustrated in Figure (b).
When unit vectors in the cross product appear in a d ifferent order, the result is a unit vector that is antiparallel to the remaining unit
vector (i.e., the result is with the minus sign, as shown by the examples in Figure (c) and Figure (d). In pract ice, when
the task is to find cross products of vectors that a re given in vector component form, this rule for the cross-multiplication of unit
vectors is very useful.Exercise 2.15

2.9.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902
Figure: (a) The diagram of the cyclic order of the unit vectors of the axes. (b) The only cross products wh ere the unit vectors
appear in the cyclic order. These products have the p ositive sign. (c, d) Two examples of cross products where the unit vectors do
not appear in the cyclic order. These products have t he negative sign.
Suppose we want to find the cross product for vectors = A + A + A and = B + B + B. We can use the
distributive property (Equation), the anticommutat ive property (Equation), and the results in Equati on and
Equation for unit vectors to perform the following alg ebra:
When performing algebraic operations involving the c ross product, be very careful about keeping the corr ect order of
multiplication because the cross product is anticomm utative. The last two steps that we still have to do to complete our task are,
first, grouping the terms that contain a common unit vector and, second, factoring. In this way we obtain th e following very useful
expression for the computation of the cross product:
In this expression, the scalar components of the cross-pr oduct vector are
When finding the cross product, in practice, we can u se either Equation or Equation, depending on which one of
them seems to be less complex computationally. They b oth lead to the same final result. One way to make sure if the final result is
correct is to use them both.
When moving in a magnetic field, some particles may e xperience a magnetic force. Without going into detai ls—a detailed
study of magnetic phenomena comes in later chapters— let’s acknowledge that the magnetic field is a vector, the magnetic
force is a vector, and the velocity of the partic le is a vector. The magnetic force vector is propor tional to the vector product
of the velocity vector with the magnetic field vecto r, which we express as =. In this equation, a constant takes care
of the consistency in physical units, so we can omit p hysical units on vectors and. In this example, let’s assume the
constant is positive. A particle moving in space wit h velocity vector = −5.0 − 2.0 + 3.5 enters a regi on with a magneticx y z x y z
Example: A Particle in a Magnetic Field

2.9.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902field and experiences a magnetic force. Find the mag netic force on this particle at the entry point to the region where the
magnetic field vector is (a) = 7.2 − − 2.4 and (b) = 4.5. In each case, find magnitude F of the ma gnetic force and
angle the force vector makes with the given magnetic field vector.
Strategy
First, we want to find the vector product, because then we can determine the magnetic force using =.
Magnitude F can be found either by using components, F =, or by computing the magnitude | | directly
using Equation. In the latter approach, we would hav e to find the angle between vectors and. When we ha ve, the
general method for finding the direction angle inv olves the computation of the scalar product and sub stitution into
Equation 2.8.13. To compute the vector product we can either use Eq uation or compute the product directly, whichever
way is simpler.
Solution
The components of the velocity vector are u = −5.0, u = −2.0, and u = 3.5. (a) The components of the magn etic field vector
are B = 7.2, B = −1.0, and B = −2.4. Substituting them i nto Equation gives the scalar components of vector
Thus, the magnetic force is = (8.3 + 13.2 + 19.4) an d its magnitude is
To compute angle, we may need to find the magnitude of the mag netic field vector
and the scalar product:
Now, substituting into Equation 2.8.13 gives angle:
Hence, the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magnetic field vector. (We could have saved som e time if we had
computed the scalar product earlier.)
(b) Because vector = 4.5 has only one component, we can p erform the algebra quickly and find the vector product d irectly:
The magnitude of the magnetic force is
Because the scalar product is
the magnetic force vector is perpendicular to the magn etic field vector.
Significancex y z
x y z

2.9.6.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83902Even without actually computing the scalar product, we can predict that the magnetic force vector must al ways be
perpendicular to the magnetic field vector because o f the way this vector is constructed. Namely, the magn etic force vector is
the vector product = and, by the definition of the vector product (see Figure), vector must be perpend icular
to both vectors and.
Given two vectors and = 3 −, find (a), (b) | |, (c) the angle between and, and (d) the angle
between and vector.
In conclusion to this section, we want to stress that “do t product” and “cross product” are entirely differen t mathematical objects
that have different meanings. The dot product is a scalar; the cross product is a vector. Later chapters use the terms dot product
and scalar product interchangeably. Similarly, the terms cross product and vector product are used interchangeably.
2.9.6.3 Contributors
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
2.9.6.4 Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 2.9.6: Products of Vectors is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.8: Products of Vectors (Part 1) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.
2.9: Products of Vectors (Part 2) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.Exercise 2.16

2.9.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839032.9.7: Further Topics
Vector Basics
Classical mechanics describes the motion of bodies as they move through space. To describe a motion in spa ce it is not sufficient to
give a position and a speed: you need a direction as well. Therefore we work with vectors: mathematical obje cts that have both a
magnitude and a direction. If you tell me you’re mov ing, I know something, but not much; I’ll know more if you tell me you’re
moving at walking speed, and have full information o f your velocity once you tell me that you’re moving at walking speed towards
the coffee machine. Although in principle we could mak e do with specifying a magnitude and direction of ev ery vector in this way,
it is often more convenient to express our vectors in a basis. To do so, we choose an (arbitrary) origin, and as many basis vectors as
we have spatial dimensions, in such a way that they are n ot parallel to one another, and usually mutually per pendicular (orthogonal)
and of unit length (orthonormal). Then we decompose o ur vector by giving its components along each of th e basis vectors. The
most common choice is to use a Cartesian basis, of t wo or three (depending on spatial dimension) basis ve ctors of unit length
pointing in the standard x, y and z directions, and in dicated as and, or (rather annoyingly) sometimes as and, the latter
especially in American textbooks. Other often encounte red systems are polar coordinates (2D) and cylindric al and spherical
coordinates (3D), see the mathematical appendix for mo re background on those. To write our vectors, we now spe cify the
components in each direction, writing for example fo r a vector (in boldface) representing a speed of a nd a
direction making an angle of with the horizontal.
Vectors can be added and subtracted just like scalar s - simply add and subtract them by component. Graph ically, you add two
vectors by putting them head-to-tail: you can find the sum of two vectors and by putting the start of at the end of, the sum
then points from the start of to the end of. You can also multiply a vector by a scalar, by multiply ing every component of
the vector with that scalar. Graphically, this means t hat you extend the length of the vector with the sca lar factor you just multiplied
with.
You can’t take the product of two vectors like you wou ld two scalars. There are however two vector operation s that closely
resemble the product, known as the inner (or dot) and outer (or cross) product, see Figure 16.A.1. The dot pro duct represents the
length of the projection of one vector on another (and thus gives a scalar); it is zero for perpendicular vectors, and the dot product
of a vector with itself gives the square of its length. To calculate the dot product of two vectors, sum th e products of their
components: if and, then. You can use the dot pr oduct to find the angle between
two vectors, using standard geometry, which gives
where and are the lengths of vectors and, respect ively. The cross product is only defined for three-d imensional vectors,
say and. The result is another vector, with a direc tion perpendicular to the plane spanned
by and, and a magnitude equal to the area of the parallelogram bounded by them. The cross product is most easily expressed in
column vector form:
The cross product of a vector with itself is zero.

2.9.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83903
Figure: Products and derivatives of vectors. (a) The do t product of two vectors and gives the length of th e projection of
on (or vice versa). (b) The cross product of two vect ors and gives a vector perpendicular to the plane sp anned by and and
with a magnitude equal to the area of the parallelo gram spanned by and. (c-f) Acceleration as a chang e in velocity. In every
panel, the original velocity is shown in black, the v elocity a short time ∆t later is shown in blue, and th e acceleration is shown in
red. (c) Acceleration for an increase in the magnitu de of the velocity. (d) Acceleration for a decrease in the magnitude of the
velocity. (e) Acceleration for a change in directio n of the velocity at constant magnitude. (f) Accele ration for a change in velocity
that involves both a change in direction and a decre ase in magnitude.
Vectors can be functions, just like scalar quantities: t hey can depend on one or more parameters, like posi tion or time. Also, again
just like scalar functions, you can calculate a rat e of change of vector function as you move through parameter values, for instance
asking how the velocity of a car changes as a functio n of time. An instantaneous rate of change is simply a derivative, which is
calculated in exactly the same manner as the deriva tive of a scalar function. For example, the rate of c hange of the velocity, known
as the acceleration, is defined as:
Since the velocity itself is the derivative of the po sition, the acceleration is also the second derivativ e of the position. Time
derivatives occur so frequently in classical mechani cs that we use a special notation for them: a first derivative is indicated by a dot
on top of the quantity, and a second derivative by a do uble dot - so we have.
Vector derivatives are somewhat richer than those of scalar functions, since there are more ways that a ve ctor can change. Like a
scalar function, the magnitude of a vector can incr ease or decrease. Moreover, its direction can also chan ge, which also means that
it has a nonzero derivative, and of course, you can have a combination of a change in magnitude and a c hange in direction, see
Figure 16.A.1.
Figure: Examples of scalar and vector fields. (a) Temp erature (a scalar) at every point in the Netherlands at 11:30 on October
28, 2013. Lines of equal temperature are drawn in bl ack; the gradient of the temperature field is everyw here perpendicular to these
lines. (b) Wind velocity (a vector) at every point i n the Netherlands at the same time as the temperature map. Colors correspond to
the magnitude of the velocity. (a and b) from [30]. (c) Example of a vector field with a large diverge nce and zero curl. (d) Example
of a vector field with a large curl (and low but no nzero divergence).
Functions (scalar or vector) that are defined at ever y point in space are sometimes called fields. Examples are the temperature
(scalar) and wind (vector) at every point on the pla net, see Figure 16.A.2. Just like you can calculate the r ate of change of a

2.9.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83903function in time, you can also consider how a function changes in space. For a scalar function, this quantit y is a vector, known as
the gradient, defined as the vector of partial derivati ves. For a function f (x, y, z), we have:
The direction of is the direction of maximal chang e, and its magnitude tells you how quickly the functi on changes in that
direction. For a vector field, we can’t take the gra dient, but we can use the ‘vector’ of partial deriva tives combined with either
the dot or cross product. The first option is known a s the divergence of, and tells you how quickly spre ads out; the second is the
curl of and tells you how much rotates:
where, and so on.
Polar Coordinates
You can specify any point in the plane by specifyin g its projection on two perpendicular axes - we typical ly call these the x and yaxes and x and y coordinates. In this Cartesian syst em (named after Descartes), we identify unit vectors a nd, pointing along
their respective axes, and being of unit length. A pos ition can then be decomposed in the two directions:, with
and. Alternatively, we can write and, which gives for:
Instead of specifying the x and y coordinates of ou r position, we could also uniquely identify it by givi ng two different numbers: its
distance to the origin r, and the angle the line to the origin makes with a fixed reference axis (typic ally the x-axis), see Figure
16.A.3. Invoking the Pythagorean theorem and basic trigon ometry,
we readily find and. We call r the length of the v ector. We could also invert the relations for r an d so we
can get the Cartesian components if the length and angle are known: and.
Like the Cartesian basis vectors and (\hat{\boldsymbo l{y}}\), which point in the direction of increasing x and y values, we can
also define unit vectors pointing in the direction o f increasing r and. These directions do depend on our position in space, but they
do have a clear geometrical interpretation: \hat{\b oldsymbol{r}} always points radially outward from the origin, and
\hat{\boldsymbol{\theta}} in the direction you’d mo ve if you’d be making a counterclockwise rotation ab out the origin. Given a
position vector, finding the vector in the directi on of increasing r is very easy:. The expression for r in our new polar basis
is almost tautological:.
Relating the polar basis vectors to the Cartesian one s is straightforward. We have:
and using we also have
We thus find that.
For \(\hat{\boldsymbol{\theta}\) we note that to rotat e around the origin, the direction of motion needs t o be perpendicular to.
There are of course two such directions - we pick the si gn by demanding that the counterclockwise rotation i s positive. This gives
. Written out as vectors, we have:

2.9.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83903Note that
Naturally, we can also express the Cartesian basis in terms of the polar ones:
Figure: Polar coordinate system and polar unit vectors. A position in the plane can be specified either by giving its
projections on two reference axes (along the and di rection), or by giving its distance r to the origin, and the angle the line to
the origin makes with the x axis. The polar basis vecto rs are defined as pointing in the direction of increa sing r (i.e., radially
outward), and increasing (i.e., rotating counterclo ckwise around the origin).
2.9.7: Further Topics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
16.A: Math by Timon Idema is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source: https://textbooks.open.tudelft.nl/textbooks/catalog/bo ok/14.

2.9.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839042.9.E: Practice
2.9.E.1 Conceptual Questions
2.9.E.1.1 Scalars and Vectors
1. A weather forecast states the temperature is predicted t o be −5 °C the following day. Is this temperature a vec tor or a
scalar quantity? Explain.
2. Which of the following is a vector: a person’s height, the altitude on Mt. Everest, the velocity of a fly, the age of E arth,
the boiling point of water, the cost of a book, Earth’s popul ation, or the acceleration of gravity?
3. Give a specific example of a vector, stating its magnitude, units, and direction.
4. What do vectors and scalars have in common? How do the y differ?
5. Suppose you add two vectors and. What relative directio n between them produces the resultant with the greatest
magnitude? What is the maximum magnitude? What relati ve direction between them produces the resultant with th e
smallest magnitude? What is the minimum magnitude?
6. Is it possible to add a scalar quantity to a vector q uantity?
7. Is it possible for two vectors of different magnitude s to add to zero? Is it possible for three vectors of diff erent
magnitudes to add to zero? Explain.
8. Does the odometer in an automobile indicate a scalar or a vector quantity?
9. When a 10,000-m runner competing on a 400-m track cro sses the finish line, what is the runner’s net displacement? Can
this displacement be zero? Explain.
10. A vector has zero magnitude. Is it necessary to specif y its direction? Explain.
11. Can a magnitude of a vector be negative?
12. Can the magnitude of a particle’s displacement be grea ter that the distance traveled?
13. If two vectors are equal, what can you say about thei r components? What can you say about their magnitudes? W hat can
you say about their directions?
14. If three vectors sum up to zero, what geometric con dition do they satisfy?
2.9.E.1.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
15. Give an example of a nonzero vector that has a compon ent of zero.
16. Explain why a vector cannot have a component great er than its own magnitude.
17. If two vectors are equal, what can you say about thei r components?
18. If vectors and are orthogonal, what is the component o f along the direction of? What is the component of
along the direction of?
19. If one of the two components of a vector is not zero, can the magnitude of the other vector component of this ve ctor be
zero?
20. If two vectors have the same magnitude, do their comp onents have to be the same?
2.9.E.1.3 Products of Vectors
21. What is wrong with the following expressions? How can y ou correct them?
a.,
b.,
c.,
d.,
e.,
f.,
g.,
h.,
i., and
j..

2.9.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8390422. If the cross product of two vectors vanishes, what can y ou say about their directions?
23. If the dot product of two vectors vanishes, what can you say about their directions?
24. What is the dot product of a vector with the cross p roduct that this vector has with another vector?
2.9.E.2 Problems
2.9.E.2.1 Scalars and Vectors
25. A scuba diver makes a slow descent into the depths of the ocean. His vertical position with respect to a boat o n the
surface changes several times. He makes the first stop 9.0 m from the boat but has a problem with equalizing the
pressure, so he ascends 3.0 m and then continues descendin g for another 12.0 m to the second stop. From there, he
ascends 4 m and then descends for 18.0 m, ascends again for 7 m and descends again for 24.0 m, where he makes a stop,
waiting for his buddy. Assuming the positive direction up to the surface, express his net vertical displacement ve ctor in
terms of the unit vector. What is his distance to the boat?
26. In a tug-of-war game on one campus, 15 students pu ll on a rope at both ends in an effort to displace the cen tral knot to
one side or the other. Two students pull with force 196 N each t o the right, four students pull with force 98 N each to the
left, five students pull with force 62 N each to the left, three students pull with force 150 N each to the right, a nd one
student pulls with force 250 N to the left. Assuming the pos itive direction to the right, express the net pull on the kn ot in
terms of the unit vector. How big is the net pull on the knot? In what direction?
27. Suppose you walk 18.0 m straight west and then 25.0 m stra ight north. How far are you from your starting point and what
is the compass direction of a line connecting your starti ng point to your final position? Use a graphical method.
28. For the vectors given in the following figure, use a gr aphical method to find the following resultants:
a.,
b.,
c.,
d.,
e.,
f.,
g..
29. A delivery man starts at the post office, drives 4 0 km north, then 20 km west, then 60 km northeast, and final ly 50 km
north to stop for lunch. Use a graphical method to find his net displacement vector.
30. An adventurous dog strays from home, runs three blo cks east, two blocks north, one block east, one block north, an d two
blocks west. Assuming that each block is about 100 m, how fa r from home and in what direction is the dog? Use a
graphical method.
31. In an attempt to escape a desert island, a castaway bui lds a raft and sets out to sea. The wind shifts a great deal du ring the
day and he is blown along the following directions: 2.50 km and 45.0° north of west, then 4.70 km and 60.0° south of
east, then 1.30 km and 25.0° south of west, then 5.10 km strai ght east, then 1.70 km and 5.00° east of north, then 7.20 km

2.9.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83904and 55.0° south of west, and finally 2.80 km and 10.0° nort h of east. Use a graphical method to find the castaway’s final
position relative to the island.
32. A small plane flies 40.0 km in a direction 60° nor th of east and then flies 30.0 km in a direction 15° nor th of east. Use a
graphical method to find the total distance the plane cov ers from the starting point and the direction of the pa th to the
final position.
33. A trapper walks a 5.0-km straight-line distance fr om his cabin to the lake, as shown in the following figure. Us e a
graphical method (the parallelogram rule) to determin e the trapper’s displacement directly to the east and dis placement
directly to the north that sum up to his resultant disp lacement vector. If the trapper walked only in direction s east and
north, zigzagging his way to the lake, how many kilometers would he have to walk to get to the lake?
34. A surveyor measures the distance across a river that flo ws straight north by the following method. Starting direct ly across
from a tree on the opposite bank, the surveyor walks 100 m al ong the river to establish a baseline. She then sights acr oss
to the tree and reads that the angle from the baseline to the tree is 35°. How wide is the river?
35. A pedestrian walks 6.0 km east and then 13.0 km north. Use a graphical method to find the pedestrian’s resultant
displacement and geographic direction.
36. The magnitudes of two displacement vectors are A = 20 m and B = 6 m. What are the largest and the smallest v alues of
the magnitude of the resultant?
2.9.E.2.2 Coordinate Systems and Components of a Vector
37. Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal and points to the right, resolve the vectors given in the following figure to their scalar
components and express them in vector component form.
38. Suppose you walk 18.0 m straight west and then 25.0 m stra ight north. How far are you from your starting point? Wh at is
your displacement vector? What is the direction of you r displacement? Assume the +x-axis is to the east.
39. You drive 7.50 km in a straight line in a direction 1 5° east of north. (a) Find the distances you would have to d rive
straight east and then straight north to arrive at the sam e point. (b) Show that you still arrive at the same point if the east
and north legs are reversed in order. Assume the +xaxis is to the east.
40. A sledge is being pulled by two horses on a flat terrain. The net force on the sledge can be expressed in the Cartesian
coordinate system as vector = (−2980.0 + 8200.0)N, wh ere and denote directions to the east and north,
respectively. Find the magnitude and direction of the pull.
41. A trapper walks a 5.0-km straight-line distance fr om her cabin to the lake, as shown in the following figure. Det ermine
the east and north components of her displacement vect or. How many more kilometers would she have to walk if she

2.9.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83904walked along the component displacements? What is her d isplacement vector?
42. The polar coordinates of a point are and 5.50 m. W hat are its Cartesian coordinates?
43. Two points in a plane have polar coordinates P (2.500 m,) and P (3.800 m,). Determine their Cartesian coordin ates
and the distance between them in the Cartesian coordinate system. Round the distance to a nearest centimeter.
44. A chameleon is resting quietly on a lanai screen, waitin g for an insect to come by. Assume the origin of a Cartesian
coordinate system at the lower left-hand corner of the screen and the horizontal direction to the right as the +x-direction.
If its coordinates are (2.000 m, 1.000 m), (a) how far is i t from the corner of the screen? (b) What is its location in polar
coordinates?
45. Two points in the Cartesian plane are A(2.00 m, −4.00 m) and B(−3.00 m, 3.00 m). Find the distance between them a nd
their polar coordinates.
46. A fly enters through an open window and zooms around th e room. In a Cartesian coordinate system with three axes alon g
three edges of the room, the fly changes its position from poi nt b(4.0 m, 1.5 m, 2.5 m) to point e(1.0 m, 4.5 m, 0.5 m).
Find the scalar components of the fly’s displacement vecto r and express its displacement vector in vector component
form. What is its magnitude?
2.9.E.2.3 Algebra of Vectors
47. For vectors and, calculate (a) and its magnitude a nd direction angle, and (b) and
its magnitude and direction angle.
48. A particle undergoes three consecutive displacements g iven by vectors = (3.0 − 4.0 − 2.0)mm, = (1.0 − 7.0
+ 4.0)mm, and = (−7.0 + 4.0 + 1.0)mm. (a) Find the resul tant displacement vector of the particle. (b) What is th e
magnitude of the resultant displacement? (c) If all disp lacements were along one line, how far would the particle travel?
49. Given two displacement vectors = (3.00 − 4.00 + 4.00)m and = (2.00 + 3.00 − 7.00)m, find the
displacements and their magnitudes for (a) and (b).
50. A small plane flies 40.0 km in a direction 60° nor th of east and then flies 30.0 km in a direction 15° nor th of east. Use the
analytical method to find the total distance the plane cov ers from the starting point, and the geographic direct ion of its
displacement vector. What is its displacement vector?
51.. In an attempt to escape a desert island, a castaway bu ilds a raft and sets out to sea. The wind shifts a great deal du ring
the day, and she is blown along the following straight lin es: 2.50 km and 45.0° north of west, then 4.70 km and 60.0°
south of east, then 1.30 km and 25.0° south of west, then 5.10 km due east, then 1.70 km and 5.00° east of north, then
7.20 km and 55.0° south of west, and finally 2.80 km and 10. 0° north of east. Use the analytical method to find the
resultant vector of all her displacement vectors. What is its magnitude and direction?
52. Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right for the vectors given in the following figure, use the analytical method to
find the following resultants:
a.,
b.,
c.,
d.,
e.,
f.,
g., and
h..1 2

2.9.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8390453. Given the vectors in the preceding figure, find vector that solves equations (a) and (b).
Assume the +x-axis is horizontal to the right.
54. A delivery man starts at the post office, drives 4 0 km north, then 20 km west, then 60 km northeast, and final ly 50 km
north to stop for lunch. Use the analytical method to determi ne the following: (a) Find his net displacement vector. (b)
How far is the restaurant from the post office? (c) If he r eturns directly from the restaurant to the post office, what is his
displacement vector on the return trip? (d) What is his compass heading on the return trip? Assume the +x-axis is to the
east.
55. An adventurous dog strays from home, runs three blo cks east, two blocks north, and one block east, one block north, and
two blocks west. Assuming that each block is about a 100 yd, use the analytical method to find the dog’s net displacement
vector, its magnitude, and its direction. Assume the +x-axis is to the east. How would your answer be affected if each
block was about 100 m?
56. If = (6.00 − 8.00 m, = (−8.00 + 3.00)m, and = (26.0 + 19.0)m, find the unknown constants a and b such
that a.
57. Given the displacement vector = (3 − 4)m, find the di splacement vector so that + = −4D.
58. Find the unit vector of direction for the following vector q uantities: (a) Force = (3.0 − 2.0)N, (b) displacement =
(−3.0 − 4.0)m, and (c) velocity = (−5.00 + 4.00)m/s.
59. At one point in space, the direction of the electric fie ld vector is given in the Cartesian system by the unit vecto r
. If the magnitude of the electric field vector is E = 40 0.0 V/m, what are the scalar components E, E, and E of the
electric field vector at this point? What is the direc tion angle of the electric field vector at this point?
60. A barge is pulled by the two tugboats shown in the followin g figure. One tugboat pulls on the barge with a force of
magnitude 4000 units of force at 15° above the line AB (see the figure and the other tugboat pulls on the barge with a
force of magnitude 5000 units of force at 12° below the line AB. Resolve the pulling forces to their scalar compo nents
and find the components of the resultant force pulling on the barge. What is the magnitude of the resultant pull? What is
its direction relative to the line AB?
61. In the control tower at a regional airport, an air traffic controller monitors two aircraft as their posit ions change with
respect to the control tower. One plane is a cargo carrie r Boeing 747 and the other plane is a Douglas DC-3. The Boei ng
is at an altitude of 2500 m, climbing at 10° above the hor izontal, and moving 30° north of west. The DC-3 is at an altitude
of 3000 m, climbing at 5° above the horizontal, and cruisin g directly west. (a) Find the position vectors of the pla nes
relative to the control tower. (b) What is the distance b etween the planes at the moment the air traffic controlle r makes a
note about their positions?
2.9.E.2.4 Products of Vectors
62. Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right for the vectors in the following figure, find the following scalar p roducts:
a.,
b.,
c.,
d.,
e.,
f.,
g. and
h..x y z

2.9.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83904
63. Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right for the vect ors in the preceding figure, find (a) the component of vec tor
along vector, (b) the component of vector along vecto r, (c) the component of vector along vector, and (d) t he
component of vector along vector.
64. Find the angle between vectors for
a. = (−3.0 − 4.0)m and = (−3.0 + 4.0)m and
b. = (2.0 − 4.0 +)m and = (−2.0 + 3.0 + 2.0)m.
65. Find the angles that vector = (2.0 − 4.0 +)m makes with t he x-, y-, and z-axes.
66. Show that the force vector = (2.0 − 4.0 +)N is orthogonal to the force vector = (3.0 + 4.0 + 10.0)N.
67. Assuming the +x-axis is horizontal to the right for the vectors in the following figure, find the following vector products:
a.,
b.,
c.
d.,
e.,
f.,
g. and
h..
68. Find the cross product for
a. = 2.0 − 4.0 + and = 3.0 + 4.0 + 10.0,
b. = 3.0 + 4.0 + 10.0 and = 2.0 − 4.0 +,
c. = −3.0 − 4.0 and = −3.0 + 4.0, and
d. = −2.0 + 3.0 + 2.0 and = −9.0.
69. For the vectors in the following figure, find (a) (), (b) (), and (c) ().

2.9.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83904
70. (a) If, can we conclude =? (b) If =, can we conclude =? (c) If =, can we
conclude =? Why or why not?
2.9.E.3 Additional Problems
71. You fly 32.0 km in a straight line in still air in the direction 35.0° south of west. (a) Find the distances you wo uld have to
fly due south and then due west to arrive at the same poin t. (b) Find the distances you would have to fly first in a
direction 45.0° south of west and then in a direction 4 5.0° west of north. Note these are the components of the
displacement along a different set of axes—namely, the one rotated by 45° with respect to the axes in (a).
72. Rectangular coordinates of a point are given by (2, y) and its polar coordinates are given by (r,). Find y and r.
73. If the polar coordinates of a point are (r,) and its rectangular coordinates are (x, y), determine the polar co ordinates of
the following points: (a) (−x, y), (b) (−2x, −2y), and (c) (3x, −3y).
74. Vectors and have identical magnitudes of 5.0 units. Find t he angle between them if + = 5 2.
75. Starting at the island of Moi in an unknown archipelag o, a fishing boat makes a round trip with two stops at the i slands of
Noi and Poi. It sails from Moi for 4.76 nautical miles (nmi) in a direction 37° north of east to Noi. From Noi, it sails 69°
west of north to Poi. On its return leg from Poi, it sails 28° east of south. What distance does the boat sail between Noi
and Poi? What distance does it sail between Moi and Poi? Expr ess your answer both in nautical miles and in kilometers.
Note: 1 nmi = 1852 m.
76. An air traffic controller notices two signals from two p lanes on the radar monitor. One plane is at altitude 800 m and in a
19.2-km horizontal distance to the tower in a direction 25° south of west. The second plane is at altitude 1100 m and its
horizontal distance is 17.6 km and 20° south of west. What is t he distance between these planes?
77. Show that when + =, then C = A + B + 2AB cos, where is the angle between vectors and.
78. Four force vectors each have the same magnitude f. Wh at is the largest magnitude the resultant force vector may have
when these forces are added? What is the smallest magnitude o f the resultant? Make a graph of both situations.
79. A skater glides along a circular path of radius 5.00 m in clockwise direction. When he coasts around one-hal f of the
circle, starting from the west point, find (a) the magnitu de of his displacement vector and (b) how far he actually s kated.
(c) What is the magnitude of his displacement vector when he skates all the way around the circle and comes back to th e
west point?
80. A stubborn dog is being walked on a leash by its owner. At o ne point, the dog encounters an interesting scent at som e spot
on the ground and wants to explore it in detail, but the owner gets impatient and pulls on the leash with force = (9 8.0
+ 132.0 + 32.0)N along the leash. (a) What is the magnit ude of the pulling force? (b) What angle does the leash ma ke
with the vertical?
81. If the velocity vector of a polar bear is = (−18.0 − 13.0)km/h, how fast and in what geographic direction is i t
heading? Here, and are directions to geographic east an d north, respectively.
82. Find the scalar components of three-dimensional vectors and in the following figure and write the vectors in vector
component form in terms of the unit vectors of the axes.2 2 2

2.9.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83904
83. A diver explores a shallow reef off the coast of Be lize. She initially swims 90.0 m north, makes a turn to the e ast and
continues for 200.0 m, then follows a big grouper for 80.0 m in the direction 30° north of east. In the meantime, a l ocal
current displaces her by 150.0 m south. Assuming the curre nt is no longer present, in what direction and how far should
she now swim to come back to the point where she started?
84. A force vector has x- and y-components, respectively, o f −8.80 units of force and 15.00 units of force. The x- an d ycomponents of force vector are, respectively, 13.20 uni ts of force and −6.60 units of force. Find the components o f
force vector that satisfies the vector equation − + 3 = 0.
85. Vectors and are two orthogonal vectors in the xy-plane and they have identical magnitudes. If = 3.0 + 4.0, find
86. For the three-dimensional vectors in the following figure, find (a), (b) | |, and (c).

2.9.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83904
87. Show that is the volume of the parallelepiped, with edges formed by the three vectors in the following figure.
2.9.E.4 Challenge Problems
88. Vector is 5.0 cm long and vector is 4.0 cm long. Find the angle between these two vectors when | | = 3.0 cm and
| − | = 3.0 cm.
89. What is the component of the force vector = (3.0 + 4.0 + 10.0)N along the force vector = (1.0 + 4.0)N?
90. The following figure shows a triangle formed by the thre e vectors, and. If vector is drawn between the
midpoints of vectors and, show that =.
91. Distances between points in a plane do not change when a coordinate system is rotated. In other words, the magnitude o f
a vector is invariant under rotations of the coordinate system. Suppose a coord inate system S is rotated about its origin
by angle to become a new coordinate system S′, as shown in the following figure. A point in a plane has coordinates (x,
y) in S and coordinates (x′, y′) in S′.
a. Show that, during the transformation of rotation, the coor dinates in S′ are expressed in terms of the coordinates i n S
by the following relations: $

2.9.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83904\ldotp$
b. Show that the distance of point P to the origin is inva riant under rotations of the coordinate system. Here, you ha ve to
show that $\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}} = \sqrt{x'^{2} + y'^{2}} \l dotp$
c. Show that the distance between points P and Q is invariant un der rotations of the coordinate system. Here, you have to
show that $\sqrt{(x_{P} - x_{Q})^{2} + (y_{P} - y_{Q})^{2}} = \sqrt{(x'_{P} - x'_{Q})^{2} + (y'_{P} y'_{Q})^{2}} \ldotp$
2.9.E.5 Contributors
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 2.9.E: Practice is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.E: Vectors (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me1.

2.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83907SECTION OVERVIEW
2.10: Vectors
This chapter will formally introduce vectors and will describe the various operations associated with them. I t will serve a prelude to
relative motion and motion in a plane.
2.10: Vectors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Electric Charge and Electric Field
3.1: Introduction
3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation of Cha rge
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
3.4: Coulomb's Law
3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited
3.6: Electric Field Lines
3.7: Electric Forces in Biology
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
3.10: Practice
This page titled 3: Electric Charge and Electric Field is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839093.1: Introduction
The image of American politician and scientist Benjam in Franklin (1706–1790) flying a kite in a thundersto rm is familiar to every
schoolchild. (Figure) In this experiment, Franklin dem onstrated a connection between lightning and static electricity. Sparks
were drawn from a key hung on a kite string during an electrical storm. These sparks were like those produc ed by static electricity,
such as the spark that jumps from your finger to a me tal doorknob after you walk across a wool carpet. What Franklin
demonstrated in his dangerous experiment was a connec tion between phenomena on two different scales: one t he grand power of
an electrical storm, the other an effect of more hu man proportions. Connections like this one reveal the underlying unity of the laws
of nature, an aspect we humans find particularly appeali ng.
Figure: Static electricity from this plastic slide cau ses the child’s hair to stand on end. The sliding motion stripped electrons
away from the child’s body, leaving an excess of positi ve charges, which repel each other along each strand of hair. (credit: Ken
Bosma/Wikimedia Commons)
Figure: When Benjamin Franklin demonstrated that lig htning was related to static electricity, he made a c onnection that is now
part of the evidence that all directly experienced forces except the gravitational force are manifestati ons of the electromagnetic
force.
Much has been written about Franklin. His experiments wer e only part of the life of a man who was a scientist, inventor,
revolutionary, statesman, and writer. Franklin’s exper iments were not performed in isolation, nor were they the only ones to reveal
connections.
For example, the Italian scientist Luigi Galvani (1737– 1798) performed a series of experiments in which stat ic electricity was used
to stimulate contractions of leg muscles of dead frog s, an effect already known in humans subjected to sta tic discharges. But
Galvani also found that if he joined two metal wires (say copper and zinc) end to end and touched the oth er ends to muscles, he
produced the same effect in frogs as static dischar ge. Alessandro V olta (1745–1827), partly inspired by Gal vani’s work,
experimented with various combinations of metals and devel oped the battery.

3.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83909During the same era, other scientists made progress in discovering fundamental connections. The periodic tab le was developed as
the systematic properties of the elements were disco vered. This influenced the development and refinement of the concept of atoms
as the basis of matter. Such submicroscopic descriptions o f matter also help explain a great deal more.
Atomic and molecular interactions, such as the force s of friction, cohesion, and adhesion, are now known to be manifestations of
the electromagnetic force. Static electricity is just one aspect of the electro magnetic force, which also includes moving electricit y
and magnetism.
All the macroscopic forces that we experience directly, such as the sensations of touch and the tension in a rope, are due to the
electromagnetic force, one of the four fundamental forces in nature. The gravitational force, another fu ndamental force, is actually
sensed through the electromagnetic interaction of m olecules, such as between those in our feet and those on the top of a bathroom
scale. (The other two fundamental forces, the strong nuc lear force and the weak nuclear force, cannot be sens ed on the human
scale.)
This chapter begins the study of electromagnetic phe nomena at a fundamental level. The next several chapt ers will cover static
electricity, moving electricity, and magnetism—colle ctively known as electromagnetism. In this chapter, we b egin with the study of
electric phenomena due to charges that are at least temporar ily stationary, called electrostatics, or static electric ity.
Glossary
static electricity
a buildup of electric charge on the surface of an object
electromagnetic force
one of the four fundamental forces of nature; the electr omagnetic force consists of static electricity, moving e lectricity and
magnetism
This page titled 3.1: Introduction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
18.0: Prelude to Electric Charge and Electric Field by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

3.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839103.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation of Charge
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define electric charge, and describe how the two types of c harge interact.
Describe three common situations that generate static elect ricity.
State the law of conservation of charge.
What makes plastic wrap cling? Static electricity. Not only are applications of static electricity common these days, its existence
has been known since ancient times. The first record o f its effects dates to ancient Greeks who noted more than 500 years B.C. that
polishing amber temporarily enabled it to attract bi ts of straw (Figure). The very word electric derives from the Greek word
for amber (electron).
Figure: Borneo amber was mined in Sabah, Malaysia, fro m shale-sandstone-mudstone veins. When a piece of amber is rubbed
with a piece of silk, the amber gains more electrons, giving it a net negative charge. At the same time, t he silk, having lost
electrons, becomes positively charged. (credit: Sebako amber, Wikimedia Commons).
Many of the characteristics of static electricity can be explored by rubbing things together. Rubbing cr eates the spark you get from
walking across a wool carpet, for example. Static cling generated in a clothes dryer and the attraction of straw to recently polished
amber also result from rubbing. Similarly, lightning results from air movements under certain weather con ditions. You can also rub
a balloon on your hair, and the static electricity created can then make the balloon cling to a wall. We also have to be cautious of
static electricity, especially in dry climates. Whe n we pump gasoline, we are warned to discharge ourselv es (after sliding across the
seat) on a metal surface before grabbing the gas no zzle. Attendants in hospital operating rooms must wear bo oties with a
conductive strip of aluminum foil on the bottoms to avoid creating sparks which may ignite flammable ane sthesia gases combined
with the oxygen being used.
Some of the most basic characteristics of static electrici ty include:
The effects of static electricity are explained by a phy sical quantity not previously introduced, called electri c charge.
There are only two types of charge, one called positive and the other called negative.
Like charges repel, whereas unlike charges attract.
The force between charges decreases with distance.
How do we know there are two types of electric charge? When various materials are rubbed together in cont rolled ways, certain
combinations of materials always produce one type of charge on one material and the opposite type on the other. By convention,
we call one type of charge “positive”, and the other type “negative.” For example, when glass is rubbed with silk, the glass
becomes positively charged and the silk negatively c harged. Since the glass and silk have opposite charges, they attract one another
like clothes that have rubbed together in a dryer. Two glass rods rubbed with silk in this manner will repe l one another, since each
rod has positive charge on it. Similarly, two silk cloth s so rubbed will repel, since both cloths have negative charge. Figure
shows how these simple materials can be used to explore the nature of the force between charges.Learning Objectives

3.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83910
Figure: A glass rod becomes positively charged when rub bed with silk, while the silk becomes negatively charg ed. (a) The
glass rod is attracted to the silk because their charges are opposite. (b) Two similarly charged glass rods repel. (c) Two similarly
charged silk cloths repel.
More sophisticated questions arise. Where do these ch arges come from? Can you create or destroy charge? Is there a smallest unit
of charge? Exactly how does the force depend on the amount of charge and the distance between charges? Suc h questions
obviously occurred to Benjamin Franklin and other early re searchers, and they interest us even today.
Charge Carried by Electrons and Protons
Franklin wrote in his letters and books that he could see the effects of electric charge but did not unde rstand what caused the
phenomenon. Today we have the advantage of knowing tha t normal matter is made of atoms, and that atoms con tain positive and
negative charges, usually in equal amounts.
Figure shows a simple model of an atom with negative electrons orbiting its positive nucleus. The nucleus is positiv e due to
the presence of positively charged protons. Nearly all charge in nature is due to electrons and protons, which are two of the three
building blocks of most matter. (The third is the neu tron, which is neutral, carrying no charge.) Other cha rge-carrying particles are
observed in cosmic rays and nuclear decay, and are created in particle accelerators. All but the electr on and proton survive only a
short time and are quite rare by comparison.
Figure: This simplified (and not to scale) view of an atom is called the planetary model of the atom. Nega tive electrons orbit a
much heavier positive nucleus, as the planets orbit the much heavier sun. There the similarity ends, because f orces in the atom are
electromagnetic, whereas those in the planetary system are gravitational. Normal macroscopic amounts of matt er contain immense
numbers of atoms and molecules and, hence, even greate r numbers of individual negative and positive charges.
The charges of electrons and protons are identical i n magnitude but opposite in sign. Furthermore, all cha rged objects in nature are
integral multiples of this basic quantity of charge, meaning that all charges are made of combinations o f a basic unit of charge.
Usually, charges are formed by combinations of electrons an d protons. The magnitude of this basic charge is
The symbol is commonly used for charge and the subscrip t indicates the charge of a single electron (or proton).
The SI unit of charge is the coulomb (C). The number of protons needed to make a charge of 1.00 C is
Similarly, electrons have a combined charge of −1.00 coulomb. Just as there is a smallest bit of an element (an atom),
there is a smallest bit of charge. There is no direc tly observed charge smaller than (see Things Great and Small: The
Submicroscopic Origin of Charge), and all observed charges are integral multiples of \(∣q_e∣\).

3.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83910With the exception of exotic, short-lived particles, all charge in nature is carried by electrons and pr otons. Electrons carry the
charge we have named negative. Protons carry an equal-m agnitude charge that we call positive. (Figure) Elect ron and
proton charges are considered fundamental building b locks, since all other charges are integral multiples of those carried by
electrons and protons. Electrons and protons are also t wo of the three fundamental building blocks of ordin ary matter. The
neutron is the third and has zero total charge.
Figure shows a person touching a Van de Graaff generat or and receiving excess positive charge. The expande d view of a hair
shows the existence of both types of charges but an excess of positive. The repulsion of these positive like charges causes the
strands of hair to repel other strands of hair and t o stand up. The further blowup shows an artist’s conce ption of an electron and a
proton perhaps found in an atom in a strand of hair.
Figure: When this person touches a Van de Graaff gener ator, some electrons are attracted to the generator, resulting in an
excess of positive charge, causing her hair to stand on end. The charges in one hair are shown. An artist’s con ception of an electron
and a proton illustrate the particles carrying the ne gative and positive charges. We cannot really see these particles with visible light
because they are so small (the electron seems to be an i nfinitesimal point), but we know a great deal about their measurable
properties, such as the charges they carry.
The electron seems to have no substructure; in contr ast, when the substructure of protons is explored by sc attering extremely
energetic electrons from them, it appears that there are point-like particles inside the proton. These sub -particles, named quarks,
have never been directly observed, but they are beli eved to carry fractional charges as seen in Figure. C harges on electrons
and protons and all other directly observable partic les are unitary, but these quark substructures carry c harges of either or.
There are continuing attempts to observe fractional charge directly and to learn of the properties of quarks, which are perhaps the
ultimate substructure of matter.
Figure: Artist’s conception of fractional quark charg es inside a proton. A group of three quark charges add up to the single
positive charge on the proton:.THINGS GREAT AND SMALL: THE SUBMICROSCOPIC ORIGIN OF CHARGE

3.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83910Separation of Charge in Atoms
Charges in atoms and molecules can be separated—for example, by rubbing materials together. Some atoms and molecules have a
greater affinity for electrons than others and will b ecome negatively charged by close contact in rubbing, leaving the other material
positively charged. (Figure) Positive charge can simil arly be induced by rubbing. Methods other than rubbin g can also
separate charges. Batteries, for example, use combinat ions of substances that interact in such a way as to se parate charges.
Chemical interactions may transfer negative charge fr om one substance to the other, making one battery t erminal negative and
leaving the first one positive.
Figure: When materials are rubbed together, charges c an be separated, particularly if one material has a g reater affinity for
electrons than another. (a) Both the amber and cloth are originally neutral, with equal positive and neg ative charges. Only a tiny
fraction of the charges are involved, and only a few of them are shown here. (b) When rubbed together, so me negative charge is
transferred to the amber, leaving the cloth with a n et positive charge. (c) When separated, the amber and cloth now have net
charges, but the absolute value of the net positive an d negative charges will be equal.
No charge is actually created or destroyed when charg es are separated as we have been discussing. Rather, exi sting charges are
moved about. In fact, in all situations the total amo unt of charge is always constant. This universally obe yed law of nature is called
the law of conservation of charge.
Total charge is constant in any process.
In more exotic situations, such as in particle acceler ators, mass,, can be created from energy in the am ount.
Sometimes, the created mass is charged, such as when an el ectron is created. Whenever a charged particle is cr eated, another
having an opposite charge is always created along with it, so that the total charge created is zero. Usually, the two particles are
“matter-antimatter” counterparts. For example, an anti electron would usually be created at the same time a s an electron. The
antielectron has a positive charge (it is called a p ositron), and so the total charge created is zero. (Figure) All particles have
antimatter counterparts with opposite signs. When matter and antimatter counterparts are brought together, t hey completely
annihilate one another. By annihilate, we mean that t he mass of the two particles is converted to energy E, again obeying the
relationship. Since the two particles have equal and opposite charge, the total charge is zero before and after the
annihilation; thus, total charge is conserved.
Only a limited number of physical quantities are univ ersally conserved. Charge is one—energy, momentum, and angular
momentum are others. Because they are conserved, the se physical quantities are used to explain more phen omena and form
more connections than other, less basic quantities. We find that conserved quantities give us great insig ht into the rules
followed by nature and hints to the organization of n ature. Discoveries of conservation laws have led to fu rther discoveries,
such as the weak nuclear force and the quark substruct ure of protons and other particles.LAW OF CONSERVATION OF CHARGE
MAKING CONNECTIONS: CONSERVATION LAWS

3.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83910
Figure: (a) When enough energy is present, it can be converted into matter. Here the matter created is an electron–antielectron
pair. (is the electron’s mass.) The total charge befor e and after this event is zero. (b) When matter and a ntimatter collide, they
annihilate each other; the total charge is conserved at zero before and after the annihilation.
The law of conservation of charge is absolute—it has never been observed to be violated. Charge, then, is a special physical
quantity, joining a very short list of other quantiti es in nature that are always conserved. Other conserved quantities include energy,
momentum, and angular momentum.
Summary
There are only two types of charge, which we call positive a nd negative.
Like charges repel, unlike charges attract, and the force b etween charges decreases with the square of the distance.
The vast majority of positive charge in nature is carried b y protons, while the vast majority of negative charge is carr ied by
electrons.
The electric charge of one electron is equal in magnit ude and opposite in sign to the charge of one proton.
An ion is an atom or molecule that has nonzero total ch arge due to having unequal numbers of electrons and proto ns.
The SI unit for charge is the coulomb (C), with protons an d electrons having charges of opposite sign but equal magnitude; the
magnitude of this basic charge is
Whenever charge is created or destroyed, equal amounts o f positive and negative are involved.
Most often, existing charges are separated from neutral objec ts to obtain some net charge.
Both positive and negative charges exist in neutral object s and can be separated by rubbing one object with ano ther. For
macroscopic objects, negatively charged means an excess of e lectrons and positively charged means a depletion of el ectrons.
The law of conservation of charge ensures that whenever a c harge is created, an equal charge of the opposite sign i s created at
the same time.

3.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83910Glossary
electric charge
a physical property of an object that causes it to be at tracted toward or repelled from another charged object; each charged
object generates and is influenced by a force called an e lectromagnetic force
law of conservation of charge
states that whenever a charge is created, an equal amount o f charge with the opposite sign is created simultaneousl y
electron
a particle orbiting the nucleus of an atom and carrying the smallest unit of negative charge
proton
a particle in the nucleus of an atom and carrying a posi tive charge equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to the amount of
negative charge carried by an electron
This page titled 3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation of Charge is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
18.1: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation of C harge by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

3.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839113.3: Conductors and Insulators
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define conductor and insulator, explain the difference, an d give examples of each.
Describe three methods for charging an object.
Explain what happens to an electric force as you move fart her from the source.
Define polarization.
Some substances, such as metals and salty water, allow c harges to move through them with relative ease. Some of the electrons in
metals and similar conductors are not bound to indiv idual atoms or sites in the material. These free electrons can move through the
material much as air moves through loose sand. Any subs tance that has free electrons and allows charge to mov e relatively freely
through it is called a conductor. The moving electrons may collide with fixed atoms a nd molecules, losing some energy, but they
can move in a conductor. Superconductors allow the move ment of charge without any loss of energy. Salty water a nd other similar
conducting materials contain free ions that can mov e through them. An ion is an atom or molecule having a positive or negative
(nonzero) total charge. In other words, the total number of electrons is not equal to the total number of protons.
Figure: This power adapter uses metal wires and connect ors to conduct electricity from the wall socket to a laptop computer.
The conducting wires allow electrons to move freely t hrough the cables, which are shielded by rubber and p lastic. These materials
act as insulators that don’t allow electric charge to escape outward. (credit: Evan-Amos, Wikimedia Commons)
Other substances, such as glass, do not allow charges to m ove through them. These are called insulators. Electrons and ions in
insulators are bound in the structure and cannot mo ve easily—as much as times more slowly than in condu ctors. Pure water
and dry table salt are insulators, for example, whereas mol ten salt and salty water are conductors.
Charging by Contact
Figure shows an electroscope being charged by touchi ng it with a positively charged glass rod. Because the glass rod is an
insulator, it must actually touch the electroscope t o transfer charge to or from it. (Note that the extra positive charges reside on the
surface of the glass rod as a result of rubbing it wit h silk before starting the experiment.) Since only el ectrons move in metals, we
see that they are attracted to the top of the elect roscope. There, some are transferred to the positive rod by touch, leaving the
electroscope with a net positive charge.Learning Objectives

3.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83911
Figure: An electroscope is a favorite instrument in phy sics demonstrations and student laboratories. It is typica lly made with
gold foil leaves hung from a (conducting) metal stem and is insulated from the room air in a glass-walled co ntainer. (a) A positively
charged glass rod is brought near the tip of the elect roscope, attracting electrons to the top and leaving a net positive charge on the
leaves. Like charges in the light flexible gold leave s repel, separating them. (b) When the rod is touched against the ball, electrons
are attracted and transferred, reducing the net char ge on the glass rod but leaving the electroscope positi vely charged. (c) The
excess charges are evenly distributed in the stem and le aves of the electroscope once the glass rod is removed.
Electrostatic repulsion in the leaves of the charged electroscope separates them. The electrostatic force has a horizontal component
that results in the leaves moving apart as well as a v ertical component that is balanced by the gravitati onal force. Similarly, the
electroscope can be negatively charged by contact with a n egatively charged object.
Charging by Induction
It is not necessary to transfer excess charge directl y to an object in order to charge it. Figure shows a method of induction
wherein a charge is created in a nearby object, without direct contact. Here we see two neutral metal spheres in contact with one
another but insulated from the rest of the world. A p ositively charged rod is brought near one of them, a ttracting negative charge to
that side, leaving the other sphere positively charged.
Figure: Charging by induction. (a) Two uncharged or neutral metal spheres are in contact with each other but insulated from
the rest of the world. (b) A positively charged glass r od is brought near the sphere on the left, attracting negative charge and leaving
the other sphere positively charged. (c) The spheres ar e separated before the rod is removed, thus separating negative and positive
charge. (d) The spheres retain net charges after the i nducing rod is removed—without ever having been touc hed by a charged
object.
This is an example of induced polarization of neutra l objects. Polarization is the separation of charges in an object that remains
neutral. If the spheres are now separated (before the r od is pulled away), each sphere will have a net charge. Note that the object

3.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83911closest to the charged rod receives an opposite charge when charged by induction. Note also that no charge i s removed from the
charged rod, so that this process can be repeated without de pleting the supply of excess charge.
Figure: Charging by induction, using a ground connec tion. (a) A positively charged rod is brought near a neutral metal sphere,
polarizing it. (b) The sphere is grounded, allowing e lectrons to be attracted from the earth’s ample supply. (c) The ground
connection is broken. (d) The positive rod is removed, leaving the sphere with an induced negative charge.
Another method of charging by induction is shown in Fig ure. The neutral metal sphere is polarized when a ch arged rod is
brought near it. The sphere is then grounded, meanin g that a conducting wire is run from the sphere to t he ground. Since the earth
is large and most ground is a good conductor, it can supply or accept excess charge easily. In this case, electrons are attracted to the
sphere through a wire called the ground wire, because it supplies a conducting path to the ground. The gr ound connection is broken
before the charged rod is removed, leaving the sphere with an excess charge opposite to that of the rod. Again, an opposit e charge is
achieved when charging by induction and the charged rod lo ses none of its excess charge.
Neutral objects can be attracted to any charged objec t. The pieces of straw attracted to polished amber are neutral, for example. If
you run a plastic comb through your hair, the charg ed comb can pick up neutral pieces of paper. Figure shows how the
polarization of atoms and molecules in neutral objects res ults in their attraction to a charged object.
Figure: Both positive and negative objects attract a neutral object by polarizing its molecules. (a) A posi tive object brought
near a neutral insulator polarizes its molecules. There is a slight shift in the distribution of the electrons orbiting the molecule, with
unlike charges being brought nearer and like charges moved away. Since the electrostatic force decreases wi th distance, there is a
net attraction. (b) A negative object produces the o pposite polarization, but again attracts the neutral object. (c) The same effect
occurs for a conductor; since the unlike charges are c loser, there is a net attraction.
When a charged rod is brought near a neutral substan ce, an insulator in this case, the distribution of c harge in atoms and molecules
is shifted slightly. Opposite charge is attracted neare r the external charged rod, while like charge is rep elled. Since the electrostatic
force decreases with distance, the repulsion of like charges is weaker than the attraction of unlike char ges, and so there is a net
attraction. Thus a positively charged glass rod attrac ts neutral pieces of paper, as will a negatively cha rged rubber rod. Some
molecules, like water, are polar molecules. Polar mol ecules have a natural or inherent separation of cha rge, although they are
neutral overall. Polar molecules are particularly af fected by other charged objects and show greater pol arization effects than
molecules with naturally uniform charge distributions.

3.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83911Can you explain the attraction of water to the charged r od in the figure below?
Figure.
Solution
Water molecules are polarized, giving them slightly positive and slightly negative sides. This makes water even more
susceptible to a charged rod’s attraction. As the wate r flows downward, due to the force of gravity, the charg ed conductor
exerts a net attraction to the opposite charges in the st ream of water, pulling it closer.
Summary
Polarization is the separation of positive and negative charges in a neutral object.
A conductor is a substance that allows charge to flow freel y through its atomic structure.
An insulator holds charge within its atomic structure.
Objects with like charges repel each other, while those with u nlike charges attract each other.
A conducting object is said to be grounded if it is con nected to the Earth through a conductor. Grounding allows tr ansfer of
charge to and from the earth’s large reservoir.
Objects can be charged by contact with another charged o bject and obtain the same sign charge.
If an object is temporarily grounded, it can be charged b y induction, and obtains the opposite sign charge.
Polarized objects have their positive and negative charges concentrated in different areas, giving them a non-sym metrical
charge.
Polar molecules have an inherent separation of charge.
Glossary
free electron
an electron that is free to move away from its atomic orbit
conductor
a material that allows electrons to move separately fro m their atomic orbits
insulator
a material that holds electrons securely within their atomic orbits
grounded
when a conductor is connected to the Earth, allowing charge to freely flow to and from Earth’s unlimited reservoir
induction
the process by which an electrically charged object broug ht near a neutral object creates a charge in that objec t
polarizationCheck Your Understanding

3.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83911slight shifting of positive and negative charges to opposi te sides of an atom or molecule
electrostatic repulsion
the phenomenon of two objects with like charges repellin g each other
This page titled 3.3: Conductors and Insulators is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
18.2: Conductors and Insulators by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

3.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839123.4: Coulomb's Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
State Coulomb’s law in terms of how the electrostatic for ce changes with the distance between two objects.
Calculate the electrostatic force between two charged poi nt forces, such as electrons or protons.
Compare the electrostatic force to the gravitational att raction for a proton and an electron; for a human and the Earth.
Through the work of scientists in the late 18th centur y, the main features of the electrostatic force —the existence of two types of
charge, the observation that like charges repel, unlik e charges attract, and the decrease of force with dist ance—were eventually
refined, and expressed as a mathematical formula. The m athematical formula for the electrostatic force is c alled Coulomb’s law
after the French physicist Charles Coulomb (1736–1806), who performed experiments and first proposed a formula t o calculate it.
Figure: This NASA image of Arp 87 shows the result of a strong gravitational attraction between two galaxie s. In contrast, at
the subatomic level, the electrostatic attraction bet ween two objects, such as an electron and a proton, is far greater than their
mutual attraction due to gravity. (credit: NASA/HST)
Coulomb’s law calculates the magnitude of the force between two point charges, and, separated by a distance.
In SI units, the constant is equal to
The electrostatic force is a vector quantity and is expressed in units of newtons. The force is understoo d to be along the line joining
the two charges. (Figure)
Although the formula for Coulomb’s law is simple, it was no mean task to prove it. The experiments Coulomb did, with the
primitive equipment then available, were difficult. Mod ern experiments have verified Coulomb’s law to great precision. For
example, it has been shown that the force is inversely proportional to distance between two objects squared t o an
accuracy of 1 part in. No exceptions have ever been fou nd, even at the small distances within the atom.
Figure: The magnitude of the electrostatic force bet ween point charges and separated by a distance is gi ven by
Coulomb’s law. Note that Newton’s third law (every fo rce exerted creates an equal and opposite force) appl ies as usual—the force
on is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction t o the force it exerts on. (a) Like charges. (b) Unli ke charges.Learning Objectives
Definition: Coulomb’s Law

3.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83912Compare the electrostatic force between an electron and proton separated by with the gravitational forc e
between them. This distance is their average separation i n a hydrogen atom.
Strategy
To compare the two forces, we first compute the elect rostatic force using Coulomb’s law,. We then calcula te the
gravitational force using Newton’s universal law of gr avitation. Finally, we take a ratio to see how the force s compare in
magnitude.
Solution
Entering the given and known information about the c harges and separation of the electron and proton int o the expression
of Coulomb’s law yields
Thus the Coulomb force is
The charges are opposite in sign, so this is an attra ctive force. This is a very large force for an electro n—it would cause an
acceleration of (verification is left as an end-of-se ction problem).The gravitational force is given by
Newton’s law of gravitation as:
where. Here and represent the electron and proton m asses, which can be found in the
appendices. Entering values for the knowns yields
This is also an attractive force, although it is trad itionally shown as positive since gravitational force is always attractive.
The ratio of the magnitude of the electrostatic force to gravitational force in this case is, thus,

Discussion
This is a remarkably large ratio! Note that this will b e the ratio of electrostatic force to gravitational force for an electron
and a proton at any distance (taking the ratio befor e entering numerical values shows that the distance cancels). This ratio
gives some indication of just how much larger the Cou lomb force is than the gravitational force between two of the most
common particles in nature.
As the example implies, gravitational force is complet ely negligible on a small scale, where the interactio ns of individual charged
particles are important. On a large scale, such as bet ween the Earth and a person, the reverse is true. Most objects are nearly
electrically neutral, and so attractive and repulsiv e Coulomb forces nearly cancel. Gravitational force on a large scale dominates
interactions between large objects because it is always at tractive, while Coulomb forces tend to cancel.Example: How Strong is the Coulomb Force Relative to the Gravitational Force?

3.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83912A hydrogen atom consists of a single proton and a singl e electron. The proton has a charge of and the elec tron has. In the
“ground state” of the atom, the electron orbits the p roton at most probable distance of (Figure). Calculat e
the electric force on the electron due to the proton.
Figure: A schematic depiction of a hydrogen atom, sho wing the force on the electron. This depiction is onl y to enable us
to calculate the force; the hydrogen atom does not r eally look like this.
Strategy
For the purposes of this example, we are treating the electron and proton as two point particles, each with an electric
charge, and we are told the distance between them; we ar e asked to calculate the force on the electron. We thus use
Coulomb’s law (Equation).
Answer
Our two charges are,
and the distance between them
The magnitude of the force on the electron (Equation) is
As for the direction, since the charges on the two par ticles are opposite, the force is attractive; the for ce on the electron
points radially directly toward the proton, everywhere i n the electron’s orbit. The force is thus expressed as
Multiple Source Charges
The analysis that we have done for two particles can b e extended to an arbitrary number of particles; we si mply repeat the analysis,
two charges at a time. Specifically, we ask the questio n: Given N charges (which we refer to as source charge), what is the netExample: The Force on the Electron in Hydrogen

3.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83912electric force that they exert on some other point charg e (which we call the test charge)?
Like all forces that we have seen up to now, the net e lectric force on our test charge is simply the vect or sum of each individual
electric force exerted on it by each of the individ ual test charges. Thus, we can calculate the net for ce on the test charge Q by
calculating the force on it from each source charge, taken one at a time, and then adding all those forc es together (as vectors). This
ability to simply add up individual forces in this way is referred to as the principle of superposition, and is one of the more
important features of the electric force. In mathematica l form, this becomes
In this expression, Q represents the charge of the particle that is experi encing the electric force, and is located at from the
origin; the are the N source charges, and the vectors are the displaceme nts from the position of the ith charge to the position
of. In the notation used for vector, refers to th e magnitude of the vector, and unit vector refers to its direction. Each of the
N unit vectors points directly from its associated sourc e charge toward the test charge. All of this is depict ed in Figure. Please
note that there is no physical difference between Q and; the difference in labels is merely to allow c lear discussion, with Q being
the charge we are determining the force on.
Figure: The eight source charges each apply a force o n the single test charge Q. Each force can be calculated independently of
the other seven forces. This is the essence of the superpo sition principle.
(Note that the force vector does not necessarily poi nt in the same direction as the unit vector; it ma y point in the opposite
direction,. The signs of the source charge and test ch arge determine the direction of the force on the test char ge.)
Three different, small charged objects are placed a s shown in Figure. The charges and are fixed in pla ce; is free to
move. Given, and, and that, what is the net force on the mid dle charge?
Figure: Source charges and each apply a force on.Example: The Net Force from Two Source Charges

3.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83912Strategy
We use Coulomb’s law. The principle of superpositio n says that the force on from each of the other cha rges is unaffected
by the presence of the other charge. Therefore, we write do wn the force on from each and add them together as vectors.
Solution
We have two source charges and a test charge, dist ances and and we are asked to find a force. This cal ls for
Coulomb’s law and superposition of forces. There are two forc es:
x-component y-component
We cannot add these forces directly because they don’ t point in the same direction: points only in the − x-direction,
while points only in the + y-direction. The net force is obtained from applying the Pythagorean theorem to its x- and ycomponents:
and
and
We find that
at an angle of
that is, above the − x-axis, as shown in the diagram.

3.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83912Significance
Notice that when we substituted the numerical values of the charges, we did not include the negative sign of either or.
Recall that negative signs on vector quantities indi cate a reversal of direction of the vector in quest ion. But for electric
forces, the direction of the force is determined by t he types (signs) of both interacting charges; we dete rmine the force
directions by considering whether the signs of the two charges are the same or are opposite. If you also inc lude negative
signs from negative charges when you substitute numbe rs, you run the risk of mathematically reversing the direction of the
force you are calculating. Thus, the safest thing to do is to calculate just the magnitude of the force, us ing the absolute
values of the charges, and determine the directions phy sically.
It’s also worth noting that the only new concept in th is example is how to calculate the electric forces; ev erything else
(getting the net force from its components, breaking the forces into their components, finding the dire ction of the net force)
is the same as force problems you have done earlier.
Summary
Frenchman Charles Coulomb was the first to publish the mat hematical equation that describes the electrostatic fo rce between
two objects.
Coulomb’s law gives the magnitude of the force between point c harges. It is where and are two point charges
separated by a distance, and
This Coulomb force is extremely basic, since most charges are due to point-like particles. It is responsible for all e lectrostatic
effects and underlies most macroscopic forces.
The Coulomb force is extraordinarily strong compared with the gravitational force, another basic force—but un like
gravitational force it can cancel, since it can be eithe r attractive or repulsive.
The electrostatic force between two subatomic particles is far greater than the gravitational force between the same two
particles.
Glossary
Coulomb’s law
the mathematical equation calculating the electrostatic force vector between two charged particles
Coulomb force
another term for the electrostatic force
electrostatic force
the amount and direction of attraction or repulsion betwe en two charged bodies
This page titled 3.4: Coulomb's Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
18.3: Coulomb's Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
5.4: Coulomb's Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

3.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839133.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe a force field and calculate the strength of an electric field due to a point charge.
Calculate the force exerted on a test charge by an electri c field.
Explain the relationship between electrical force () on a test charge and electrical field strength ().
Contact forces, such as between a baseball and a bat, a re explained on the small scale by the interaction o f the charges in atoms and
molecules in close proximity. They interact through forces that include the Coulomb force. Action at a distance is a force between
objects that are not close enough for their atoms to “ touch.” That is, they are separated by more than a few atomic diameters.
For example, a charged rubber comb attracts neutral bits of paper from a distance via the Coulomb force. It is very useful to think
of an object being surrounded in space by a force field. The force field carries the force to another obje ct (called a test object) some
distance away.
Concept of a Field
A field is a way of conceptualizing and mapping the f orce that surrounds any object and acts on another obje ct at a distance without
apparent physical connection. For example, the gravita tional field surrounding the earth (and all other m asses) represents the
gravitational force that would be experienced if anoth er mass were placed at a given point within the field.
In the same way, the Coulomb force field surrounding an y charge extends throughout space. Using Coulomb’s law, its
magnitude is given by the equation, for a point charge (a particle having a charge) acting on a test charge at a
distance (Figure). Both the magnitude and direction o f the Coulomb force field depend on and the test char ge.
Figure: The Coulomb force field due to a positive ch arge is shown acting on two different charges. Both c harges are the
same distance from. (a) Since is positive, the force acting on it is repulsive. (b) The charge is negativ e and greater in
magnitude than, and so the force acting on it is at tractive and stronger than. The Coulomb force field is thus not unique at
any point in space, because it depends on the test char ges and as well as the charge.
To simplify things, we would prefer to have a field tha t depends only on and not on the test charge. The electric field is defined
in such a manner that it represents only the charge creating it and is unique at every point in space. Spe cifically, the electric field
is defined to be the ratio of the Coulomb force to the tes t charge:
where
This expression is called the electric field at posit ion due to charge. Here, is the location of the po int in space
where you are calculating the field and is relative to the positions of charge. Note that we have to impo se a coordinate system
to solve actual problems.Learning Objectives

3.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83913Notice that the calculation of the electric field ma kes no reference to the test charge. Thus, the physical ly useful approach is to
calculate the electric field using and then use it to calculate the force on some test charge later, if needed. Different test
charges experience different forces Equation. That being said, recall that there is no fundamental diff erence between a test
charge and a source charge; these are merely conveni ent labels for the system of interest. Any charge prod uces an electric field;
however, just as Earth’s orbit is not affected by Earth ’s own gravity, a charge is not subject to a force due to the electric field it
generates. Charges are only subject to forces from the elect ric fields of other charges.
In this respect, the electric field of a point cha rge is similar to the gravitational field of Earth; once we have calculated the
gravitational field at some point in space, we can us e it any time we want to calculate the resulting force on any mass we choose to
place at that point. In fact, this is exactly what we d o when we say the gravitational field of Earth (near Earth’s surface) has a value
of and then we calculate the resulting force (i.e., weight) on different masses. Also, the general express ion for calculating
at arbitrary distances from the center of Earth (i.e., not just near Earth’s surface) is very similar to the express ion for:
where is a proportionality constant, playing the sam e role for as does for. The value of is calculated once and is
then used in an endless number of problems.
To push the analogy further, notice the units of the electric field: From, the units of are newtons per coulomb, N/C, that
is, the electric field applies a force on each unit charge. Now notice the units of: From the units of ar e newtons per
kilogram, N/kg, that is, the gravitational field appl ies a force on each unit mass. We could say that the g ravitational field of Earth,
near Earth’s surface, has a value of 9.81 N/kg.
The Meaning of “Field
Recall from your studies of gravity that the word “f ield” in this context has a precise meaning. A field, i n physics, is a physical
quantity whose value depends on (is a function of) po sition, relative to the source of the field. In the ca se of the electric field,
Equation shows that the value of (both the magnitud e and the direction) depends on where in space the p oint is located,
measured from the locations of the source charges.
In addition, since the electric field is a vector q uantity, the electric field is referred to as a vector field. (The gravitational field is
also a vector field.) In contrast, a field that has o nly a magnitude at every point is a scalar field. The temperature in a room is an
example of a scalar field. It is a field because th e temperature, in general, is different at different locations in the room, and it is a
scalar field because temperature is a scalar quantity.
Also, as you did with the gravitational field of an o bject with mass, you should picture the electric field of a charge-bearing object
(the source charge) as a continuous, immaterial subs tance that surrounds the source charge, filling all of space—in principle, to
in all directions. The field exists at every physical p oint in space. To put it another way, the electric c harge on an object alters the
space around the charged object in such a way that al l other electrically charged objects in space exper ience an electric force as a
result of being in that field. The electric field, t hen, is the mechanism by which the electric propertie s of the source charge are
transmitted to and through the rest of the universe. (Again, the range of the electric force is infinite.)
We will see in subsequent chapters that the speed at which electrical phenomena travel is the same as the speed of light. There is a
deep connection between the electric field and light.
Superposition
Yet another experimental fact about the field is tha t it obeys the superposition principle. In this cont ext, that means that we can (in
principle) calculate the total electric field of ma ny source charges by calculating the electric field of only at position P, then
calculate the field of at P, while—and this is the crucial idea—ignoring the fie ld of, and indeed even the existence of,. We can
repeat this process, calculating the field of each individual source charge, independently of the existe nce of any of the other
charges. The total electric field, then, is the vector su m of all these fields.
In the next section, we describe how to determine the shape of an electric field of a source charge distribution an d how to sketch it.

3.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83913The Direction of the Field
Equation enables us to determine the magnitude of the electric field, but we need the direction also. W e use the convention
that the direction of any electric field vector is t he same as the direction of the electric force vect or that the field would apply to a
positive test charge placed in that field. Such a ch arge would be repelled by positive source charges (t he force on it would point
away from the positive source charge) but attracted to negati ve charges (the force points toward the negative source).
By convention, all electric fields point away from posit ive source charges and point toward negative source c harges.
In an ionized helium atom, the most probable distanc e between the nucleus and the electron is. What is t he
electric field due to the nucleus at the location of th e electron?
Strategy
Note that although the electron is mentioned, it is n ot used in any calculation. The problem asks for an el ectric field, not a
force; hence, there is only one charge involved, and t he problem specifically asks for the field due to th e nucleus. Thus, the
electron is a red herring; only its distance matters. Also, since the distance between the two protons in the nucleus is much,
much smaller than the distance of the electron from the nucleus, we can treat the two protons as a single ch arge +2 e (Figure
Figure: A schematic representation of a helium atom. Again, helium physically looks nothing like this, but this sort of
diagram is helpful for calculating the electric fiel d of the nucleus.
Solution
The electric field is calculated by
Here, (since there are two protons) and r is given; substituting gives
The direction of is radially away from the nucleus in all directions. Why? Because a positive test charg e placed in this field
would accelerate radially away from the nucleus (since it is also positively charged), and again, the conve ntion is that the
direction of the electric field vector is defined in term s of the direction of the force it would apply to positive t est charges.Direction of the Electric Field
Example: The E-field of an Atom

3.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83913The electric field is thus seen to depend only on the char ge and the distance; it is completely independent of t he test charge.
Calculate the strength and direction of the electri c field due to a point charge of 2.00 nC (nano-Coul ombs) at a distance of
5.00 mm from the charge.
Strategy
We can find the electric field created by a point charg e by using the equation.
Solution
Here and. Entering those values into the above equation gives
Discussion
This electric field strength is the same at any point 5.00 mm away from the charge that creates the field. It is positive,
meaning that it has a direction pointing away from the cha rge.
What force does the electric field found in the previou s example exert on a point charge of?
Strategy
Since we know the electric field strength and the char ge in the field, the force on that charge can be cal culated using the
definition of electric field rearranged to.
Solution
The magnitude of the force on a charge exerted by a fie ld of strength is thus,
Because is negative, the force is directed opposite to the direction of the field.
Discussion
The force is attractive, as expected for unlike char ges. (The field was created by a positive charge and h ere acts on a negative
charge.) The charges in this example are typical of common static electricity, and the modest attractive force obtained is similar
to forces experienced in static cling and similar situati ons.
Field due to Many Charges
Suppose we have source charges located at positions, the electric field due to all charges is the
vector sum of the electric fields due to each of the charges:
or, more compactly,Example: Calculating the Electric Field of a Point Charge
Example: Calculating the Force Exerted on a Point Charge by an Electric Field

3.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83913This expression is called the electric field at posit ion of the source charges. Here, is the location of the point in
space where you are calculating the field and is rela tive to the positions of the source charges (Figure). Note that we have to
impose a coordinate system to solve actual problems.
Figure: Each of these five source charges creates its ow n electric field at every point in space; shown here are the field vectors
at an arbitrary point P. Like the electric force, t he net electric field obeys the superposition principl e.
Notice that the calculation of the electric field ma kes no reference to the test charge. Thus, the physical ly useful approach is to
calculate the electric field and then use it to cal culate the force on some test charge later, if needed. Different test charges
experience different forces Equation, but it is the same electric field Equation. That being said, recal l that there is no
fundamental difference between a test charge and a so urce charge; these are merely convenient labels for the system of interest.
Any charge produces an electric field; however, just as Earth’s orbit is not affected by Earth’s own gravity, a charge is not subject to
a force due to the electric field it generates. Charges are only subject to forces from the electric fields of other c harges.
Find the magnitude and direction of the total electr ic field due to the two point charges, and, at the origin of the coordinate
system.
Figure: The electric fields and at the origin O ad d to.
Strategy
Since the electric field is a vector (having magnitu de and direction), we add electric fields with the sa me vector techniques
used for other types of vectors. We first must find th e electric field due to each charge at the point of interest, which is the
origin of the coordinate system (O) in this instance. We pretend that there is a positive test charge,, at point O, which allows
us to determine the direction of the fields and. On ce those fields are found, the total field can be det ermined using vector
addition.Example: Adding Electric Fields

3.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83913Solution
The electric field strength at the origin due to is la beled and is calculated:
Similarly, is
Four digits have been retained in this solution to ill ustrate that is exactly twice the magnitude of. Now arrows are drawn
to represent the magnitudes and directions of and. (Figure) The direction of the electric field is th at of the force on a
positive charge so both arrows point directly away fro m the positive charges that create them. The arrow for is exactly twice
the length of that for. The arrows form a right tri angle in this case and can be added using the Pythago rean theorem. The
magnitude of the total field is
The direction is
or above the x-axis.
Discussion
In cases where the electric field vectors to be adde d are not perpendicular, vector components or graph ical techniques can be
used. The total electric field found in this example is the total electric field at only one point in s pace. To find the total electric
field due to these two charges over an entire region, the same technique must be repeated for each poin t in the region. This
impossibly lengthy task (there are an infinite numbe r of points in space) can be avoided by calculating the total field at
representative points and using some of the unifying feature s noted next.
a. Find the electric field (magnitude and direction) a di stance z above the midpoint between two equal charges that are a
distance d apart (Figure). Check that your result is consistent wit h what you’d expect when.
b. The same as part (a), only this time make the right-ha nd charge instead of.Example: The E-Field above Two Equal Charges

3.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83913
Figure: Finding the field of two identical source cha rges at the point. Due to the symmetry, the net fiel d at \(P\) is
entirely vertical. (Notice that this is not true away from the midline between the charges.)
Strategy
We add the two fields as vectors, per Equation. Noti ce that the system (and therefore the field) is symm etrical about the
vertical axis; as a result, the horizontal component s of the field vectors cancel. This simplifies the math. Also, we take care to
express our final answer in terms of only quantities that are given in the original statement of the pro blem:,,, and constants
Figure. Note that the horizontal components of the electric field s from the two charges cancel each other out, while
the vertical components add together.
Solution
a. By symmetry, the horizontal (x)-components of cancel (Figure);
The vertical (z)-component is given by

3.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83913Since none of the other components survive, this is the entire electric field, and it points in the direc tion. Notice that this
calculation uses the principle of superposition; we calculate the fields of the two charges independently and then add them
together.
What we want to do now is replace the quantities in th is expression that we don’t know (such as), or can’t e asily measure
(such as with quantities that we do know, or can measure. I n this case, by geometry,
and
Thus, substituting,
Simplifying, the desired answer is
b. If the source charges are equal and opposite, the vertic al components cancel because
and we get, for the horizontal component of.
Summary
The electrostatic force field surrounding a charged obj ect extends out into space in all directions.
The electrostatic force exerted by a point charge on a test charge at a distance depends on the charge of both charges, as well as
the distance between the two.
The electric field is defined to be where is the C oulomb or electrostatic force exerted on a small positive test
charge. has units of N/C.
The magnitude of the electric field created by a poi nt charge is where is the distance from. The electr ic field
is a vector and fields due to multiple charges add lik e vectors.
Glossary
field
a map of the amount and direction of a force acting on oth er objects, extending out into space
point charge
A charged particle, designated Q, generating an electric field
test charge
A particle (designated q) with either a positive or negat ive charge set down within an electric field generated by a po int charge

3.5.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83913This page titled 3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
18.4: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
5.5: Electric Field by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
18.5: Electric Field Lines- Multiple Charges by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

3.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839143.6: Electric Field Lines
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the total force (magnitude and direction) e xerted on a test charge from more than one charge
Describe an electric field diagram of a positive point c harge; of a negative point charge with twice the magnitude of
positive charge
Draw the electric field lines between two points of the same charge; between two points of opposite charge.
Drawings using lines to represent electric fields around charged objects are very useful in visualizin g field strength and direction.
Since the electric field has both magnitude and dire ction, it is a vector. Like all vectors, the electric field can be represented by an
arrow that has length proportional to its magnitude a nd that points in the correct direction. (We have u sed arrows extensively to
represent force vectors, for example.)
Figure shows two pictorial representations of the same electric field created by a positive point charge. Figure (b)
shows the standard representation using continuous li nes. Figure (b) shows numerous individual arrows with eac h arrow
representing the force on a test charge. Field lines are e ssentially a map of infinitesimal force vectors.
Figure: Two equivalent representations of the electri c field due to a positive charge. (a) Arrows represen ting the electric
field’s magnitude and direction. (b) In the standard representation, the arrows are replaced by continuous field lines having the
same direction at any point as the electric field. Th e closeness of the lines is directly related to the stren gth of the electric field. A
test charge placed anywhere will feel a force in the direction of the field line; this force will have a strength proportional to the
density of the lines (being greater near the charge, for example).
Note that the electric field is defined for a positiv e test charge, so that the field lines point away f rom a positive charge and toward
a negative charge. (Figure) The electric field streng th is exactly proportional to the number of field l ines per unit area, since
the magnitude of the electric field for a point cha rge is and area is proportional to. This pictorial representation, in
which field lines represent the direction and their closeness (that is, their areal density or the number of lines crossing a unit area)
represents strength, is used for all fields: electrostati c, gravitational, magnetic, and others.
Figure: The electric field surrounding three differe nt point charges. (a) A positive charge. (b) A negati ve charge of equal
magnitude. (c) A larger negative charge.
In many situations, there are multiple charges. The to tal electric field created by multiple charges is t he vector sum of the individual
fields created by each charge. Figure shows how the el ectric field from two point charges can be drawn by f inding the total
field at representative points and drawing electric f ield lines consistent with those points. While the e lectric fields from multiple
charges are more complex than those of single charges, s ome simple features are easily noticed.Learning Objectives

3.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83914
Figure: Two positive point charges and produce the resultant electric field shown. The field is calculate d at representative
points and then smooth field lines drawn following the rules outlined in the text.
For example, the field is weaker between like charges, as shown by the lines being farther apart in that reg ion. (This is because the
fields from each charge exert opposing forces on any charge placed between them.) (See Figure and Figure (a).)
Furthermore, at a great distance from two like charges, the field becomes identical to the field from a single, large r charge.
Figure (b) shows the electric field of two unlike char ges. The field is stronger between the charges. In that region, the fields
from each charge are in the same direction, and so t heir strengths add. The field of two unlike charges is weak at large distances,
because the fields of the individual charges are in opposite directions and so their strengths subtract. At very large distances, the
field of two unlike charges looks like that of a smaller single charge.
Figure: (a) Two negative charges produce the fields sh own. It is very similar to the field produced by two positive charges,
except that the directions are reversed. The field is clearly weaker between the charges. The individual f orces on a test charge in
that region are in opposite directions. (b) Two opposi te charges produce the field shown, which is stronger i n the region between
the charges.
We use electric field lines to visualize and analyze electric fields (the lines are a pictorial tool, not a physical entity in themselves).
The properties of electric field lines for any charge dist ribution can be summarized as follows:
1. Field lines must begin on positive charges and terminate on negative charges, or at infinity in the hypothetical ca se of isolated
charges.
2. The number of field lines leaving a positive charge or entering a negative charge is proportional to the magnit ude of the charge.
3. The strength of the field is proportional to the clo seness of the field lines—more precisely, it is proport ional to the number of
lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines.
4. The direction of the electric field is tangent to th e field line at any point in space.
5. Field lines can never cross.

3.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83914The last property means that the field is unique at any point. The field line represents the direction o f the field; so if they crossed,
the field would have two directions at that location (an im possibility if the field is unique).
Summary
Drawings of electric field lines are useful visual tools. Th e properties of electric field lines for any charge distri bution are that:
Field lines must begin on positive charges and terminate on negative charges, or at infinity in the hypothetical case of isolated
charges.
The number of field lines leaving a positive charge or e ntering a negative charge is proportional to the magnitud e of the charge.
The strength of the field is proportional to the close ness of the field lines—more precisely, it is proportio nal to the number of
lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines.
The direction of the electric field is tangent to the field line at any point in space.
Field lines can never cross.
Glossary
electric field
a three-dimensional map of the electric force extende d out into space from a point charge
electric field lines
a series of lines drawn from a point charge representing t he magnitude and direction of force exerted by that charge
vector
a quantity with both magnitude and direction
vector addition
mathematical combination of two or more vectors, includin g their magnitudes, directions, and positions
This page titled 3.6: Electric Field Lines is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
18.5: Electric Field Lines- Multiple Charges by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

3.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839153.7: Electric Forces in Biology
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how a water molecule is polar.
Explain electrostatic screening by a water molecule within a living cell.
Classical electrostatics has an important role to pl ay in modern molecular biology. Large molecules such as proteins, nucleic acids,
and so on—so important to life—are usually electrica lly charged. DNA itself is highly charged; it is the el ectrostatic force that not
only holds the molecule together but gives the molecule str ucture and strength. Figure is a schematic of the DNA doub le helix.
Figure: DNA is a highly charged molecule. The DNA do uble helix shows the two coiled strands each containing a row of
nitrogenous bases, which “code” the genetic informatio n needed by a living organism. The strands are connect ed by bonds between
pairs of bases. While pairing combinations between cert ain bases are fixed (C-G and A-T), the sequence of nuc leotides in the strand
varies. (credit: Jerome Walker)
The four nucleotide bases are given the symbols A (adenine), C (cytosine), G (g uanine), and T (thymine). The order of the four
bases varies in each strand, but the pairing between bases is always the same. C and G are always paired and A and T are always
paired, which helps to preserve the order of bases in cell division (mitosis) so as to pass on the correct genetic information. Since
the Coulomb force drops with distance (), the distances between the base pairs must be small enough that the electrostatic
force is sufficient to hold them together.
DNA is a highly charged molecule, with about (fundamen tal charge) per m. The distance separating the two stra nds
that make up the DNA structure is about 1 nm, while the distan ce separating the individual atoms within each base is abou t 0.3 nm.
One might wonder why electrostatic forces do not play a larger role in biology than they do if we have so ma ny charged molecules.
The reason is that the electrostatic force is “diluted ” due to screening between molecules. This is due to the presence of othe r
charges in the cell.
Polarity of Water Molecules
The best example of this charge screening is the water molecule, represented as. Water is a strongly polar molecule. Its 10
electrons (8 from the oxygen atom and 2 from the two hydrogen atoms) tend to remain closer to the oxygen nucleus than the
hydrogen nuclei. This creates two centers of equal an d opposite charges—what is called a dipole, as illustrated in Figure. The
magnitude of the dipole is called the dipole moment.
Figure: This schematic shows water () as a polar molecul e. Unequal sharing of electrons between the oxygen (O) and
hydrogen (H) atoms leads to a net separation of positiv e and negative charge—forming a dipole. The symbols and indicate
that the oxygen side of the molecule tends to be mor e negative, while the hydrogen ends tend to be more positive. This leads
to an attraction of opposite charges between molecule s.
These two centers of charge will terminate some of the electric field lines coming from a free charge, as on a DNA molecule. This
results in a reduction in the strength of the Coulomb interaction. One might say that screening makes the Coulomb for ce a short
range force rather than long range. Other ions of imp ortance in biology that can reduce or screen Coulom b interactions are,Learning Objectives

3.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83915and, and. These ions are located both inside and outside of living cells. The movement of these ions th rough cell
membranes is crucial to the motion of nerve impulses thro ugh nerve axons.
Recent studies of electrostatics in biology seem to s how that electric fields in cells can be extended ov er larger distances, in spite of
screening, by “microtubules” within the cell. These microtubules are hollow tubes composed of proteins that guide the movement
of chromosomes when cells divide, the motion of other o rganisms within the cell, and provide mechanisms for mo tion of some
cells (as motors).
Summary
Many molecules in living organisms, such as DNA, carry a charge.
An uneven distribution of the positive and negative charg es within a polar molecule produces a dipole.
The effect of a Coulomb field generated by a charged ob ject may be reduced or blocked by other nearby charged o bjects.
Biological systems contain water, and because water molecul es are polar, they have a strong effect on other molecules in living
systems.
Glossary
dipole
a molecule’s lack of symmetrical charge distribution, c ausing one side to be more positive and another to be mor e negative
polar molecule
a molecule with an asymmetrical distribution of positiv e and negative charge
screening
the dilution or blocking of an electrostatic force on a charged object by the presence of other charges nearb y
Coulomb interaction
the interaction between two charged particles generated by the Coulomb forces they exert on one another
This page titled 3.7: Electric Forces in Biology is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
18.6: Electric Forces in Biology by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

3.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839163.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
List the three properties of a conductor in electrostat ic equilibrium.
Explain the effect of an electric field on free charges i n a conductor.
Explain why no electric field may exist inside a conducto r.
Describe the electric field surrounding Earth.
Explain what happens to an electric field applied to an ir regular conductor.
Describe how a lightning rod works.
Explain how a metal car may protect passengers inside fr om the dangerous electric fields caused by a downed li ne touching
the car.
Conductors contain free charges that move easily. When excess charge is placed on a conductor or the conductor is put into a
static electric field, charges in the conductor quickly respond to reach a steady state called electrostatic equilibrium.
Figure shows the effect of an electric field on free charges in a conductor. The free charges move until the field is
perpendicular to the conductor’s surface. There can be no component of the field parallel to the surface in electrostatic equilibrium,
since, if there were, it would produce further moveme nt of charge. A positive free charge is shown, but fre e charges can be either
positive or negative and are, in fact, negative in me tals. The motion of a positive charge is equivalent t o the motion of a negative
charge in the opposite direction.
Figure: When an electric field is applied to a cond uctor, free charges inside the conductor move until t he field is
perpendicular to the surface. (a) The electric field is a vector quantity, with both parallel and perpen dicular components. The
parallel component () exerts a force () on the free charge, which moves the charge until. (b) The resul ting field is
perpendicular to the surface. The free charge has bee n brought to the conductor’s surface, leaving electro static forces in
equilibrium.
A conductor placed in an electric field will be polarized. Figure shows the result of placing a neutral conduc tor in an
originally uniform electric field. The field becomes str onger near the conductor but entirely disappears inside it.Learning Objectives

3.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83916
Figure: This illustration shows a spherical conductor in static equilibrium with an originally uniform elect ric field. Free
charges move within the conductor, polarizing it, un til the electric field lines are perpendicular to th e surface. The field lines end on
excess negative charge on one section of the surface an d begin again on excess positive charge on the opposite side. No electric
field exists inside the conductor, since free charges in the conductor would continue moving in response to a ny field until it was
neutralized.
Excess charges placed on a spherical conductor repel and move until they are evenly distributed, as shown in Figure.
Excess charge is forced to the surface until the fie ld inside the conductor is zero. Outside the conductor, t he field is exactly the
same as if the conductor were replaced by a point charge at its center equal to the excess charge.
Figure: The mutual repulsion of excess positive charges on a spherical conductor distributes them uniformly on its
surface. The resulting electric field is perpendicular to the surface and zero inside. Outside the conductor, the field is identical
to that of a point charge at the center equal to th e excess charge.
1. The electric field is zero inside a conductor.
2. Just outside a conductor, the electric field lines ar e perpendicular to its surface, ending or beginning on cha rges on the
surface.
3. Any excess charge resides entirely on the surface or sur faces of a conductor.
The properties of a conductor are consistent with the situations already discussed and can be used to ana lyze any conductor in
electrostatic equilibrium. This can lead to some intere sting new insights, such as described below.
How can a very uniform electric field be created? Con sider a system of two metal plates with opposite charg es on them, as shown
in Figure. The properties of conductors in electrost atic equilibrium indicate that the electric field b etween the plates will be
uniform in strength and direction. Except near the ed ges, the excess charges distribute themselves uniforml y, producing field lines
that are uniformly spaced (hence uniform in strength) and perpendicular to the surfaces (hence uniform in direction, since the plates
are flat). The edge effects are less important when the plates are close together.MISCONCEPTION ALERT: ELECTRIC FIELD INSIDE A CONDUCTOR
PROPERTIES OF A CONDUCTOR IN ELECTROSTATIC EQUILIBRIUM

3.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83916
Figure: Two metal plates with equal, but opposite, ex cess charges. The field between them is uniform in stren gth and direction
except near the edges. One use of such a field is to pr oduce uniform acceleration of charges between the pl ates, such as in the
electron gun of a TV tube.
Earth’s Electric Field
A near uniform electric field of approximately 150 N/ C, directed downward, surrounds Earth, with the magnitude increasing
slightly as we get closer to the surface. What causes the electric field? At around 100 km above the surf ace of Earth we have a layer
of charged particles, called the ionosphere. The ionosphere is responsible for a range of phenom ena including the electric field
surrounding Earth. In fair weather the ionosphere is positive and the Earth largely negative, maintaining the electric field (Figure
In storm conditions clouds form and localized electr ic fields can be larger and reversed in direction (Figure). The exact
charge distributions depend on the local conditions, an d variations of Figure are possible.
If the electric field is sufficiently large, the ins ulating properties of the surrounding material break down and it becomes
conducting. For air this occurs at around N/C. Air ioni zes ions and electrons recombine, and we get discharge in the form of
lightning sparks and corona discharge.
Figure: Earth’s electric field. (a) Fair weather fie ld. Earth and the ionosphere (a layer of charged par ticles) are both
conductors. They produce a uniform electric field of about 150 N/C. (credit: D. H. Parks) (b) Storm field s. In the presence of storm
clouds, the local electric fields can be larger. At v ery high fields, the insulating properties of the air break down and lightning can
occur. (credit: Jan-Joost Verhoef)
Electric Fields on Uneven Surfaces
So far we have considered excess charges on a smooth, symmetrical conductor surface. What happens if a con ductor has sharp
corners or is pointed? Excess charges on a nonuniform c onductor become concentrated at the sharpest points. Additionally, excess
charge may move on or off the conductor at the sharpest poi nts.
To see how and why this happens, consider the charged conductor in Figure. The electrostatic repulsion of like charges is most
effective in moving them apart on the flattest surfac e, and so they become least concentrated there. This i s because the forces
between identical pairs of charges at either end of the conductor are identical, but the components of the forces parallel to the
surfaces are different. The component parallel to th e surface is greatest on the flattest surface and, he nce, more effective in moving
the charge.

3.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83916The same effect is produced on a conductor by an ex ternally applied electric field, as seen in Figure. Si nce the field lines
must be perpendicular to the surface, more of them are c oncentrated on the most curved parts.
Figure: Excess charge on a nonuniform conductor becom es most concentrated at the location of greatest curva ture. (a) The
forces between identical pairs of charges at either en d of the conductor are identical, but the component s of the forces parallel to the
surface are different. It is that moves the charges ap art once they have reached the surface. (b) is smalle st at the more pointed
end, the charges are left closer together, producing the electric field shown. (c) An uncharged conductor in an originally uniform
electric field is polarized, with the most concentrat ed charge at its most pointed end.
Applications of Conductors
On a very sharply curved surface, such as shown in Figur e, the charges are so concentrated at the point th at the resulting
electric field can be great enough to remove them from the surface. This can be useful.
Lightning rods work best when they are most pointed. T he large charges created in storm clouds induce an opposite charge on a
building that can result in a lightning bolt hitting the building. The induced charge is bled away contin ually by a lightning rod,
preventing the more dramatic lightning strike.
Figure: A very pointed conductor has a large charge concentration at the point. The electric field is ve ry strong at the point and
can exert a force large enough to transfer charge on or off the conductor. Lightning rods are used to pre vent the buildup of large
excess charges on structures and, thus, are pointed.
Of course, we sometimes wish to prevent the transfer of c harge rather than to facilitate it. In that case, t he conductor should be very
smooth and have as large a radius of curvature as p ossible. (Figure) Smooth surfaces are used on high-vol tage transmission
lines, for example, to avoid leakage of charge into the a ir.
Another device that makes use of some of these princip les is a Faraday cage. This is a metal shield that encloses a volume. All
electrical charges will reside on the outside surface of this shield, and there will be no electrical field inside. A Faraday cage is used

3.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83916to prohibit stray electrical fields in the environme nt from interfering with sensitive measurements, such a s the electrical signals
inside a nerve cell.
During electrical storms if you are driving a car, it is best to stay inside the car as its metal body act s as a Faraday cage with zero
electrical field inside. If in the vicinity of a lig htning strike, its effect is felt on the outside of t he car and the inside is unaffected,
provided you remain totally inside. This is also true if an active (“hot”) electrical wire was broken (in a storm or an accident) and
fell on your car.
Figure: (a) A lightning rod is pointed to facilitate the transfer of charge. (credit: Romaine, Wikimedia Commons) (b) This Van
de Graaff generator has a smooth surface with a large radius of curvature to prevent the transfer of charge and allow a large voltage
to be generated. The mutual repulsion of like charge s is evident in the person’s hair while touching the me tal sphere. (credit: Jon
‘ShakataGaNai’ Davis/Wikimedia Commons).
Summary
A conductor allows free charges to move about within it.
The electrical forces around a conductor will cause free ch arges to move around inside the conductor until static e quilibrium is
reached.
Any excess charge will collect along the surface of a cond uctor.
Conductors with sharp corners or points will collect more cha rge at those points.
A lightning rod is a conductor with sharply pointed end s that collect excess charge on the building caused by a n electrical storm
and allow it to dissipate back into the air.
Electrical storms result when the electrical field of Eart h’s surface in certain locations becomes more strongl y charged, due to
changes in the insulating effect of the air.
A Faraday cage acts like a shield around an object, preventi ng electric charge from penetrating inside.
Glossary
conductor
an object with properties that allow charges to move about freely within it
free charge
an electrical charge (either positive or negative) whic h can move about separately from its base molecule
electrostatic equilibrium
an electrostatically balanced state in which all free elect rical charges have stopped moving about
polarized
a state in which the positive and negative charges withi n an object have collected in separate locations
ionosphere
a layer of charged particles located around 100 km above the surface of Earth, which is responsible for a range of phe nomena
including the electric field surrounding Earth
Faraday cage

3.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83916a metal shield which prevents electric charge from pene trating its surface
This page titled 3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibri um is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
18.7: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

3.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839173.9: Applications of Electrostatics
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Name several real-world applications of the study of elect rostatics.
The study of electrostatics has proven useful in many areas. This module covers j ust a few of the many applications of
electrostatics.
The Van de Graaff Generator
Van de Graaff generators (or Van de Graaffs) are not only spectacular devices used to demonstrate high voltage due to static
electricity—they are also used for serious research. The first was built by Robert Van de Graaff in 1931 (based on original
suggestions by Lord Kelvin) for use in nuclear physics research. Figure shows a schematic of a large researc h version. Van de
Graaffs utilize both smooth and pointed surfaces, an d conductors and insulators to generate large static c harges and, hence, large
voltages.
A very large excess charge can be deposited on the s phere, because it moves quickly to the outer surfac e. Practical limits arise
because the large electric fields polarize and even tually ionize surrounding materials, creating free c harges that neutralize excess
charge or allow it to escape. Nevertheless, voltages of 15 million volts are well within practical limits.
Figure: Schematic of Van de Graaff generator. A batt ery (A) supplies excess positive charge to a pointed con ductor, the points
of which spray the charge onto a moving insulating be lt near the bottom. The pointed conductor (B) on to p in the large sphere picks
up the charge. (The induced electric field at the p oints is so large that it removes the charge from the b elt.) This can be done
because the charge does not remain inside the conducti ng sphere but moves to its outside surface. An ion source inside the sphere
produces positive ions, which are accelerated away fro m the positive sphere to high velocities.Learning Objectives

3.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83917Rub a comb through your hair and use it to lift pie ces of paper. It may help to tear the pieces of pape r rather than cut them
neatly. Repeat the exercise in your bathroom after y ou have had a long shower and the air in the bathroom is moist. Is it easier
to get electrostatic effects in dry or moist air? Wh y would torn paper be more attractive to the comb th an cut paper? Explain
your observations.
Xerography
Most copy machines use an electrostatic process called xerography —a word coined from the Greek words xeros for dry and
graphos for writing. The heart of the process is shown in sim plified form in Figure. A selenium-coated aluminum drum is
sprayed with positive charge from points on a device c alled a corotron. Selenium is a substance with an inte resting property—it is a
photoconductor. That is, selenium is an insulator when in the dark and a conductor when exposed to light.
In the first stage of the xerography process, the c onducting aluminum drum is grounded so that a negati ve charge is induced under
the thin layer of uniformly positively charged sele nium. In the second stage, the surface of the drum is exposed to the image of
whatever is to be copied. Where the image is light, the selenium becomes conducting, and the positive c harge is neutralized. In dark
areas, the positive charge remains, and so the image has b een transferred to the drum.
The third stage takes a dry black powder, called ton er, and sprays it with a negative charge so that it wi ll be attracted to the positive
regions of the drum. Next, a blank piece of paper is gi ven a greater positive charge than on the drum so tha t it will pull the toner
from the drum. Finally, the paper and electrostatically held toner are passed through heated pressure rolle rs, which melt and
permanently adhere the toner within the fibers of the paper.
Figure: Xerography is a dry copying process based on el ectrostatics. The major steps in the process are the char ging of the
photoconducting drum, transfer of an image creating a positive charge duplicate, attraction of toner to the charged parts of the
drum, and transfer of toner to the paper. Not shown a re heat treatment of the paper and cleansing of the drum for the next copy.
Laser Printers
Laser printers use the xerographic process to make high-quality im ages on paper, employing a laser to produce an imag e on the
photoconducting drum as shown in Figure. In its most common application, the laser printer receives output from a computer,
and it can achieve high-quality output because of t he precision with which laser light can be controlled. Many laser printers do
significant information processing, such as making sophisticated letters or fonts, and may contain a comp uter more powerful than
the one giving them the raw data to be printed.TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: ELECTROSTATICS AND HUMIDITY

3.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83917
Figure: In a laser printer, a laser beam is scanned acr oss a photoconducting drum, leaving a positive charge image. The other
steps for charging the drum and transferring the image to paper are the same as in xerography. Laser light c an be very precisely
controlled, enabling laser printers to produce high-q uality images.
Ink Jet Printers and Electrostatic Painting
The ink jet printer, commonly used to print computer-generated text an d graphics, also employs electrostatics. A nozzle makes a
fine spray of tiny ink droplets, which are then give n an electrostatic charge (Figure). Once charged, the droplets can be
directed, using pairs of charged plates, with great precision to form letters and images on paper. Ink jet p rinters can produce color
images by using a black jet and three other jets wit h primary colors, usually cyan, magenta, and yellow, much as a color television
produces color (this is more difficult with xerography, requi ring multiple drums and toners).
Figure: The nozzle of an ink-jet printer produces sma ll ink droplets, which are sprayed with electrostatic charge. Various
computer-driven devices are then used to direct the d roplets to the correct positions on a page.
Electrostatic painting employs electrostatic charge t o spray paint onto odd-shaped surfaces. Mutual repul sion of like charges causes
the paint to fly away from its source. Surface tension fo rms drops, which are then attracted by unlike charges to the surface to be
painted. Electrostatic painting can reach those hard- to-get at places, applying an even coat in a contro lled manner. If the object is a
conductor, the electric field is perpendicular to th e surface, tending to bring the drops in perpendicul arly. Corners and points on
conductors will receive extra paint. Felt can similarly be applied.
Smoke Precipitators and Electrostatic Air Cleaning
Another important application of electrostatics is fou nd in air cleaners, both large and small. The electro static part of the process
places excess (usually positive) charge on smoke, dust, pollen, and other particles in the air and then pa sses the air through an
oppositely charged grid that attracts and retains t he charged particles (Figure). Large electrostatic precipitators are used
industrially to remove over 99% of the particles fr om stack gas emissions associated with the burning of coal and oil. Home
precipitators, often in conjunction with the home hea ting and air conditioning system, are very effectiv e in removing polluting
particles, irritants, and allergens.

3.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83917
Figure: (a) Schematic of an electrostatic precipitat or. Air is passed through grids of opposite charge. The first grid charges
airborne particles, while the second attracts and coll ects them. (b) The dramatic effect of electrostatic p recipitators is seen by the
absence of smoke from this power plant. (credit: Cmdal gleish, Wikimedia Commons)
1. Examine the situation to determine if static electric ity is involved. This may concern separated stationary charges, the
forces among them, and the electric fields they create.
2. Identify the system of interest. This includes noting the number, locations, and types of charges involved.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful. Dete rmine
whether the Coulomb force is to be considered directly— if so, it may be useful to draw a free-body diagram, usin g electric
field lines.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the pr oblem as stated (identify the knowns). It is important to
distinguish the Coulomb force from the electric field, for example.
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be de termined (the unknown) or draw the field lines as request ed.
6. Examine the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make se nse? Are units correct and the numbers involved reasonable?
The following worked example illustrates how this strategy is applied:
If steps are not taken to ground a gasoline pump, st atic electricity can be placed on gasoline when fill ing your car’s tank.
Suppose a tiny drop of gasoline has a mass of and is given a positiv e charge of. (a) Find the weight
of the drop. (b) Calculate the electric force on th e drop if there is an upward electric field of streng th due to
other static electricity in the vicinity. (c) Calculate the drop’s acceleration.
Strategy
To solve an integrated concept problem, we must first identify the physical principles involved and identi fy the chapters in
which they are found.
Part (a) of this example asks for weight. This is a topic o f dynamics and is defined in Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws
of Motion.
Part (b) deals with electric force on a charge, a topic of Electric Charge and Electric Field. Part (c) asks for acceleration,
knowing forces and mass. These are part of Newton’s laws, also foun d in Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion.
The following solutions to each part of the example i llustrate how the specific problem-solving strategies are applied. These
involve identifying knowns and unknowns, checking to see if t he answer is reasonable, and so on.PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGIES FOR ELECTROSTATICS
Example: Acceleration of a Charged Drop of Gasoline

3.9.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83917Solution for (a)
Weight is mass times the acceleration due to gravity, as fi rst expressed in
Entering the given mass and the average acceleration due to gravity yields
Discussion for (a)
This is a small weight, consistent with the small mass of t he drop.
Solution for (b)
The force an electric field exerts on a charge is given by rearranging the following equation:
Here we are given the charge (is twice the fundamental unit of charge) and the electric field strength, a nd so the
electric force is found to be
Discussion for (b)
While this is a small force, it is greater than the weight of the drop.
Solution for (c)
The acceleration can be found using Newton’s second la w, provided we can identify all of the external force s acting on the
drop. We assume only the drop’s weight and the electri c force are significant. Since the drop has a positive charge and the
electric field is given to be upward, the electric fo rce is upward. We thus have a one-dimensional (verti cal direction) problem,
and we can state Newton’s second law as
where. Entering this and the known values into the expressio n for Newton’s second law yields
Discussion for (c)
This is an upward acceleration great enough to carry the dr op to places where you might not wish to have gasoline.
This worked example illustrates how to apply problem-sol ving strategies to situations that include topics in different chapters.
The first step is to identify the physical principles involved in the problem. The second step is to solve for the unknown using
familiar problem-solving strategies. These are found t hroughout the text, and many worked examples show how to use them
for single topics. In this integrated concepts exam ple, you can see how to apply them across several to pics. You will find these
techniques useful in applications of physics outside a physics course, such as in your profession, in othe r science disciplines,
and in everyday life. The following problems will build your skills in the broad application of physical principles.

3.9.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83917The Unreasonable Results exercises for this module h ave results that are unreasonable because some premise is unreasonable
or because certain of the premises are inconsistent with one another. Physical principles applied correctl y then produce
unreasonable results. The purpose of these problems is to give practice in assessing whether nature is being accurately
described, and if it is not to trace the source of diffi culty.
To determine if an answer is reasonable, and to determin e the cause if it is not, do the following.
1. Solve the problem using strategies as outlined above. Us e the format followed in the worked examples in the text to solve
the problem as usual.
2. Check to see if the answer is reasonable. Is it too large or too small, or does it have the wrong sign, improper units, and so
on?
3. If the answer is unreasonable, look for what specificall y could cause the identified difficulty. Usually, the mann er in which
the answer is unreasonable is an indication of the difficul ty. For example, an extremely large Coulomb force could b e due
to the assumption of an excessively large separated char ge.
Summary
Electrostatics is the study of electric fields in stati c equilibrium.
In addition to research using equipment such as a Van de Gra aff generator, many practical applications of electrost atics exist,
including photocopiers, laser printers, ink-jet printers and electrostatic air filters.
Glossary
Van de Graaff generator
a machine that produces a large amount of excess charge, us ed for experiments with high voltage
electrostatics
the study of electric forces that are static or slow-movi ng
photoconductor
a substance that is an insulator until it is exposed to lig ht, when it becomes a conductor
xerography
a dry copying process based on electrostatics
grounded
connected to the ground with a conductor, so that charge fl ows freely to and from the Earth to the grounded object
laser printer
uses a laser to create a photoconductive image on a dr um, which attracts dry ink particles that are then rolled o nto a sheet of
paper to print a high-quality copy of the image
ink-jet printer
small ink droplets sprayed with an electric charge are con trolled by electrostatic plates to create images on pape r
electrostatic precipitators
filters that apply charges to particles in the air, then a ttract those charges to a filter, removing them from t he airstream
This page titled 3.9: Applications of Electrostatics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
18.8: Applications of Electrostatics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.UNREASONABLE RESULTS
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY

3.9.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83917

3.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839183.10: Practice
Conceptual Questions
18.1: Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge
1. There are very large numbers of charged particles in most objects. Why, then, don’t most objects exhibit static electricity?
2. Why do most objects tend to contain nearly equal numb ers of positive and negative charges?
18.2: Conductors and Insulators
3. An eccentric inventor attempts to levitate by first placing a large negative charge on himself and then putting a large
positive charge on the ceiling of his workshop. Inste ad, while attempting to place a large negative charge on himself, his
clothes fly off. Explain.
4. If you have charged an electroscope by contact with a positively charged object, describe how you could u se it to
determine the charge of other objects. Specifically, what would the leaves of the electroscope do if othe r charged objects
were brought near its knob?
5. When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, it becomes posi tive and the silk becomes negative—yet both attract dust. Does the
dust have a third type of charge that is attracted to both positive and negative? Explain.
6. Why does a car always attract dust right after it is poli shed? (Note that car wax and car tires are insulators.)
7. Describe how a positively charged object can be used to give another object a negative charge. What is t he name of this
process?
8. What is grounding? What effect does it have on a charged conductor? On a charged insulator?
18.3: Coulomb's Law
9. Figure shows the charge distribution in a water molecul e, which is called a polar molecule because it has an inherent
separation of charge. Given water’s polar character, e xplain what effect humidity has on removing excess c harge from
objects.
Schematic representation of the outer electron cloud of a neutral water molecule. The electrons spend more ti me near the
oxygen than the hydrogens, giving a permanent charge separation as shown. Water is thus a polar molecule. It is more easily
affected by electrostatic forces than molecules with uni form charge distributions.
10. Using Figure, explain, in terms of Coulomb’s law, why a polar molecule (such as in Figure) is attracted by both positive
and negative charges.
11. Given the polar character of water molecules, explain how i ons in the air form nucleation centers for rain droplets.
18.4: Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited
12. Why must the test charge in the definition of the ele ctric field be vanishing small?
13. Are the direction and magnitude of the Coulomb force unique at a given point in space? What about the electric field?

3.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8391818.5: Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges
14. Compare and contrast the Coulomb force field and th e electric field. To do this, make a list of five prope rties for the
Coulomb force field analogous to the five propertie s listed for electric field lines. Compare each item i n your list of Coulomb
force field properties with those of the electric fi eld—are they the same or different? (For example, elec tric field lines cannot
cross. Is the same true for Coulomb field lines?)
15. Figure shows an electric field extending over three regio ns, labeled I, II, and III. Answer the following questions.
(a) Are there any isolated charges? If so, in what region an d what are their signs?
(b) Where is the field strongest?
(c) Where is it weakest?
(d) Where is the field the most uniform?
18.6: Electric Forces in Biology
16. A cell membrane is a thin layer enveloping a cell. T he thickness of the membrane is much less than the si ze of the cell. In
a static situation the membrane has a charge distrib ution of on its inner surface and on its
outer surface. Draw a diagram of the cell and the surro unding cell membrane. Include on this diagram the cha rge distribution
and the corresponding electric field. Is there any elec tric field inside the cell? Is there any electric field ou tside the cell?
18.7: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium
17. Is the object in Figure 18.8.9 a conductor or an insulat or? Justify your answer.
18. If the electric field lines in the figure above were perpendicular to the object, would it necessarily be a conductor?
Explain.
19. The discussion of the electric field between two parall el conducting plates, in this module states that edge effects are less
important if the plates are close together. What do es close mean? That is, is the actual plate separati on crucial, or is the ratio
of plate separation to plate area crucial?
20. Would the self-created electric field at the end of a pointed conductor, such as a lightning rod, remove positive or
negative charge from the conductor? Would the same sign charge be removed from a neutral pointed conduc tor by the
application of a similar externally created electri c field? (The answers to both questions have implica tions for charge transfer
utilizing points.)
21. Why is a golfer with a metal club over her shoulder vulnerable to lightning in an open fairway? Would she be any safer
under a tree?
22. Can the belt of a Van de Graaff accelerator be a condu ctor? Explain.
23. Are you relatively safe from lightning inside an aut omobile? Give two reasons.
24. Discuss pros and cons of a lightning rod being grounded ve rsus simply being attached to a building.

3.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8391825. Using the symmetry of the arrangement, show that the ne t Coulomb force on the charge at the center of the square
below (Figure) is zero if the charges on the four corners a re exactly equal.
Four point charges,,, and lie on the corners of a squar e and is located at its center.
(a) Using the symmetry of the arrangement, show that t he electric field at the center of the square in Fig ure zero if the
charges on the four corners are exactly equal.
(b) Show that this is also true for any combination of charg es in which and
26. (a) What is the direction of the total Coulomb forc e on in Figure if is negative, and both are negati ve, and
and both are positive? (b) What is the direction of t he electric field at the center of the square in this sit uation?
27. Considering Figure, suppose that and. First show that i s in static equilibrium. (You may neglect the
gravitational force.) Then discuss whether the equil ibrium is stable or unstable, noting that this may d epend on the signs of
the charges and the direction of displacement of from the center of the square.
28. If in Figure, under what conditions will there be no net Coulomb force on?
29. In regions of low humidity, one develops a special “gr ip” when opening car doors, or touching metal door kn obs. This
involves placing as much of the hand on the device as possible, not just the ends of one’s fingers. Discuss t he induced charge
and explain why this is done.
30. Tollbooth stations on roadways and bridges usually h ave a piece of wire stuck in the pavement before them that will
touch a car as it approaches. Why is this done?
31. Suppose a woman carries an excess charge. To maintain h er charged status can she be standing on ground weari ng just
any pair of shoes? How would you discharge her? What are the consequences if she simply walks away?
Problems & Exercises
18.1: Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge
32. Common static electricity involves charges ranging fro m nanocoulombs to microcoulombs.
(a) How many electrons are needed to form a charge of
(b) How many electrons must be removed from a neutral obj ect to leave a net charge of?
Solution
a.
b.
33. If electrons move through a pocket calculator duri ng a full day’s operation, how many coulombs of charge
moved through it?
34. To start a car engine, the car battery moves electr ons through the starter motor. How many coulombs of c harge
were moved?
Solution
-600C
35. A certain lightning bolt moves 40.0 C of charge. How many fund amental units of charge is this?

3.10.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8391818.2: Conductors and Insulators
36. Suppose a speck of dust in an electrostatic precipita tor has protons in it and has a net charge of –5.00 n C (a
very large charge for a small speck). How many electrons does it have?
Solution
37. An amoeba has protons and a net charge of 0.300 pC. (a) How many fewer electrons are there than protons?
(b) If you paired them up, what fraction of the protons wou ld have no electrons?
38. A 50.0 g ball of copper has a net charge of. What f raction of the copper’s electrons has been removed? (Each
copper atom has 29 protons, and copper has an atomic mas s of 63.5.)
Solution
39. What net charge would you place on a 100 g piece of sulfur if you put an extra electron on 1 in of its atoms? (Sulfur
has an atomic mass of 32.1.)
40. How many coulombs of positive charge are there in 4.00 kg of plutonium, given its atomic mass is 244 and t hat each
plutonium atom has 94 protons?
Solution
18.3: Coulomb's Law
41. What is the repulsive force between two pith balls that ar e 8.00 cm apart and have equal charges of – 30.0 nC?
42. (a) How strong is the attractive force between a glass r od with a charge and a silk cloth with a charge,
which are 12.0 cm apart, using the approximation that the y act like point charges?
(b) Discuss how the answer to this problem might be aff ected if the charges are distributed over some area a nd do not
act like point charges.
Solution
(a) 0.263 N
(b) If the charges are distributed over some area, the re will be a concentration of charge along the side c losest to the
oppositely charged object. This effect will increase the net force.
43. Two point charges exert a 5.00 N force on each other. What will the force become if the distance between th em is
increased by a factor of three?
44. Two point charges are brought closer together, incre asing the force between them by a factor of 25. By wha t factor was
their separation decreased?
Solution
The separation decreased by a factor of 5.
45. How far apart must two point charges of 75.0 nC (typical of static electricity) be to have a force of 1.00 N between th em?
46. If two equal charges each of 1 C each are separated in air by a distance of 1 km, what is the magnitude of the force acting
between them? You will see that even at a distance as large as 1 km, the repulsive force is substantial be cause 1 C is a very
significant amount of charge.
47. A test charge of is placed halfway between a charge of and another of separated by 10 cm.
(a) What is the magnitude of the force on the test charge?
(b) What is the direction of this force (away from or towar d the charge)?
48. Bare free charges do not remain stationary when close together. To illustrate this, calculate the accelerat ion of two
isolated protons separated by 2.00 nm (a typical dist ance between gas atoms). Explicitly show how you follow th e steps in

3.10.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83918the Problem-Solving Strategy for electrostatics.
Solution
49. (a) By what factor must you change the distance betwe en two point charges to change the force between them by a factor
of 10?
(b) Explain how the distance can either increase or decrease by this factor and still cause a factor of 10 change in the
force.
Solution
(a) 3.2
(b) If the distance increases by 3.2, then the force wi ll decrease by a factor of 10; if the distance dec reases by 3.2, then
the force will increase by a factor of 10. Either way, the f orce changes by a factor of 10.
50. Suppose you have a total charge that you can split i n any manner. Once split, the separation distance is f ixed. How do
you split the charge to achieve the greatest force?
51. (a) Common transparent tape becomes charged when pul led from a dispenser. If one piece is placed above ano ther, the
repulsive force can be great enough to support the t op piece’s weight. Assuming equal point charges (only an approximation),
calculate the magnitude of the charge if electrosta tic force is great enough to support the weight of a 1 0.0 mg piece of tape
held 1.00 cm above another.
(b) Discuss whether the magnitude of this charge is consisten t with what is typical of static electricity.
Solution
(a)
(b) This charge is approximately 1 nC, which is consistent with the magnitude of charge typical for static electric ity
52. (a) Find the ratio of the electrostatic to gravitational fo rce between two electrons.
(b) What is this ratio for two protons?
(c) Why is the ratio different for electrons and proto ns?
53. At what distance is the electrostatic force between two pro tons equal to the weight of one proton?
54. A certain five cent coin contains 5.00 g of nickel. W hat fraction of the nickel atoms’ electrons, remove d and placed 1.00
m above it, would support the weight of this coin? The atomic mass of nickel is 58.7, and each nickel atom c ontains 28
electrons and 28 protons.
Solution
55. (a) Two point charges totaling exert a repulsive fo rce of 0.150 N on one another when separated by 0.500 m.
What is the charge on each?
(b) What is the charge on each if the force is attractiv e?
56. Point charges of and are placed 0.250 m apart.
(a) Where can a third charge be placed so that the net force on it is zero?

3.10.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83918(b) What if both charges are positive?
Solution
(a). 0.859 m beyond negative charge on line connecting two charges
(b). 0.109 m from lesser charge on line connecting two char ges
57. Two point charges and are apart, and their total charge is.
(a) If the force of repulsion between them is 0.075N, what a re magnitudes of the two charges?
(b) If one charge attracts the other with a force of 0.525N, what are the magnitudes of the two charges? Note that you
may need to solve a quadratic equation to reach your a nswer.
18.4: Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited
58. What is the magnitude and direction of an electric field that exerts a upward force on a charge?
59. What is the magnitude and direction of the force ex erted on a charge by a 250 N/C electric field that points due
east?
Solution
60. Calculate the magnitude of the electric field 2.00 m from a point charge of 5.00 mC (such as found on the terminal of a
Van de Graaff).
61. (a) What magnitude point charge creates a 10,000 N/C ele ctric field at a distance of 0.250 m?
(b) How large is the field at 10.0 m?
Solution
(a)
(b)
62. Calculate the initial (from rest) acceleration of a proton in a electric field (such as created by a research
Van de Graaff). Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Pr oblem-Solving Strategy for electrostatics.
63. (a) Find the direction and magnitude of an electric field that exerts a westward force on an electron.
(b) What magnitude and direction force does this fiel d exert on a proton?
Solution
(a) 300N/C (east)
(b) (east)
18.5: Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges
64. (a) Sketch the electric field lines near a point charge.
(b) Do the same for a point charge.
65. Sketch the electric field lines a long distance from the charge distributions shown in Figure (a) and (b)
66. Figure shows the electric field lines near two charges an d. What is the ratio of their magnitudes?
(b) Sketch the electric field lines a long distance from th e charges shown in the figure.

3.10.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83918The electric field near two charges.
67. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of t wo opposite charges, where the negative charge is thr ee times greater in
magnitude than the positive. (See Figure 18.6.8 for a simil ar situation).
18.7: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium
68. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the conductor in Figure given the field was originally uniform and parallel
to the object’s long axis. Is the resulting field small n ear the long side of the object?
69. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of th e conductor in Figure 18.8.12 given the field was orig inally uniform and
parallel to the object’s long axis. Is the resulting fiel d small near the long side of the object?
70. Sketch the electric field between the two conducting p lates shown in Figure, given the top plate is positive a nd an equal
amount of negative charge is on the bottom plate. Be cert ain to indicate the distribution of charge on the plates.
71. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the charged insulator in Figure noting its nonuniform cha rge distribution.
A charged insulating rod such as might be used in a class room demonstration.
72. What is the force on the charge located at in Figure (a) given that?
(a) Point charges located at 3.00, 8.00, and 11.0 cm al ong the x-axis. (b) Point charges located at 1.00, 5.00, 8.00, and 14.0
cm along the x-axis.
73. (a) Find the total electric field at in Figure
(b) given that. (b) Find the total electric field at i n Figure 18.8.15(b).

3.10.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83918(c) If the charges are allowed to move and eventuall y be brought to rest by friction, what will the final charge
configuration be? (That is, will there be a single charge, double charge, etc., and what will its value(s) be?)
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c) one charge of
74. (a) Find the electric field at in Figure 18.8.15(a), give n that.
(b) At what position between 3.00 and 8.00 cm is the total e lectric field the same as that for alone?
(c) Can the electric field be zero anywhere between 0.00 an d 8.00 cm?
(d) At very large positive or negative values of x, the electric field approaches zero in both (a) and (b). In which does it
most rapidly approach zero and why?
(e) At what position to the right of 11.0 cm is the t otal electric field zero, other than at infinity? (Hi nt: A graphing
calculator can yield considerable insight in this proble m.)
75. (a) Find the total Coulomb force on a charge of 2.00 nC loc ated at in Figure
(b), given that. (b) Find the x-position at which the electric field is zero in Fgiure 18.8.15(b).
Solution
(a) 0.252 N to the left
(b)
76. Using the symmetry of the arrangement, determine the d irection of the force on in the figure below, given that
and.
(b) Calculate the magnitude of the force on the charge, given that the square is 10.0 cm on a side and.
77. (a) Using the symmetry of the arrangement, determine t he direction of the electric field at the center of the square in
Figure 18.8.16, given that and.
(b) Calculate the magnitude of the electric field at the location of, given that the square is 5.00 cm on a side.
Solution
(a) The electric field at the center of the square will be straight up, since and are negative and an d are
positive and all have the same magnitude.
(b) (upward)
78. Find the electric field at the location of in Figure 18.8.16 given that,, and the
square is 20.0 cm on a side.
79. Find the total Coulomb force on the charge in Figure 18.8.16, given that,,,
, and. The square is 50.0 cm on a side.
Solution
0.102 N, in the direction
80. (a) Find the electric field at the location of in Figur e, given that and.
(b) What is the force on, given that?

3.10.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83918
Point charges located at the corners of an equilateral t riangle 25.0 cm on a side.
81. (a) Find the electric field at the center of the tr iangular configuration of charges in Figure 18.8.17, gi ven that
,, and.
(b) Is there any combination of charges, other than, that will produce a zero strength electric field at the
center of the triangular configuration?
Solution
(a), below the horizontal.
(b) No
18.8: Applications of Electrostatics
82. (a) What is the electric field 5.00 m from the center of the terminal of a Van de Graaff with a 3.00 mC ch arge, noting that
the field is equivalent to that of a point charge at the ce nter of the terminal?
(b) At this distance, what force does the field exert on a charge on the Van de Graaff’s belt?
83. (a) What is the direction and magnitude of an elect ric field that supports the weight of a free electron near the surface of
Earth?
(b) Discuss what the small value for this field implies regarding the relative strength of the gravitational and
electrostatic forces.
Solution
(a)
(b) the coulomb force is extraordinarily stronger than gr avity
84. A simple and common technique for accelerating elect rons is shown in Figure, where there is a uniform electri c field
between two plates. Electrons are released, usually fr om a hot filament, near the negative plate, and ther e is a small hole in
the positive plate that allows the electrons to conti nue moving. (a) Calculate the acceleration of the e lectron if the field
strength is.
(b) Explain why the electron will not be pulled back to the positive plate once it moves through the hole.
Parallel conducting plates with opposite charges on th em create a relatively uniform electric field used to accelerate
electrons to the right. Those that go through the hole can be used to make a TV or computer screen glow or to pro duce Xrays.
85. Earth has a net charge that produces an electric field of approximately 150 N/C downward at its surface.
(a) What is the magnitude and sign of the excess char ge, noting the electric field of a conducting sphere is equivalent
to a point charge at its center?Extra close brace or missing open brace

3.10.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83918(b) What acceleration will the field produce on a free e lectron near Earth’s surface?
(c) What mass object with a single extra electron will have it s weight supported by this field?
Solution
(a)
(b) (upward)
(c)
86. Point charges of and are placed 0.500 m apart.
(a) At what point along the line between them is the elect ric field zero?
(b) What is the electric field halfway between them?
87. What can you say about two charges and, if the electric fi eld one-fourth of the way from to is zero?
Solution
The charge is 9 times greater than.
88. Calculate the angular velocity of an electron orbi ting a proton in the hydrogen atom, given the radius of the orbit is
. You may assume that the proton is stationary and the centripetal force is supplied by Coulomb attraction.
89. An electron has an initial velocity of in a uniform strength electric field. The field
accelerates the electron in the direction opposite to i ts initial velocity.
(a) What is the direction of the electric field?
(b) How far does the electron travel before coming to rest?
(c) How long does it take the electron to come to res t? (d) What is the electron’s velocity when it return s to its starting
point?
90. The practical limit to an electric field in air is about. Above this strength, sparking takes place bec ause air
begins to ionize and charges flow, reducing the field.
(a) Calculate the distance a free proton must travel in this field to reach of the speed of light, starting from rest.
(b) Is this practical in air, or must it occur in a vacuum?
91. A 5.00 g charged insulating ball hangs on a 30.0 cm l ong string in a uniform horizontal electric field a s shown in Figure.
Given the charge on the ball is, find the strength of the field.
A horizontal electric field causes the charged ball to han g at an angle of.
92. Figure shows an electron passing between two charged me tal plates that create an 100 N/C vertical electric field
perpendicular to the electron’s original horizontal velocity. (These can be used to change the electron’ s direction, such as in
an oscilloscope.) The initial speed of the electron is, and the horizontal distance it travels in the uniform field
is 4.00 cm.
(a) What is its vertical deflection?
(b) What is the vertical component of its final velocit y?
(c) At what angle does it exit? Neglect any edge effects.

3.10.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83918
93. The classic Millikan oil drop experiment was the first to obtain an accurate measurement of the charge on an electron. In
it, oil drops were suspended against the gravitationa l force by a vertical electric field. (Figure 18.9.9) Given the oil drop to be
in radius and have a density of: (a) Find the weigh t of the drop. (b) If the drop has a single excess ele ctron,
find the electric field strength needed to balance its we ight.
In the Millikan oil drop experiment, small drops can be suspended in an electric field by the force exerted on a single excess
electron. Classically, this experiment was used to det ermine the electron charge by measuring the electric field and mass
of the drop.
94. (a) In Figure, four equal charges lie on the corner s of a square. A fifth charge is on a mass directly above the center
of the square, at a height equal to the length of one side of the square. Determine the magnitude of in terms of,, and,
if the Coulomb force is to equal the weight of. (b) Is this eq uilibrium stable or unstable? Discuss.
Four equal charges on the corners of a horizontal squ are support the weight of a fifth charge located dir ectly above the
center of the square.
95. (a) Calculate the electric field strength near a 10.0 cm dia meter conducting sphere that has 1.00 C of excess charge o n it.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which as sumptions are responsible?
96. (a) Two 0.500 g raindrops in a thunderhead are 1.00 c m apart when they each acquire 1.00 mC charges. Find th eir
acceleration.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which premise or assumption is responsible?
97. A wrecking yard inventor wants to pick up cars by charg ing a 0.400 m diameter ball and inducing an equal an d opposite
charge on the car. If a car has a 1000 kg mass and the bal l is to be able to lift it from a distance of 1.00 m:
(a) What minimum charge must be used?
(b) What is the electric field near the surface of the bal l?
(c) Why are these results unreasonable?

3.10.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83918(d) Which premise or assumption is responsible?
98. Consider two insulating balls with evenly distributed equal and opposite charges on their surfaces, held with a certain
distance between the centers of the balls. Construct a problem in which you calculate the electric field (magnitude and
direction) due to the balls at various points along a line running through the centers of the balls and extending to infinity on
either side. Choose interesting points and comment on the meaning of the field at those points. For example, at what points
might the field be just that due to one ball and whe re does the field become negligibly small? Among the things to be
considered are the magnitudes of the charges and the distance between the centers of the balls. Your instru ctor may wish for
you to consider the electric field off axis or for a more co mplex array of charges, such as those in a water molecule.
99. Consider identical spherical conducting space ships i n deep space where gravitational fields from other bo dies are
negligible compared to the gravitational attraction between the ships. Construct a problem in which you pl ace identical
excess charges on the space ships to exactly counter their gravitational attraction. Calculate the amount of excess charge
needed. Examine whether that charge depends on the di stance between the centers of the ships, the masses o f the ships, or
any other factors. Discuss whether this would be an easy, diffic ult, or even impossible thing to do in practice.
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State University of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univer sity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 3.10: Practice is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
18: Electric Charge and Electric Field (Exercises) has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electricalengineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnet ics-and-applications-spring-2009.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: Electric Potential Energy, Electrical Potential or Voltage, and Capacitance
4.1: Introduction to Electric Potential and Electric Energy
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical Potential Di fference
4.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
4.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
4.5: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
4.6: Equipotential Lines
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
4.9: Energy Stored in Capacitors
4.E: Exercises
4: Electric Potential Energy, Electrical Potential o r V oltage, and Capacitance is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839404.1: Introduction to Electric Potential and Electric Energy
Two of the most familiar aspects of electricity are it s energy and voltage. We know, for example, that great amounts of electr ical
energy can be stored in batteries, are transmitted cro ss-country through power lines, and may jump from cloud s to explode the sap
of trees. In a similar manner, at molecular levels, ions cross cell membranes and transfer information. We a lso know about voltages
associated with electricity. Batteries are typically a few volts, the outlets in your home produce 120 vol ts, and power lines can be as
high as hundreds of thousands of volts.
Energy and voltage are not the same thing. A motorcy cle battery, for example, is small and would not be ve ry successful in
replacing the much larger car battery, yet each has the same voltage. In this chapter, we shall examine the relationship between
voltage and electrical energy.
Figure: Automated external defibrillator unit (AED) (credit: U.S. Defense Department photo/Tech. Sgt. Suz anne M. Day)
4.1: Introduction to Electric Potential and Electric Energy is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.
19.0: Introduction to Electric Potential and Electric En ergy by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

4.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839414.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical Potential Difference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define electric potential and electric potential energy.
Describe the relationship between potential difference and electrical potential energy.
Explain electron volt and its usage in submicroscopic pr ocess.
Determine electric potential energy given potential di fference and amount of charge.
Electrical Potential Energy
When a free positive charge is accelerated by an el ectric field, such as shown in Figure, it is given kin etic energy. The
process is analogous to an object being accelerated by a gravitational field. It is as if the charge is goi ng down an electrical hill
where its electric potential energy is converted to k inetic energy. Let us explore the work done on a cha rge by the electric field in
this process, so that we may develop a definition of electri c potential energy.
Figure: A charge accelerated by an electric field i s analogous to a mass going down a hill. In both cases po tential energy is
converted to another form. Work is done by a force, but since this force is conservative, we can write.
The electrostatic or Coulomb force is conservative, which means that the work done on is independent of the path taken. This is
exactly analogous to the gravitational force in the absence of dissipative forces such as friction. When a force is conservative, it is
possible to define a potential energy associated with the force, and it is usually easier to deal with the po tential energy (because it
depends only on position) than to calculate the work direc tly.
We use U to denote electric potential energy, which h as units of joules (J). The change in potential energ y,, is crucial, since the
work done by a conservative force is the negative of the change in potential energy; that is,. For exampl e, work done
to accelerate a positive charge from rest is positive and results from a loss in U, or a negative. There m ust be a minus sign in
front of to make positive. U can be found at any po int by taking one point as a reference and calculat ing the work needed to
move a charge to the other point.
. For example, work done to accelerate a positive cha rge from rest is positive and results from a loss in U, or a
negative There must be a minus sign in front of to make positive. U can be found at any point by takin g one point as
a reference and calculating the work needed to move a c harge to the other point.
Gravitational potential energy and electric potentia l energy are quite analogous. Potential energy account s for work done by a
conservative force and gives added insight regarding energy and energy transformation without the necessi ty of dealing with the
force directly. It is much more common, for example, to use the concept of voltage (related to electric potential energy) than to deal
with the Coulomb force directly.Learning Objectives
ELECTRICAL POTENTIAL ENERGY

4.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941Calculating the work directly is generally difficult, since and the direction and magnitude of can be c omplex for
multiple charges, for odd-shaped objects, and along ar bitrary paths. But we do know that, since, the work, and hence, is
proportional to the test charge To have a physical quantity that is independent of test charge, we defi ne electric potential (or
simply potential, since electric is understood) to be th e potential energy per unit charge:
To show this explicitly, consider an electric charge f ixed at the origin and move another charge toward q in such a manner
that, at each instant, the applied force exactly bal ances the electric force on Q (Figure). The work done by the applied
force on the charge Q changes the potential energy of Q. We call this potential energy the electrical potential energy of Q.
Figure: Displacement of “test” charge Q in the presence of fixed “source” charge q.
The work done by the applied force when the particle m oves from to may be calculated by
Since the applied force balances the electric force on Q, the two forces have equal magnitude and opposite d irections.
Therefore, the applied force is
where we have defined positive to be pointing away fro m the origin and r is the distance from the origin. The directions of both the
displacement and the applied force in the system in Figur e are parallel, and thus the work done on the system is po sitive.
We use the letter U to denote electric potential energy, which has units of joules (J). When a conservative force does nega tive work,
the system gains potential energy. When a conservativ e force does positive work, the system loses potential e nergy,. In
the system in Figure, the Coulomb force acts in the o pposite direction to the displacement; therefore, the work is negative.
However, we have increased the potential energy in the two-charg e system.
A charge Q is initially at rest a distance of 10 cm () from a charge q fixed at the origin (Figure).
Naturally, the Coulomb force accelerates Q away from q, eventually reaching 15 cm ().
Figure: The charge Q is repelled by q, thus having work done on it and gaining kinetic en ergy.
a. What is the work done by the electric field between and?
b. How much kinetic energy does Q have at?
Strategy
Calculate the work with the usual definition. Since Q started from rest, this is the same as the kinetic energ y.
Solution
Integrating force over distance, we obtainExample: Kinetic Energy of a Charged Particle

4.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941This is also the value of the kinetic energy at.
Significance
Charge Q was initially at rest; the electric field of q did work on Q, so now Q has kinetic energy equal to the work done by the
electric field.
In this example, the work W done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is po sitive and results from a loss in U, or a negative
. A value for U can be found at any point by taking one point as a reference and calculating the work needed to move a charge to
the other point.
Work W done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is p ositive and results from a loss in U, or a negative.
Mathematically,
Gravitational potential energy and electric potentia l energy are quite analogous. Potential energy account s for work done by a
conservative force and gives added insight regarding energy and energy transformation without the necessi ty of dealing with the
force directly. It is much more common, for example, t o use the concept of electric potential energy than to deal with the Coulomb
force directly in real-world applications.
In polar coordinates with q at the origin and Q located at r, the displacement element vector is and thus the work bec omes
Notice that this result only depends on the endpoint s and is otherwise independent of the path taken. To explore this further,
compare path to with path in Figure.
Figure:Two paths for displacement to. The work on se gments and are zero due to the electrical force be ing
perpendicular to the displacement along these paths. T herefore, work on paths and are equal.Electric Potential Energy

4.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941The segments and are arcs of circles centered at q. Since the force on Q points either toward or away from q, no work is
done by a force balancing the electric force, becau se it is perpendicular to the displacement along these arcs. Therefore, the only
work done is along segment which is identical to.
One implication of this work calculation is that if we we re to go around the path, the net work would be zero (Figure
). Recall that this is how we determine whether a forc e is conservative or not. Hence, because the electric force is related t o the
electric field by, the electric field is itself conser vative.
Figure: A closed path in an electric field. The net work around this path is zero.
Another implication is that we may define an electric potential energy. Recall that the work done by a co nservative force is also
expressed as the difference in the potential energy corresponding to that force. Therefore, the work to b ring a charge from a
reference point to a point of interest may be written as
and, by Equation, the difference in potential energy () of the test charge Q between the two points is
Therefore, we can write a general expression for the poten tial energy of two point charges (in spherical coordinates):
We may take the second term to be an arbitrary consta nt reference level, which serves as the zero reference:
A convenient choice of reference that relies on our common sense is that when the two charges are infinit ely far apart, there is no
interaction between them. (Recall the discussion of ref erence potential energy in Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy.)
Taking the potential energy of this state to be zer o removes the term from the equation (just like whe n we say the ground is
zero potential energy in a gravitational potential energy problem), and the potential energy of Q when it is separated from q by a
distance r assumes the form
This formula is symmetrical with respect to and, so it is b est described as the potential energy of the two-charge syst em.
A charge Q is initially at rest a distance of 10 cm from a charge q fixed at the origin (Figure).
Naturally, the Coulomb force accelerates Q away from q, eventually reaching 15 cm.Example: Potential Energy of a Charged Particle

4.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941
Figure: The charge is repelled by, thus having work done on it and losing potential energy.
What is the change in the potential energy of the two-cha rge system from to?
Strategy
Calculate the potential energy with the definition given above:
. Since Q started from rest, this is the same as the kinetic energy.
Solution
We have
Significance
The change in the potential energy is negative, as ex pected, and equal in magnitude to the change in kin etic energy in this
system. Recall from Example that the change in kinetic e nergy was positive.
Due to Coulomb’s law, the forces due to multiple cha rges on a test charge superimpose; they may be cal culated individually and
then added. This implies that the work integrals and h ence the resulting potential energies exhibit the sam e behavior. To
demonstrate this, we consider an example of assembling a system of four charges.
Find the amount of work an external agent must do in a ssembling four charges,, and
at the vertices of a square of side 1.0 cm, starting each ch arge from infinity (Figure).
Figure: How much work is needed to assemble this charge configuration?
Strategy
We bring in the charges one at a time, giving them s tarting locations at infinity and calculating the wo rk to bring them in from
infinity to their final location. We do this in order of increasing charge.Example: Assembling Four Positive Charges

4.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941Solution
Step 1. First bring the charge to the origin. Since t here are no other charges at a finite distance from this charge yet,
no work is done in bringing it from infinity,
Step 2. While keeping the charge fixed at the origin, bring the charge to (Figure
). Now, the applied force must do work against the for ce exerted by the charge fixed at the origin. The work
done equals the change in the potential energy of the c harge:
Figure: Step 2. Work to bring the charge from infi nity.
Step 3. While keeping the charges of and fixed in th eir places, bring in the charge to
(Figure). The work done in this step is
Figure: Step 3. The work to bring the charge from infinity.
Step 4. Finally, while keeping the first three charges in their places, bring the charge to
(Figure). The work done here is

4.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941
Figure: Step 4. The work to bring the charge from infinity.
Hence, the total work done by the applied force in as sembling the four charges is equal to the sum of the work in bringing each
charge from infinity to its final position:
Significance
The work on each charge depends only on its pairwise interactions with the other charges. No more complicat ed interactions
need to be considered; the work on the third charge only depends on its interaction with the first and se cond charges, the
interaction between the first and second charge does not affect the third.
positive, negative, and these quantities are the same as t he work you would need to do to bring the charges in from infinity
Note that the electrical potential energy is positive if the two charges are of the same type, either posi tive or negative, and negative
if the two charges are of opposite types. This makes se nse if you think of the change in the potential ene rgy as you bring the
two charges closer or move them farther apart. Dependi ng on the relative types of charges, you may have t o work on the system or
the system would do work on you, that is, your work is either positive or negative. If you have to do posit ive work on the system
(actually push the charges closer), then the energy o f the system should increase. If you bring two positi ve charges or two negative
charges closer, you have to do positive work on the sy stem, which raises their potential energy. Since poten tial energy is
proportional to 1/ r, the potential energy goes up when r goes down between two positive or two negative charges.
On the other hand, if you bring a positive and a neg ative charge nearer, you have to do negative work on the system (the charges
are pulling you), which means that you take energy awa y from the system. This reduces the potential energy. Since potential energy
is negative in the case of a positive and a negative charge pair, the increase in 1/ r makes the potential energy more negative, which
is the same as a reduction in potential energy.
The result from Example may be extended to systems with any arbitrary number of charges. In this case, i t is most convenient
to write the formula as
The factor of 1/2 accounts for adding each pair of char ges twice.

Consider two point charges, and that are separated by an initial distance and are moved to a new separ ation (we will
assume that only moves). We seek the work done on du ring this move by the electric field coming from, from which we can
obtain the change in the system's potential energy.
Figure 2.1.1 – Change of Potential Energy for a Two Point Charges

4.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941
The force between these charges changes as is moved, wh ich means that the work calculation requires a far les s trivial integral
than was performed for the case of a uniform field. Start by setting up the work integral with the coluomb force:
The displacement is parallel to the radial unit vect or (if it wasn't, the dot product would require that we only take the displacement
in that direction anyway), so the product can be written simply as. Putting this into the integral gives:
The change in potential energy for this process is therefo re:
As we recall from our study of mechanics, it is only the change in potential energy that matters, but we also find it useful to define
a state of zero potential, from which we can reference other states. It is common (though not universal, as wel l will see later) to
reference our point of zero electrostatic potential energy at. Another way to look at this is to think of the potential energy of
a configuration of charges (in this case, two point ch arges) as the work done in moving the charges from i nfinite separation to their
current proximity. That gives us the following potential energy of two point charges separated by a distance:
It should be noted that this potential energy is po sitive if the two charges have the same sign, and neg ative if they have different
signs. This makes sense, since we have to add external work to the system to push the repelling charges toge ther, while attracting
charges "want" to come together, which is a characterist ic of decreasing potential energy (because the force causes them to speed
up, so the loss of potential energy results in a increase o f kinetic energy).
When we collect more than just two point charges, we ha ve to account for the potential energy contribution of every pair of
charges. This begins to add up when the number of po int charges grows. Representing the separation of char ge 1 from charge 2
with " ", charge 1 from charge 3 with "," and so on, the total potential energy for a collection of point c harges is the sum of all
the pairwise contributions:
A point charge is moving horizontally halfway betwe en two other point charges that are equal in magnitud e but opposite in
sign, and are held fixed in place. The two negative p oint charges are separated by a distance. The positiv e point charge
obviously experiences no net vertical force, so it c ontinues moving horizontally. Find the amount of KE gai ned or lost (indicate
which) by the moving charge at the moment when the three ch arges form an equilateral triangle.Example

4.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941
Solution
The mechanical energy will be conserved, so the chang e in kinetic energy will equal the negative the cha nge of potential
energy. The potential energy in the system that resul ts from the two negative charges interacting with ea ch other never changes
(they are held in place), and the potential energy change between the moving charge each of the stationa ry charges is the same
due to symmetry. So all we need to calculate is the ch ange in potential energy between the moving charge a nd one of the
others, and multiply it by two. They are initially separated by a distance, and afterward are separated by, so:
The change in kinetic energy is negative, indicating that the charge slows down. This makes sense, given tha t it is attracted by
the other charges, which pull it in the direction opposite to its motion.

Electrical Potential
Calculating the work directly is generally difficult, since and the direction and magnitude of can be c omplex for
multiple charges, for odd-shaped objects, and along ar bitrary paths. But we do know that, since, the work, and hence, is
proportional to the test charge To have a physical quantity that is independent of test charge, we defi ne electric potential (or
simply potential, since electric is understood) to be th e potential energy per unit charge:
This is the electric potential energy per unit charge.
Since PE is proportional to, the dependence on cance ls. Thus does not depend on. The change in potentia l energy is
crucial, and so we are concerned with the difference in poten tial or potential difference between two points, where
The potential difference between points A and B,, is thus defined to be the c hange in potential energy of a charge moved
from A to B, divided by the charge. Units of potentia l difference are joules per coulomb, given the name vo lt (V) after Alessandro
V olta.
The potential difference between points A and B,, i s defined to be the change in potential energy of a charge moved
from A to B, divided by the charge. Units of potential difference are joules per coulomb, given the name volt (V) after
Alessandro V olta.ELECTRIC POTENTIAL
POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE

4.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941The familiar term voltage is the common name for potential difference. Keep in mind that whenever a voltage is quoted, it is
understood to be the potential difference between two points. For example, every battery has two terminals, a nd its voltage is the
potential difference between them. More fundamentally, the point you choose to be zero volts is arbitrary. Th is is analogous to the
fact that gravitational potential energy has an arbitrar y zero, such as sea level or perhaps a lecture hall floor.
In summary, the relationship between potential differen ce (or voltage) and electrical potential energy is given by
The relationship between potential difference (or volt age) and electrical potential energy is given by
The second equation is equivalent to the first.
V oltage is not the same as energy. V oltage is the en ergy per unit charge. Thus a motorcycle battery and a car battery can both have
the same voltage (more precisely, the same potential difference between battery terminals), yet one store s much more energy than
the other since. The car battery can move more charge than the motorcycle battery, although both are 12 V b atteries.
Suppose you have a 12.0 V motorcycle battery that can move 5000 C of charge, and a 12.0 V car battery that can move 60,000
C of charge. How much energy does each deliver? (Assume that the numerical value of each charge is accurate to three
significant figures.)
Strategy
To say we have a 12.0 V battery means that its terminal s have a 12.0 V potential difference. When such a b attery moves charge,
it puts the charge through a potential difference of 12.0 V, and the charge is given a change in potentia l energy equal to
So to find the energy output, we multiply the charge move d by the potential difference.
Solution
For the motorcycle battery, and. The total energy de livered by the motorcycle battery is
Similarly, for the car battery, and
Discussion
While voltage and energy are related, they are not t he same thing. The voltages of the batteries are ide ntical, but the energy
supplied by each is quite different. Note also that as a battery is discharged, some of its energy is used internally and its
terminal voltage drops, such as when headlights dim bec ause of a low car battery. The energy supplied by the battery is still
calculated as in this example, but not all of the energy i s available for external use.POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE AND ELECTRICAL POTENTIAL ENERGY
Example:Calculating Energy

4.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941Note that the energies calculated in the previous exam ple are absolute values. The change in potential ene rgy for the battery is
negative, since it loses energy. These batteries, like ma ny electrical systems, actually move negative charge —electrons in
particular. The batteries repel electrons from their negative terminals (A) through whatever circuitry is involved and attract them to
their positive terminals (B) as shown in Figure. The change in potential is and the charge is negative,
so that is negative, meaning the potential energy of t he battery has decreased when has moved from A to B.
Figure: A battery moves negative charge from its nega tive terminal through a headlight to its positive ter minal. Appropriate
combinations of chemicals in the battery separate char ges so that the negative terminal has an excess of negat ive charge, which is
repelled by it and attracted to the excess positive ch arge on the other terminal. In terms of potential, t he positive terminal is at a
higher voltage than the negative. Inside the battery, both positive and negative charges move.
When a 12.0 V car battery runs a single 30.0 W headlig ht, how many electrons pass through it each second?
Strategy
To find the number of electrons, we must first find t he charge that moved in 1.00 s. The charge moved is related to voltage and
energy through the equation. A 30.0 W lamp uses 30.0 joules per second. Since the battery loses energy, we have
and, since the electrons are going from the negativ e terminal to the positive, we see that.
Solution
To find the charge moved, we solve the equation:
Entering the values for and, we get
The number of electrons is the total charge divided b y the charge per electron. That is,
Discussion
This is a very large number. It is no wonder that we do not ordinarily observe individual electrons with so ma ny being present
in ordinary systems. In fact, electricity had been in use for many decades before it was determined that the moving charges in
many circumstances were negative. Positive charge moving in the opposite direction of negative charge often p roduces
identical effects; this makes it difficult to determine whi ch is moving or whether both are moving.
The Electron Volt
The energy per electron is very small in macroscopic situations like that in the previous example—a tiny fraction of a joule. But on
a submicroscopic scale, such energy per particle (ele ctron, proton, or ion) can be of great importance. Fo r example, even a tiny
fraction of a joule can be great enough for these p articles to destroy organic molecules and harm livi ng tissue. The particle may do
its damage by direct collision, or it may create harm ful x rays, which can also inflict damage. It is useful to have an energy unitExample: How Many Electrons Move through a Headlight Each Second?

4.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941related to submicroscopic effects. Figure shows a situ ation related to the definition of such an energy u nit. An electron is
accelerated between two charged metal plates as it migh t be in an old-model television tube or oscilloscop e. The electron is given
kinetic energy that is later converted to another f orm—light in the television tube, for example. (Note that downhill for the electron
is uphill for a positive charge.) Since energy is relate d to voltage by we can think of the joule as a coulomb -volt.
Figure: A typical electron gun accelerates electrons using a potential difference between two metal plate s. The energy of the
electron in electron volts is numerically the same as t he voltage between the plates. For example, a 5000 V potential difference
produces 5000 eV electrons.
On the submicroscopic scale, it is more convenient to define an energy unit called the electron volt (eV), which is the energy given
to a fundamental charge accelerated through a potential difference of 1 V. In equation form,
On the submicroscopic scale, it is more convenient to define an energy unit called the electron volt (eV), which is the energy
given to a fundamental charge accelerated through a po tential difference of 1 V. In equation form,
An electron accelerated through a potential differen ce of 1 V is given an energy of 1 eV. It follows that an electron accelerated
through 50 V is given 50 eV. A potential difference of 100,000 V (100 kV) will give an electron an energ y of 100,000 eV (100
keV), and so on. Similarly, an ion with a double positiv e charge accelerated through 100 V will be given 200 eV of energy. These
simple relationships between accelerating voltage and particle charges make the electron volt a simple an d convenient energy unit
in such circumstances.
The electron volt (eV) is the most common energy unit for submicroscopic processes. This will be particul arly noticeable in the
chapters on modern physics. Energy is so important to so many subjects that there is a tendency to define a special energy unit
for each major topic. There are, for example, calori es for food energy, kilowatt-hours for electrical ener gy, and therms for
natural gas energy.
The electron volt is commonly employed in submicrosco pic processes—chemical valence energies and molecular and nuclear
binding energies are among the quantities often exp ressed in electron volts. For example, about 5 eV of e nergy is required to break
up certain organic molecules. If a proton is accele rated from rest through a potential difference of 30 kV, it is given an energy of 30
keV (30,000 eV) and it can break up as many as 6000 of these molecules (per molecule molecules).
Nuclear decay energies are on the order of 1 MeV (1,000,000 e V) per event and can, thus, produce significant biologica l damage.ELECTRON VOLT
CONNECTIONS: ENERGY UNITS

4.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941Conservation of Energy
The total energy of a system is conserved if there is no net addition (or subtraction) of work or heat tr ansfer. For conservative
forces, such as the electrostatic force, conservation of energy states that mechanical energy is a constant.
Mechanical energy is the sum of the kinetic energy and potential ene rgy of a system; that is,. A loss of PE of
a charged particle becomes an increase in its KE. Here PE is the electric potential energy. Conservation of energy is stated in
equation form as
or
where i and f stand for initial and final conditions. As we have found many times before, considering energy can give us insights
and facilitate problem solving.
Calculate the final speed of a free electron accele rated from rest through a potential difference of 1 00 V. (Assume that this
numerical value is accurate to three significant figures.)
Strategy
We have a system with only conservative forces. Assuming the electron is accelerated in a vacuum, and neglec ting the
gravitational force (we will check on this assumption later), all of the electrical potential energy is con verted into kinetic
energy. We can identify the initial and final forms of e nergy to be.
Solution
Conservation of energy states that
Entering the forms identified above, we obtain
We solve this for:
Entering values for gives
Discussion
Note that both the charge and the initial voltage ar e negative, as in Figure. From the discussions in Electric Charge and Electric
Field, we know that electrostatic forces on small particles are generally very large compared with the gravitat ional force. The
large final speed confirms that the gravitational fo rce is indeed negligible here. The large speed also i ndicates how easy it is to
accelerate electrons with small voltages because of t heir very small mass. V oltages much higher than the 100 V in this problem
are typically used in electron guns. Those higher v oltages produce electron speeds so great that relativ istic effects must be
taken into account. That is why a low voltage is considered (accurately) in this example.Example: Electrical Potential Energy Converted to Kinetic Energy

4.2.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83941Summary
Electric potential is potential energy per unit charge.
The potential difference between points A and B,, define d to be the change in potential energy of a charge mo ved
from A to B, is equal to the change in potential energy di vided by the charge, Potential difference is commonly c alled voltage,
represented by the symbol.
An electron volt is the energy given to a fundamental ch arge accelerated through a potential difference of 1 V. In equation form,
Mechanical energy is the sum of the kinetic energy and pot ential energy of a system, that is, This sum is a constant.
Glossary
electric potential
potential energy per unit charge
potential difference (or voltage)
change in potential energy of a charge moved from one p oint to another, divided by the charge; units of poten tial difference are
joules per coulomb, known as volt
electron volt
the energy given to a fundamental charge accelerated through a potential difference of one volt
mechanical energy
sum of the kinetic energy and potential energy of a syste m; this sum is a constant
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical Potent ial Difference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by LibreTexts.
19.1: Electric Potential Energy- Potential Differenc e by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
7.2: Electric Potential Energy by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.
2.1: Potential Energy of Charge Assembly by Tom Weideman is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source: native.

4.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839424.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the relationship between voltage and electric field.
Derive an expression for the electric potential and elec tric field.
Calculate electric field strength given distance and volt age.
In the previous section, we explored the relationship between voltage and energy. In this section, we will e xplore the relationship
between voltage and electric field. For example, a unif orm electric field is produced by placing a potenti al difference (or voltage)
across two parallel metal plates, labeled A and B. (Figu re) Examining this will tell us what voltage is neede d to produce a
certain electric field strength; it will also reveal a more fundamental relationship between electric pot ential and electric field. From
a physicist’s point of view, either or can be use d to describe any charge distribution. is most closel y tied to energy,
whereas is most closely related to force. is a scalar quantity and has no direction, while is a vector quantity, having both
magnitude and direction. (Note that the magnitude of the electric field strength, a scalar quantity, is r epresented by below.) The
relationship between and is revealed by calculating the work done by the force in moving a charge from point A to point B.
But, as noted in Electric Potential Energy: Potential Difference, this is complex for arbitrary charge distributions, requiring
calculus. We therefore look at a uniform electric field as an interesting special case.
Figure: The relationship between and for parallel conducting plates is. (Note that in magnitude. For a
charge that is moved from plate A at higher potentia l to plate B at lower potential, a minus sign needs to be included as follows:
. See the text for details.)
The work done by the electric field in Figure to mov e a positive charge from A, the positive plate, high er potential, to B, the
negative plate, lower potential, is
The potential difference between points A and B is
Entering this into the expression for work yields
Work is; here, since the path is parallel to the f ield, and so. Since, we see that.
Substituting this expression for work into the previous equation gives
The charge cancels, and so the voltage between points A an d B is seen to beLearning Objectives

4.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83942where is the distance from A to B, or the distance betwe en the plates in Figure. Note that the above equation implies the
units for electric field are volts per meter. We alre ady know the units for electric field are newtons per coulomb; thus the following
relation among units is valid:
where is the distance from A to B, or the distance betwee n the plates.
Dry air will support a maximum electric field strengt h of about. Above that value, the field creates eno ugh
ionization in the air to make the air a conductor. This allows a discharge or spark that reduces the fiel d. What, then, is the
maximum voltage between two parallel conducting plates s eparated by 2.5 cm of dry air?
Strategy
We are given the maximum electric field between the plates and the distance between them. The equation can
thus be used to calculate the maximum voltage.
Solution
The potential difference or voltage between the plates i s
Entering the given values for and gives
or
(The answer is quoted to only two digits, since the maximum field strength is approximate.)
Discussion
One of the implications of this result is that it take s about 75 kV to make a spark jump across a 2.5 cm (1 in.) gap, or 150 kV
for a 5 cm spark. This limits the voltages that can ex ist between conductors, perhaps on a power transmission line. A smaller
voltage will cause a spark if there are points on the surface, since points create greater fields than smoot h surfaces. Humid air
breaks down at a lower field strength, meaning that a sm aller voltage will make a spark jump through humid ai r. The largest
voltages can be built up, say with static electricity, on dry days.VOLTAGE BETWEEN POINTS A AND B
Example: What Is the Highest Voltage Possible between Two Plates?

4.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83942
Figure: A spark chamber is used to trace the paths of h igh-energy particles. Ionization created by the part icles as they pass
through the gas between the plates allows a spark to ju mp. The sparks are perpendicular to the plates, follow ing electric field lines
between them. The potential difference between adja cent plates is not high enough to cause sparks without t he ionization produced
by particles from accelerator experiments (or cosmic r ays). (credit: Daderot, Wikimedia Commons)
a. An electron gun has parallel plates separated by 4.00 c m and gives electrons 25.0 keV of energy. What is the elec tric field
strength between the plates?
b. What force would this field exert on a piece of plastic wit h a charge that gets between the plates?
Strategy
Since the voltage and plate separation are given, th e electric field strength can be calculated directl y from the expression
. Once the electric field strength is known, the force on a charge is found using. Since the electric fiel d is in only
one direction, we can write this equation in terms of the magnitudes,.
Solution(a)
The expression for the magnitude of the electric field be tween two uniform metal plates is
Since the electron is a single charge and is given 25.0 keV of energy, the potential difference must be 25.0 kV. Entering this
value for and the plate separation of 0.0400 m, we obtain
Solution(b)
The magnitude of the force on a charge in an electric fi eld is obtained from the equation
Substituting known values gives
Discussion
Note that the units are newtons, since. The force on the charge is the same no matter where the charge is located
between the plates. This is because the electric field is u niform between the plates.
In more general situations, regardless of whether the el ectric field is uniform, it points in the direction o f decreasing potential,
because the force on a positive charge is in the di rection of and also in the direction of lower poten tial. Furthermore, the
magnitude of equals the rate of decrease of with di stance. The faster decreases over distance, the greate r the electric field. In
equation form, the general relationship between voltage and electric field isExample: Field and Force inside an Electron Gun

4.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83942where is the distance over which the change in potent ial,, takes place. The minus sign tells us that poin ts in the direction
of decreasing potential. The electric field is said to be the gradient (as in grade or slope) of the electric potential.
In equation form, the general relationship between voltag e and electric field is
where is the distance over which the change in poten tial,, takes place. The minus sign tells us that po ints in the
direction of decreasing potential. The electric field is said to be the gradient (as in grade or slope) of the electric potential.
For continually changing potentials, and become in finitesimals and differential calculus must be emplo yed to determine the
electric field.
Summary
The voltage between points A and B is
where is the distance from A to B, or the distance betwee n the plates.
In equation form, the general relationship between voltag e and electric field is
where is the distance over which the change in potential,, takes place. The minus sign tells us that points in th e
direction of decreasing potential.) The electric field i s said to be the gradient (as in grade or slope) of the electric potential.
Glossary
scalar
physical quantity with magnitude but no direction
vector
physical quantity with both magnitude and direction
4.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19.2: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN VOLTAGE AND ELECTRIC FIELD

4.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/886904.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define electric potential, voltage, and potential differ ence
Define the electron-volt
Calculate electric potential and potential difference from potential energy and electric field
Describe systems in which the electron-volt is a useful unit
Apply conservation of energy to electric systems
Recall that earlier we defined electric field to be a quantity independent of the test charge in a given system, which would
nonetheless allow us to calculate the force that would result on an arbitrary test charge. (The default a ssumption in the absence of
other information is that the test charge is positive.) We briefly defined a field for gravity, but gravi ty is always attractive, whereas
the electric force can be either attractive or repu lsive. Therefore, although potential energy is perfe ctly adequate in a gravitational
system, it is convenient to define a quantity that all ows us to calculate the work on a charge independent of the magnitude of the
charge. Calculating the work directly may be difficul t, since and the direction and magnitude of can be complex for
multiple charges, for odd-shaped objects, and along a rbitrary paths. But we do know that because, the work, and hence
is proportional to the test charge. To have a phys ical quantity that is independent of test charge, we define electric potential (or
simply potential, since electric is understood) to be th e potential energy per unit charge:
The electric potential energy per unit charge is
Since is proportional to, the dependence on cancel s. Thus, does not depend on. The change in potential energy is
crucial, so we are concerned with the difference in potential or potential difference between two points, where
The electric potential difference between points and, is defined to be the change in potential energy of a charge
moved from to, divided by the charge. Units of pote ntial difference are joules per coulomb, given the n ame volt (V) after
Alessandro V olta.
The familiar term voltage is the common name for electric potential differenc e. Keep in mind that whenever a voltage is quoted, it
is understood to be the potential difference between two points. For example, every battery has two terminals, and its voltage is the
potential difference between them. More fundamentally, the point you choose to be zero volts is arbitrary. Th is is analogous to the
fact that gravitational potential energy has an arb itrary zero, such as sea level or perhaps a lecture hall floor. It is worthwhile to
emphasize the distinction between potential difference and electrical potential energy.
The relationship between potential difference (or volt age) and electrical potential energy is given by
orLearning Objectives
Electric Potential
Electric Potential Difference
Potential Difference and Electrical Potential Energy

4.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690V oltage is not the same as energy. V oltage is the ene rgy per unit charge. Thus, a motorcycle battery and a car battery can both have
the same voltage (more precisely, the same potential difference between battery terminals), yet one store s much more energy than
the other because. The car battery can move more char ge than the motorcycle battery, although both are 12-V batteries.
You have a 12.0-V motorcycle battery that can move 5 000 C of charge, and a 12.0-V car battery that can m ove 60,000 C of
charge. How much energy does each deliver? (Assume that t he numerical value of each charge is accurate to th ree significant
figures.)
Strategy
To say we have a 12.0-V battery means that its termina ls have a 12.0-V potential difference. When such a battery moves
charge, it puts the charge through a potential diffe rence of 12.0 V, and the charge is given a change in potential energy equal to
. To find the energy output, we multiply the charge moved b y the potential difference.
Solution
For the motorcycle battery, and. The total energy de livered by the motorcycle battery is
Similarly, for the car battery, and
Significance
V oltage and energy are related, but they are not th e same thing. The voltages of the batteries are identic al, but the energy
supplied by each is quite different. A car battery h as a much larger engine to start than a motorcycle. Note also that as a battery
is discharged, some of its energy is used internally and its terminal voltage drops, such as when headlights dim because of a
depleted car battery. The energy supplied by the ba ttery is still calculated as in this example, but no t all of the energy is
available for external use.
How much energy does a 1.5-V AAA battery have that can move 100 C?
Answer
Note that the energies calculated in the previous exam ple are absolute values. The change in potential ene rgy for the battery is
negative, since it loses energy. These batteries, like ma ny electrical systems, actually move negative charge —electrons in
particular. The batteries repel electrons from their n egative terminals () through whatever circuitry is i nvolved and attract them to
their positive terminals (), as shown in Figure. The change in potential is and the charge is
negative, so that is negative, meaning the potential ene rgy of the battery has decreased when has moved from to.Example: Calculating Energy
Exercise

4.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690
Figure: A battery moves negative charge from its nega tive terminal through a headlight to its positive ter minal. Appropriate
combinations of chemicals in the battery separate char ges so that the negative terminal has an excess of negat ive charge, which is
repelled by it and attracted to the excess positive ch arge on the other terminal. In terms of potential, t he positive terminal is at a
higher voltage than the negative terminal. Inside th e battery, both positive and negative charges move.
When a 12.0-V car battery powers a single 30.0-W headlight, how many electrons pass through it each second?
Strategy
To find the number of electrons, we must first find th e charge that moves in 1.00 s. The charge moved is r elated to voltage and
energy through the equations. A 30.0-W lamp uses 30.0 joules per second. Since the battery loses energy, we have
and, since the electrons are going from the negativ e terminal to the positive, we see that.
Solution
To find the charge moved, we solve the equation:
Entering the values for and, we get
The number of electrons is the total charge divided b y the charge per electron. That is,
Significance
This is a very large number. It is no wonder that we do not ordinarily observe individual electrons with so ma ny being present
in ordinary systems. In fact, electricity had been in use for many decades before it was determined that the moving charges in
many circumstances were negative. Positive charge moving in the opposite direction of negative charge often p roduces
identical effects; this makes it difficult to determine whi ch is moving or whether both are moving.
How many electrons would go through a 24.0-W lamp?
AnswerExample: How Many Electrons Move through a Headlight Each Second?
Exercise

4.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690The Electron-Volt
The energy per electron is very small in macroscopic situations like that in the previous example—a tiny fraction of a joule. But on
a submicroscopic scale, such energy per particle (ele ctron, proton, or ion) can be of great importance. Fo r example, even a tiny
fraction of a joule can be great enough for these p articles to destroy organic molecules and harm livi ng tissue. The particle may do
its damage by direct collision, or it may create harm ful X-rays, which can also inflict damage. It is useful to have an energy unit
related to submicroscopic effects.
Figure shows a situation related to the definition o f such an energy unit. An electron is accelerated betwe en two charged metal
plates, as it might be in an old-model television tu be or oscilloscope. The electron gains kinetic energy that is later converted into
another form—light in the television tube, for exam ple. (Note that in terms of energy, “downhill” for the electron is “uphill” for a
positive charge.) Since energy is related to voltage by, we c an think of the joule as a coulomb-volt.
Figure: A typical electron gun accelerates electrons using a potential difference between two separated me tal plates. By
conservation of energy, the kinetic energy has to equ al the change in potential energy, so. The energy o f the electron in
electron-volts is numerically the same as the voltage b etween the plates. For example, a 5000-V potential d ifference produces
5000-eV electrons. The conceptual construct, namely t wo parallel plates with a hole in one, is shown in (a), while a real electron
gun is shown in (b).
On the submicroscopic scale, it is more convenient to define an energy unit called the electron-volt (eV), which is the energy
given to a fundamental charge accelerated through a po tential difference of 1 V. In equation form,
An electron accelerated through a potential differen ce of 1 V is given an energy of 1 eV. It follows that an electron accelerated
through 50 V gains 50 eV. A potential difference of 1 00,000 V (100 kV) gives an electron an energy of 100, 000 eV (100 keV), and
so on. Similarly, an ion with a double positive charge accelerated through 100 V gains 200 eV of energy. Th ese simple relationships
between accelerating voltage and particle charges ma ke the electron-volt a simple and convenient energy unit in such
circumstances.
The electron-volt is commonly employed in submicrosco pic processes—chemical valence energies and molecula r and nuclear
binding energies are among the quantities often expr essed in electron-volts. For example, about 5 eV of e nergy is required to breakThe Electron-Volt Unit

4.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690up certain organic molecules. If a proton is accelera ted from rest through a potential difference of 30 k V, it acquires an energy of 30
keV (30,000 eV) and can break up as many as 6000 of these molecules. Nuclear
decay energies are on the order of 1 MeV (1,000,000 eV) per event and can thus produce significant biological damag e.
Conservation of Energy
The total energy of a system is conserved if there i s no net addition (or subtraction) due to work or he at transfer. For conservative
forces, such as the electrostatic force, conservation of energy states that mechanical energy is a constant.
Mechanical energy is the sum of the kinetic energy a nd potential energy of a system; that is,. A loss of (\U\) for a
charged particle becomes an increase in its (\K\). Conserva tion of energy is stated in equation form as
or
where i and f stand for initial and final conditions. As we have found many times before, considering energy can give us insights
and facilitate problem solving.
Calculate the final speed of a free electron accele rated from rest through a potential difference of 1 00 V. (Assume that this
numerical value is accurate to three significant figures.)
Strategy
We have a system with only conservative forces. Assuming the electron is accelerated in a vacuum, and neglec ting the
gravitational force (we will check on this assumption later), all of the electrical potential energy is con verted into kinetic
energy. We can identify the initial and final forms of e nergy to be
Solution
Conservation of energy states that
Entering the forms identified above, we obtain
We solve this for (\v\):
Entering values for (\q\), (\V\), and (\m\) gives
Significance
Note that both the charge and the initial voltage ar e negative, as in Figure. From the discussion of elec tric charge and
electric field, we know that electrostatic forces on s mall particles are generally very large compared with the gravitational
force. The large final speed confirms that the grav itational force is indeed negligible here. The large speed also indicates how
easy it is to accelerate electrons with small voltage s because of their very small mass. V oltages much high er than the 100 V in
this problem are typically used in electron guns. Th ese higher voltages produce electron speeds so great that effects fromExample: Electrical Potential Energy Converted into Kinetic Energy

4.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690special relativity must be taken into account and will be discussed else where. That is why we consider a low voltage
(accurately) in this example.
How would this example change with a positron? A positron is identical to an electron except the charge is positive.
Answer
It would be going in the opposite direction, with no effe ct on the calculations as presented.
Voltage and Electric Field
So far, we have explored the relationship between volta ge and energy. Now we want to explore the relationship b etween voltage
and electric field. We will start with the general cas e for a non-uniform field. Recall that our general formula for the potential
energy of a test charge at point relative to reference point is
When we substitute in the definition of electric field, this becomes
Applying our definition of potential to this potentia l energy, we find that, in general,
From our previous discussion of the potential energy of a charge in an electric field, the result is ind ependent of the path chosen,
and hence we can pick the integral path that is most conven ient.
Consider the special case of a positive point charge at the origin. To calculate the potential caused b y at a distance from the
origin relative to a reference of 0 at infinity (re call that we did the same for potential energy), let and, with
and use. When we evaluate the integral
for this system, we have
This result,
is the standard form of the potential of a point charge. Th is will be explored further in the next section.
To examine another interesting special case, suppose a uniform electric field is produced by placing a p otential difference (or
voltage) across two parallel metal plates, labeled and (Figure). Examining this situation will tell us what voltage is
needed to produce a certain electric field strength. It will also reveal a more fundamental relationship between electric potential and
electric field.Exercise

4.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690
Figure: The relationship between and for parallel conducting plates is. (Note that in magnitude. For a
charge that is moved from plate at higher potential to plate at lower potential, a minus sign needs to b e included as follows:
From a physicist’s point of view, either or can be used to describe any interaction between charges. However, is a scalar
quantity and has no direction, whereas is a vector q uantity, having both magnitude and direction. (Note t hat the magnitude of the
electric field, a scalar quantity, is represented by.) The relationship between and is revealed by calcul ating the work done
by the electric force in moving a charge from point to point. But, as noted earlier, arbitrary charg e distributions require
calculus. We therefore look at a uniform electric field as an interesting special case.
The work done by the electric field in Figure to mov e a positive charge from, the positive plate, high er potential, to, the
negative plate, lower potential, is
The potential difference between points and is
Entering this into the expression for work yields
Work is: here, since the path is parallel to the f ield. Thus,. Since we see that
Substituting this expression for work into the previous equation gives
The charge cancels, so we obtain for the voltage between po ints and.
In uniform E-field only:

4.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690where is the distance from to, or the distance bet ween the plates in Figure. Note that this equation imp lies that the units
for electric field are volts per meter. We already k now the units for electric field are newtons per coul omb; thus, the following
relation among units is valid:
Furthermore, we may extend this to the integral form. Su bstituting Equation into our definition for the pot ential difference
between points and we obtain
which simplifies to
As a demonstration, from this we may calculate the pote ntial difference between two points (and) equidistan t from a point
charge at the origin, as shown in Figure.
Figure: The arc for calculating the potential diffe rence between two points that are equidistant from a point charge at the
origin.
To do this, we integrate around an arc of the circle o f constant radius r between and, which means we let, while
using. Thus,
for this system becomes
However, and therefore
This result, that there is no difference in potential along a constant radius from a point charge, will co me in handy when we map
potentials.
Dry air can support a maximum electric field strength of about. Above that value, the field creates enough
ionization in the air to make the air a conductor. This allows a discharge or spark that reduces the fiel d. What, then, is the
maximum voltage between two parallel conducting plates s eparated by 2.5 cm of dry air?
Strategy
We are given the maximum electric field between the plates and the distance between them. We can use th e equation
to calculate the maximum voltage.
Solution
The potential difference or voltage between the plates i sExample: What Is the Highest Voltage Possible between Two Plates?

4.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690Entering the given values for and gives
or
(The answer is quoted to only two digits, since the maximum field strength is approximate.)
Significance
One of the implications of this result is that it ta kes about 75 kV to make a spark jump across a 2.5-cm (1-in.) gap, or 150 kV
for a 5-cm spark. This limits the voltages that can exist between conductors, perhaps on a power transmissio n line. A smaller
voltage can cause a spark if there are spines on the surface, since sharp points have larger field stren gths than smooth surfaces.
Humid air breaks down at a lower field strength, meani ng that a smaller voltage will make a spark jump thr ough humid air. The
largest voltages can be built up with static electrici ty on dry days (Figure).
Figure: A spark chamber is used to trace the paths of h igh-energy particles. Ionization created by the part icles as they pass
through the gas between the plates allows a spark to ju mp. The sparks are perpendicular to the plates, follow ing electric field
lines between them. The potential difference between adjacent plates is not high enough to cause sparks with out the ionization
produced by particles from accelerator experiments (o r cosmic rays). This form of detector is now archaic an d no longer in use
except for demonstration purposes. (credit b: modifica tion of work by Jack Collins)
An electron gun (Figure) has parallel plates separat ed by 4.00 cm and gives electrons 25.0 keV of energ y. (a) What is the
electric field strength between the plates? (b) What f orce would this field exert on a piece of plastic wit h a charge that
gets between the plates?
Strategy
Since the voltage and plate separation are given, th e electric field strength can be calculated directl y from the expression
. Once we know the electric field strength, we can find the force on a charge by using. Since the electric field is
in only one direction, we can write this equation in terms of the magnitudes,.
Solution
a. The expression for the magnitude of the electric fie ld between two uniform metal plates is
Since the electron is a single charge and is given 25.0 keV of energy, the potential difference must be 25.0 kV. Entering this
value for and the plate separation of 0.0400 m, we obtainExample: Field and Force inside an Electron Gun

4.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/88690b. The magnitude of the force on a charge in an electri c field is obtained from the equation
Substituting known values gives
Significance Note that the units are newtons, since. Because the electric field is uniform between the plat es, the
force on the charge is the same no matter where the charg e is located between the plates.
Given a point charge at the origin, calculate the po tential difference between point a distance from,
and a distance from, where the two points have an angle of between them (Figure).
Figure: Find the difference in potential between an d.
Strategy Do this in two steps. The first step is to use an d let and, with
and Then perform the integral. The second step is t o integrate around an arc of
constant radius, which means we let with limits, still usi ng.
Then add the two results together.
Solution For the first part, for this system becomes which co mputes to
For the second step, becomes, but and therefore. Add ing the two
parts together, we get 300 V.
Significance
We have demonstrated the use of the integral form o f the potential difference to obtain a numerical re sult. Notice that, in this
particular system, we could have also used the formula f or the potential due to a point charge at the two po ints and simply
taken the difference.
From the examples, how does the energy of a lightning strike vary with the height of the clouds from the ground? Consider the
cloud-ground system to be two parallel plates.
Answer
Given a fixed maximum electric field strength, the pot ential at which a strike occurs increases with increas ing height above
the ground. Hence, each electron will carry more energy. Determining if there is an effect on the total numb er of electrons
lies in the future.
Before presenting problems involving electrostatics, we su ggest a problem-solving strategy to follow for this topi c.Example: Calculating Potential of a Point Charge
Exercise

4.4.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/886901. Examine the situation to determine if static electric ity is involved; this may concern separated stationary c harges, the forces
among them, and the electric fields they create.
2. Identify the system of interest. This includes noting the number, locations, and types of charges involved.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful. Dete rmine
whether the Coulomb force is to be considered directly— if so, it may be useful to draw a free-body diagram, usin g electric
field lines.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the pr oblem as stated (identify the knowns). It is important to
distinguish the Coulomb force from the electric field, for example.
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be de termined (the unknown) or draw the field lines as request ed.
6. Examine the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make se nse? Are units correct and the numbers involved reasonable?
4.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
7.3: Electric Potential and Potential Difference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.Problem-Solving Strategy: Electrostatics

4.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839434.5: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain point charges and express the equation for elect ric potential of a point charge.
Distinguish between electric potential and electric field.
Determine the electric potential of a point charge giv en charge and distance.
Point charges, such as electrons, are among the fundamen tal building blocks of matter. Furthermore, spherical charge distributions
(like on a metal sphere) create external electric f ields exactly like a point charge. The electric pote ntial due to a point charge is,
thus, a case we need to consider. Using calculus to find the work needed to move a test charge from a large d istance away to a
distance of from a point charge, and noting the co nnection between work and potential, we can define th e electric
potential of a point charge:
The electric potential of a point charge is given by
where is a constant equal to
The potential at infinity is chosen to be zero. Thus for a point charge decreases with distance, whereas for a point charge
decreases with distance squared:
Recall that the electric potential is a scalar and has no direction, whereas the electric field is a v ector. To find the voltage due to
a combination of point charges, you add the individua l voltages as numbers. To find the total electric fi eld, you must add the
individual fields as vectors, taking magnitude and direction into account. This is consistent with the fact that is closely associate d
with energy, a scalar, whereas is closely associated with fo rce, a vector.
Charges in static electricity are typically in the n anocoulomb to microcoulomb range. What is the volt age 5.00 cm
away from the center of a 1-cm diameter metal sphere that has a static charge?
Strategy
As we have discussed in Electric Charge and Electric Field, charge on a metal sphere spreads out uniformly and produces a
field like that of a point charge located at its center. Thus we can find the voltage using Equation.
Solution
Entering known values into the expression for the poten tial of a point charge, we obtain
DiscussionLearning Objectives
definition: ELECTRIC POTENTIAL OF A POINT CHARGE
Example: What Voltage Is Produced by a Small Charge on a Metal Sphere?

4.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83943The negative value for voltage means a positive cha rge would be attracted from a larger distance, since the potential is lower
(more negative) than at larger distances. Conversely, a negative charge would be repelled, as expected.
A demonstration Van de Graaff generator has a 25.0 cm diameter metal sphere that produces a voltage of 1 00 kV near its
surface. (Figure) What excess charge resides on the sphere? (Assume that each numerical value here is shown with three
significant figures.)
Figure: The voltage of this demonstration Van de Graa ff generator is measured between the charged sphere an d ground.
Earth’s potential is taken to be zero as a reference. The potential of the charged conducting sphere is the same as that of an
equal point charge at its center.
Strategy
The potential on the surface will be the same as that of a point charge at the center of the sphere, 12.5 cm away. (The radius of
the sphere is 12.5 cm.) We can thus determine the excess ch arge using Equation.
Solution
Solving for and entering known values gives
Discussion
This is a relatively small charge, but it produces a r ather large voltage. We have another indication her e that it is difficult to
store isolated charges.
The voltages in both of these examples could be measu red with a meter that compares the measured potentia l with ground
potential. Ground potential is often taken to be zero (instead of taking the potential at infinity to be zero). It is the potential
difference between two points that is of importance, a nd very often there is a tacit assumption that some r eference point, such as
Earth or a very distant point, is at zero potential. This is analogous to taking sea level as when consi dering gravitational
potential energy,.Example: What Is the Excess Charge on a Van de Graaff Generator

4.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83943Consider the dipole in Figure with the charge magnit ude of and separation distance What is the
potential at the following locations in space? (a) (0, 0, 1. 0 cm); (b) (0, 0, –5.0 cm); (c) (3.0 cm, 0, 2.0 cm).
Figure: A general diagram of an electric dipole, an d the notation for the distances from the individual charges to a point P
in space.
Strategy
Apply to each of these three points.
Solution
a.
b.
c.
Significance
Note that evaluating potential is significantly simpler than electric field, due to potential being a scalar in stead of a vector.

Summary
Electric potential of a point charge is.
Electric potential is a scalar, and electric field is a vect or. Addition of voltages as numbers gives the voltage due to a
combination of point charges, whereas addition of individ ual fields as vectors gives the total electric field.
4.5: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19.3: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
7.4: Calculations of Electric Potential by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Example: Electric Potential of a Dipole

4.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839444.6: Equipotential Lines
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain equipotential lines and equipotential surfaces.
Describe the action of grounding an electrical applianc e.
Compare electric field and equipotential lines.
We can represent electric potentials (voltages) pict orially, just as we drew pictures to illustrate electr ic fields. Of course, the two are
related. Consider Figure, which shows an isolated posi tive point charge and its electric field lines. Ele ctric field lines radiate
out from a positive charge and terminate on negativ e charges. While we use blue arrows to represent the m agnitude and direction of
the electric field, we use green lines to represent pla ces where the electric potential is constant. These are called equipotential lines
in two dimensions, or equipotential surfaces in three dimensions. The term equipotential is also used as a noun, referring to an
equipotential line or surface. The potential for a po int charge is the same anywhere on an imaginary spher e of radius surrounding
the charge. This is true since the potential for a po int charge is given by and, thus, has the same val ue at any point that is
a given distance from the charge. An equipotential sphere is a circle in the two-dimensional view of Figu re. Since the
electric field lines point radially away from the charge, they are perpendicular to the equipotential lines.
Figure: An isolated point charge with its electric f ield lines in blue and equipotential lines in green. The potential is the
same along each equipotential line, meaning that no work is required to move a charge anywhere along one of those lines. Work is
needed to move a charge from one equipotential line to another. Equipotential lines are perpendicular t o electric field lines in every
case.
It is important to note that equipotential lines are always perpendicular to ele ctric field lines. No work is required to move a charge
along an equipotential, since. Thus the work is
Work is zero if force is perpendicular to motion. Fo rce is in the same direction as, so that motion alo ng an equipotential must be
perpendicular to. More precisely, work is related to the elec tric field by
Note that in the above equation, and symbolize the magnitudes of the electric field strength and force, respectively. Neither
nor nor is zero, and so must be 0, meaning must b e. In other words, motion along an equipotential is perpendicular to
One of the rules for static electric fields and cond uctors is that the electric field must be perpendic ular to the surface of any
conductor. This implies that a conductor is an equipotential surface in static situ ations. There can be no voltage difference across
the surface of a conductor, or charges will flow. One of the uses of this fact is that a conductor can be fixed at zero volts by
connecting it to the earth with a good conductor—a p rocess called grounding. Grounding can be a useful safety tool. For example,
grounding the metal case of an electrical appliance ensu res that it is at zero volts relative to the earth.Learning Objectives

4.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83944A conductor can be fixed at zero volts by connecting it t o the earth with a good conductor—a process called groundi ng.
Because a conductor is an equipotential, it can repl ace any equipotential surface. For example, in Figure a charged spherical
conductor can replace the point charge, and the elec tric field and potential surfaces outside of it will be unchanged, confirming the
contention that a spherical charge distribution is equiv alent to a point charge at its center.
Figure: The electric field lines and equipotential l ines for two equal but opposite charges. The equipoten tial lines can be drawn
by making them perpendicular to the electric field lines, if those are known. Note that the potential is greatest (most positive) near
the positive charge and least (most negative) near the negative charge.
Figure shows the electric field and equipotential li nes for two equal and opposite charges. Given the ele ctric field lines, the
equipotential lines can be drawn simply by making th em perpendicular to the electric field lines. Conver sely, given the
equipotential lines, as in Figure, the electric fie ld lines can be drawn by making them perpendicular to the equipotentials, as
in Figure.
Figure: (a) These equipotential lines might be measure d with a voltmeter in a laboratory experiment. (b) The corresponding
electric field lines are found by drawing them perpe ndicular to the equipotentials. Note that these field s are consistent with two
equal negative charges.
One of the most important cases is that of the familia r parallel conducting plates shown in Figure. Between the plates, the
equipotentials are evenly spaced and parallel. The sa me field could be maintained by placing conducting plates at the equipotential
lines at the potentials shown.
Figure: The electric field and equipotential lines b etween two metal plates.GROUNDING

4.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83944An important application of electric fields and equi potential lines involves the heart. The heart relies o n electrical signals to
maintain its rhythm. The movement of electrical sign als causes the chambers of the heart to contract an d relax. When a person has
a heart attack, the movement of these electrical sig nals may be disturbed. An artificial pacemaker and a defibrillator can be used to
initiate the rhythm of electrical signals. The equipo tential lines around the heart, the thoracic region, and the axis of the heart are
useful ways of monitoring the structure and functions of the heart. An electrocardiogram (ECG) measures th e small electric signals
being generated during the activity of the heart. M ore about the relationship between electric fields and t he heart is discussed in
Energy Stored in Capacitors.
Summary
An equipotential line is a line along which the electri c potential is constant.
An equipotential surface is a three-dimensional versio n of equipotential lines.
Equipotential lines are always perpendicular to electri c field lines.
The process by which a conductor can be fixed at zero volts by connecting it to the earth with a good conductor is ca lled
grounding.
Glossary
equipotential line
a line along which the electric potential is constant
grounding
fixing a conductor at zero volts by connecting it to the ear th or ground
4.6: Equipotential Lines is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19.4: Equipotential Lines by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

4.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839454.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the action of a capacitor and define capacitan ce.
Explain parallel plate capacitors and their capacitanc es.
Discuss the process of increasing the capacitance of a die lectric.
Determine capacitance given charge and voltage.
A capacitor is a device used to store electric charge. Capacito rs have applications ranging from filtering static out of radio
reception to energy storage in heart defibrillators. Typically, commercial capacitors have two conducting parts close to one another,
but not touching, such as those in Figure. (Most of the time an insulator is used between the two plates to provide separation
—see the discussion on dielectrics below.)
Figure: Both capacitors shown here were initially unc harged before being connected to a battery. They no w have separated
charges of and on their two halves. (a) A parallel plate capacitor. (b) A rolled capacitor with an insu lating material between
its two conducting sheets.
A capacitor is a device used to store electric charge.
When battery terminals are connected to an initially uncharged capacitor, equal amounts of positive and negative charge, and
, are separated into its two plates. The capacitor rem ains neutral overall, but we refer to it as storing a charge in this
circumstance. The amount of charge a capacitor can store depends on two major factors—the voltage ap plied and the capacitor’s
physical characteristics, such as its size.
A system composed of two identical, parallel conducti ng plates separated by a distance, as in Figure, is ca lled a parallel plate
capacitor. It is easy to see the relationship between the volta ge and the stored charge for a parallel plate capacit or, as shown in
Figure. Each electric field line starts on an indivi dual positive charge and ends on a negative one, so that there will be more
field lines if there is more charge. (Drawing a single field line per charge is a convenience, only. We can draw many field lines for
each charge, but the total number is proportional to the number of charges.) The electric field strength is, thus, directly proportional
to.Learning Objectives
Definition: CAPACITOR

4.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83945
Figure: Electric field lines in this parallel plate c apacitor, as always, start on positive charges and end o n negative charges.
Since the electric field strength is proportional to t he density of field lines, it is also proportional to t he amount of charge on the
capacitor.
The field is proportional to the charge:
where the symbol means “proportional to.” From the disc ussion in Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field, we know that
the voltage across parallel plates is. Thus,
It follows, then, that, and conversely,
This is true in general: The greater the voltage applied t o any capacitor, the greater the charge stored in it.
Different capacitors will store different amounts of c harge for the same applied voltage, depending on the ir physical characteristics.
We define their capacitance to be such that the charge stored in a capacitor i s proportional to. The charge stored in a
capacitor is given by
This equation expresses the two major factors affecting the amount of charge stored. Those factors are the ph ysical characteristics
of the capacitor,, and the voltage,. Rearranging the eq uation, we define the c apacitance of a capacitor.
Capacitance is the amount of charge stored per volt, or
The unit of capacitance is the farad (F), named for Mi chael Faraday (1791–1867), an English scientist who co ntributed to the fields
of electromagnetism and electrochemistry. Since capacita nce is charge per unit voltage, we see that a farad is a cou lomb per volt, or
A 1-farad capacitor would be able to store 1 coulomb (a very large amount of charge) with the applicatio n of only 1 volt. One farad
is, thus, a very large capacitance. Typical capacitors range from fractions of a picofarad to millifarads
.Definition: CAPACITANCE

4.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83945Figure shows some common capacitors. Capacitors are pr imarily made of ceramic, glass, or plastic, depending upon purpose
and size. Insulating materials, called dielectrics, are co mmonly used in their construction, as discussed below.
Figure: Some typical capacitors. Size and value of ca pacitance are not necessarily related. (credit: Winde ll Oskay)
Parallel Plate Capacitor
The parallel plate capacitor shown in Figure has two identical conducting plates, each having a surface area, separated by a
distance (with no material between the plates). When a voltage is applied to the capacitor, it stores a c harge, as shown. We
can see how its capacitance depends on and by consi dering the characteristics of the Coulomb force. We k now that like charges
repel, unlike charges attract, and the force between c harges decreases with distance. So it seems quite reason able that the bigger the
plates are, the more charge they can store—because th e charges can spread out more. Thus should be greate r for larger.
Similarly, the closer the plates are together, the g reater the attraction of the opposite charges on th em. So should be greater for
smaller.
Figure: Parallel plate capacitor with plates separated by a distance. Each plate has an area.
It can be shown that for a parallel plate capacitor there are only two factors (and) that affect its ca pacitance. The capacitance
of a parallel plate capacitor in equation form can be defined:
The capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor in equat ion form is given byDefinition: CAPACITANCE OF A PARALLEL PLATE CAPACITOR

4.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83945 is the area of one plate in square meters, and is th e distance between the plates in meters. The constant is the permittivity of
free space; its numerical value in SI units is. The units of F/m are equivalent to. The small
numerical value of is related to the large size of t he farad. A parallel plate capacitor must have a la rge area to have a capacitance
approaching a farad. (Note that the above equation i s valid when the parallel plates are separated by air or free space. When another
material is placed between the plates, the equation is mod ified, as discussed below.)
a. What is the capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor with metal plates, each of area, separated by 1.00 mm?
b. What charge is stored in this capacitor if a voltage of is applied to it?
Strategy
Finding the capacitance is a straightforward applica tion of the equation. Once is found, the charge st ored can be
found using the equation.
Solution for (a)
Entering the given values into the equation for the capac itance of a parallel plate capacitor yields
Discussion for (a)
This small value for the capacitance indicates how di fficult it is to make a device with a large capacitan ce. Special techniques
help, such as using very large area thin foils placed clo se together.
Solution for (b)
The charge stored in any capacitor is given by the equat ion. Entering the known values into this equation gives
Discussion for (b)
This charge is only slightly greater than those found in typical static electricity. Since air breaks down at about,
more charge cannot be stored on this capacitor by incr easing the voltage.
Another interesting biological example dealing with e lectric potential is found in the cell’s plasma memb rane. The membrane
sets a cell off from its surroundings and also allows ions to selectively pass in and out of the cell. Ther e is a potential difference
across the membrane of about. This is due to the mainly negatively ch arged ions in the cell and the predominance of
positively charged sodium () ions outside. Things chan ge when a nerve cell is stimulated. ions are allowed t o pass
through the membrane into the cell, producing a posi tive membrane potential— the nerve signal. The cell membrane is about 7
to 10 nm thick. An approximate value of the electric fi eld across it is given byExample: Capacitance and Charge Stored in a Parallel Plate Capacitor
Membrane Potential

4.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83945This electric field is enough to cause a breakdown in air.
Dielectric
The previous example highlights the difficulty of s toring a large amount of charge in capacitors. If i s made smaller to produce a
larger capacitance, then the maximum voltage must b e reduced proportionally to avoid breakdown (since). An important
solution to this difficulty is to put an insulating m aterial, called a dielectric, between the plates of a capacitor and allow to be as
small as possible. Not only does the smaller make t he capacitance greater, but many insulators can withs tand greater electric
fields than air before breaking down.
There is another benefit to using a dielectric in a capacitor. Depending on the material used, the capaci tance is greater than that
given by the equation by a factor, called the dielectric constant. A parallel plate capacitor with a dielectric betwee n its
plates has a capacitance given by
Values of the dielectric constant for various mater ials are given in Table. Note that for vacuum is ex actly 1, and so the
above equation is valid in that case, too. If a diele ctric is used, perhaps by placing Teflon between the p lates of the capacitor in
Example, then the capacitance is greater by the facto r, which for Teflon is 2.1.
How large a capacitor can you make using a chewing gum wrapper? The plates will be the aluminum foil, and th e separation
(dielectric) in between will be the paper.
Table: Dielectric Constants and Dielectric Strengths for Various Materials at 20ºC
Material Dielectric constant () Dielectric Strength ()
Vacuum
Air
Bakelite
Fused quartz
Neoprene rubber
Nylon
Paper
Polystyrene
Pyrex glass
Silicon oil
Strontium titanate
Teflon
Water
Note also that the dielectric constant for air is ver y close to 1, so that air-filled capacitors act much l ike those with vacuum between
their plates except that the air can become conductive if the electric field strength becomes too great. (Recall that fo r a
parallel plate capacitor.) Also shown in Table are max imum electric field strengths in V/m, called dielectric strengths, for
several materials. These are the fields above which t he material begins to break down and conduct. The diel ectric strength imposesTAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: BUILDING A CAPACITOR

4.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83945a limit on the voltage that can be applied for a gi ven plate separation. For instance, in Example, the separation is 1.00 mm, and so
the voltage limit for air is
However, the limit for a 1.00 mm separation filled with Teflon is 60,000 V, since the dielectric strength of T eflon is
V/m. So the same capacitor filled with Teflon has a gre ater capacitance and can be subjected to a much gre ater voltage. Using the
capacitance we calculated in the above example for t he air-filled parallel plate capacitor, we find that the Teflon-filled capacitor can
store a maximum charge of
This is 42 times the charge of the same air-filled capacit or.
The maximum electric field strength above which an in sulating material begins to break down and conduct is called its
dielectric strength.
Microscopically, how does a dielectric increase capacit ance? Polarization of the insulator is responsible. Th e more easily it is
polarized, the greater its dielectric constant. Wa ter, for example, is a polar molecule because one end of the molecule has a slight
positive charge and the other end has a slight negat ive charge. The polarity of water causes it to have a relatively large dielectric
constant of 80. The effect of polarization can be b est explained in terms of the characteristics of the Coulomb force. Figure
shows the separation of charge schematically in the mo lecules of a dielectric material placed between the charged plates of a
capacitor. The Coulomb force between the closest ends of the molecules and the charge on the plates is a ttractive and very strong,
since they are very close together. This attracts m ore charge onto the plates than if the space were em pty and the opposite charges
were a distance away.DIELECTRIC STRENGTH

4.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83945
Figure: (a) The molecules in the insulating material between the plates of a capacitor are polarized by t he charged plates. This
produces a layer of opposite charge on the surface of the dielectric that attracts more charge onto the pl ate, increasing its
capacitance. (b) The dielectric reduces the electric field strength inside the capacitor, resulting in a sm aller voltage between the
plates for the same charge. The capacitor stores the sam e charge for a smaller voltage, implying that it has a larger capacitance
because of the dielectric.
Another way to understand how a dielectric increases ca pacitance is to consider its effect on the electric field inside the capacitor.
Figure (b) shows the electric field lines with a dielec tric in place. Since the field lines end on charges i n the dielectric, there are
fewer of them going from one side of the capacitor t o the other. So the electric field strength is less th an if there were a vacuum
between the plates, even though the same charge is on t he plates. The voltage between the plates is, so it to o is reduced by
the dielectric. Thus there is a smaller voltage for t he same charge; since, the capacitance is greater.
The dielectric constant is generally defined to be, or the ratio of the electric field in a vacuum to that in the dielectric
material, and is intimately related to the polarizabil ity of the material.
Polarization is a separation of charge within an atom o r molecule. As has been noted, the planetary model of the atom pictures
it as having a positive nucleus orbited by negative electrons, analogous to the planets orbiting the Sun. Although this model is
not completely accurate, it is very helpful in expla ining a vast range of phenomena and will be refined elsewhere, such as in the
Chapter on Atomic Physics. The submicroscopic origin of polarization can be mode led as shown in Figure.
Figure: Artist’s conception of a polarized atom. The orbits of electrons around the nucleus are shifted sligh tly by the external
charges (shown exaggerated). The resulting separation o f charge within the atom means that it is polarized. Note that the unlike
charge is now closer to the external charges, causing t he polarization.THINGS GREAT AND SMALL: The Submicroscopic Origin of Polarization

4.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83945We will find in Atomic Physics that the orbits of electrons are more properly vie wed as electron clouds with the density of the
cloud related to the probability of finding an elec tron in that location (as opposed to the definite lo cations and paths of planets in
their orbits around the Sun). This cloud is shifted by the Coulomb force so that the atom on average has a s eparation of charge.
Although the atom remains neutral, it can now be the s ource of a Coulomb force, since a charge brought near the atom will be
closer to one type of charge than the other.
Some molecules, such as those of water, have an inhere nt separation of charge and are thus called polar mo lecules.Figure
illustrates the separation of charge in a water molec ule, which has two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom (). The water
molecule is not symmetric—the hydrogen atoms are rep elled to one side, giving the molecule a boomerang sh ape. The electrons in
a water molecule are more concentrated around the mo re highly charged oxygen nucleus than around the hy drogen nuclei. This
makes the oxygen end of the molecule slightly negati ve and leaves the hydrogen ends slightly positive. T he inherent separation of
charge in polar molecules makes it easier to align t hem with external fields and charges. Polar molecules therefore exhibit greater
polarization effects and have greater dielectric con stants. Those who study chemistry will find that the p olar nature of water has
many effects. For example, water molecules gather ions m uch more effectively because they have an electric f ield and a separation
of charge to attract charges of both signs. Also, as brought out in the previous chapter, polar water pro vides a shield or screening of
the electric fields in the highly charged molecules of interest in biological systems.
Figure: Artist’s conception of a water molecule. Ther e is an inherent separation of charge, and so water is a polar molecule.
Electrons in the molecule are attracted to the oxyge n nucleus and leave an excess of positive charge near t he two hydrogen nuclei.
(Note that the schematic on the right is a rough illu stration of the distribution of electrons in the water molecule. It does not show
the actual numbers of protons and electrons involved i n the structure.)
Explore how a capacitor works! Change the size of the plates and add a dielectric to see the effect on cap acitance. Change the
voltage and see charges built up on the plates. Obser ve the electric field in the capacitor. Measure the voltage and the electric
field.
Figure: Capacitor Lab
Summary
A capacitor is a device used to store charge.
The amount of charge a capacitor can store depends on two major factors—the voltage applied and the capacitor ’s physical
characteristics, such as its size.
The capacitance is the amount of charge stored per vol t, or
The capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor is, when th e plates are separated by air or free space. is called the
permittivity of free space.
A parallel plate capacitor with a dielectric between its pl ates has a capacitance given by where is the dielectri c
constant of the material.
The maximum electric field strength above which an in sulating material begins to break down and conduct is called dielectric
strength.PHET EXPLORATIONS: CAPACITOR LAB

4.7.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83945Glossary
capacitor
a device that stores electric charge
capacitance
amount of charge stored per unit volt
dielectric
an insulating material
dielectric strength
the maximum electric field above which an insulating ma terial begins to break down and conduct
parallel plate capacitor
two identical conducting plates separated by a distance
polar molecule
a molecule with inherent separation of charge
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19.5: Capacitors and Dielectrics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

4.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839464.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Derive expressions for total capacitance in series and in par allel.
Identify series and parallel parts in the combination of co nnection of capacitors.
Calculate the effective capacitance in series and para llel given individual capacitances.
Several capacitors may be connected together in a var iety of applications. Multiple connections of capacito rs act like a single
equivalent capacitor. The total capacitance of this equivalent single capacitor depends both on the indi vidual capacitors and how
they are connected. There are two simple and common t ypes of connections, called series and parallel, for which we can easily
calculate the total capacitance. Certain more complic ated connections can also be related to combinations of seri es and parallel.
Capacitance in Series
Figure (a) shows a series connection of three capacit ors with a voltage applied. As for any capacitor, the c apacitance of the
combination is related to charge and voltage by.
Note in Figure that opposite charges of magnitude f low to either side of the originally uncharged combin ation of capacitors
when the voltage is applied. Conservation of charge r equires that equal-magnitude charges be created on the plates of the
individual capacitors, since charge is only being s eparated in these originally neutral devices. The en d result is that the combination
resembles a single capacitor with an effective plate separation greater than that of the individual capa citors alone. (See Figure
(b).) Larger plate separation means smaller capacitanc e. It is a general feature of series connections of c apacitors that the total
capacitance is less than any of the individual capacitanc es.
Figure: (a) Capacitors connected in series. The magnit ude of the charge on each plate is. (b) An equivale nt capacitor has a
larger plate separation. Series connections produce a total capacitance that is less than that of any of the individual capacitors.
We can find an expression for the total capacitance by considering the voltage across the individual ca pacitors shown in Figure
. Solving for gives. The voltages across the indiv idual capacitors are thus,, and.
The total voltage is the sum of the individual voltages:
Now, calling the total capacitance for series capacitance, consider that
Entering the expressions for,, and, we getLearning Objectives

4.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83946Canceling the s, we obtain the equation for the total cap acitance in series to be
where “...” indicates that the expression is valid for a ny number of capacitors connected in series. An expre ssion of this form
always results in a total capacitance that is less than an y of the individual capacitances,,, as the next examp le illustrates.
Total capacitance in series:
Find the total capacitance for three capacitors conne cted in series, given their individual capacitances a re 1.000, 5.000, and
8.000.
Strategy
With the given information, the total capacitance can be fo und using the equation for capacitance in series.
Solution
Entering the given capacitances into the expression for gives
Inverting to find yields
Discussion
The total series capacitance is less than the smalle st individual capacitance, as promised. In series conne ctions of capacitors,
the sum is less than the parts. In fact, it is less tha n any individual. Note that it is sometimes possible, and more convenient, to
solve an equation like the above by finding the lea st common denominator, which in this case (showing onl y whole-number
calculations) is 40. Thus,
so that
Capacitors in Parallel
Figure (a) shows a parallel connection of three capac itors with a voltage applied. Here the total capacitan ce is easier to find
than in the series case. To find the equivalent total capacit ance, we first note that the voltage across each capacitor is, th e same
as that of the source, since they are connected dir ectly to it through a conductor. (Conductors are equi potentials, and so the voltage
across the capacitors is the same as that across the vo ltage source.) Thus the capacitors have the same charg es on them as they
would have if connected individually to the voltage sour ce. The total charge is the sum of the individual charge s:TOTAL CAPACITANCE IN SERIES,
Example: What Is the Series Capacitance?

4.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83946
Figure: (a) Capacitors in parallel. Each is connected directly to the voltage source just as if it were all alone, and so the total
capacitance in parallel is just the sum of the individ ual capacitances. (b) The equivalent capacitor has a larger plate area and can
therefore hold more charge than the individual capa citors.
Using the relationship, we see that the total charge i s, and the individual charges are,, and
. Entering these into the previous equation gives
Canceling from the equation, we obtain the equation fo r the total capacitance in parallel:
Total capacitance in parallel is simply the sum of the individual capacitances. (Again the “...” indicates the expression is valid for
any number of capacitors connected in parallel.) So, f or example, if the capacitors in the example above were connected in parallel,
their capacitance would be
The equivalent capacitor for a parallel connection has an effectively larger plate area and, thus, a larg er capacitance, as illustrated in
Figure (b).
Total capacitance in parallel
More complicated connections of capacitors can sometim es be combinations of series and parallel. (See Figure.) To find the
total capacitance of such combinations, we identify series and parallel parts, compute their capacitances, and then find the total.
Figure: (a) This circuit contains both series and paral lel connections of capacitors. See Example for the calculation of the
overall capacitance of the circuit. (b) and are i n series; their equivalent capacitance is less than eit her of them. (c) Note
that is in parallel with. The total capacitance is, thus, the sum of and.
Find the total capacitance of the combination of cap acitors shown in Figure. Assume the capacitances in Fig ure are
known to three decimal places (), and round your answer to three decimal
places.
StrategyTOTAL CAPACITANCE IN PARALLEL,
Example:A Mixture of Series and Parallel Capacitance

4.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83946To find the total capacitance, we first identify which capacitors are in series and which are in parallel. C apacitors and are
in series. Their combination, labeled in the figure, is in p arallel with.
Solution
Since and are in series, their total capacitance i s given by are in series, their total capacitance is
given by
This equivalent series capacitance is in parallel with the third capacitor; thus, the total is the sum
Discussion
This technique of analyzing the combinations of capa citors piece by piece until a total is obtained can be applied to larger
combinations of capacitors.
Summary
Total capacitance in series
Total capacitance in parallel
If a circuit contains a combination of capacitors in series and parallel, identify series and parallel parts, compute their
capacitances, and then find the total.
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19.6: Capacitors in Series and Parallel by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

4.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839474.9: Energy Stored in Capacitors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
List some uses of capacitors.
Express in equation form the energy stored in a capacit or.
Explain the function of a defibrillator.
Most of us have seen dramatizations in which medical per sonnel use a defibrillator to pass an electric current through a patient’s
heart to get it to beat normally. (Review Figure.) Oft en realistic in detail, the person applying the sho ck directs another person
to “make it 400 joules this time.” The energy deliv ered by the defibrillator is stored in a capacitor and can be adjusted to fit the
situation. SI units of joules are often employed. Less dramatic is the use of capacitors in microelectronics, such as certain handheld
calculators, to supply energy when batteries are charg ed. (See Figure.) Capacitors are also used to supply e nergy for flash
lamps on cameras.
Figure: Energy stored in the large capacitor is used t o preserve the memory of an electronic calculator wh en its batteries are
charged. (credit: Kucharek, Wikimedia Commons)
Energy stored in a capacitor is electrical potential energy, and it is thus related to the charge and v oltage on the capacitor. We
must be careful when applying the equation for elect rical potential energy to a capacitor. Remember tha t is the
potential energy of a charge going through a volta ge. But the capacitor starts with zero voltage and gradually comes up to its
full voltage as it is charged. The first charge place d on a capacitor experiences a change in voltage, since the capacitor has
zero voltage when uncharged. The final charge placed on a capacitor experiences, since the capacitor now h as its full
voltage on it. The average voltage on the capacito r during the charging process is, and so the average voltage experienced by
the full charge is. Thus the energy stored in a capacit or,, is
where is the charge on a capacitor with a voltage a pplied. (Note that the energy is not, but.) Charge and voltage are
related to the capacitance of a capacitor by, and so the expression for can be algebraically manipul ated into three
equivalent expressions:
where is the charge and the voltage on a capacitor. The energy is in joules for a charge in coulombs, voltage in volts, and
capacitance in farads.
The energy stored in a capacitor can be expressed in thr ee ways:
where is the charge, is the voltage, and is the ca pacitance of the capacitor. The energy is in joules for a charge in
coulombs, voltage in volts, and capacitance in farads.Learning Objectives
ENERGY STORED IN CAPACITORS

4.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83947In a defibrillator, the delivery of a large charge i n a short burst to a set of paddles across a person’ s chest can be a lifesaver. The
person’s heart attack might have arisen from the on set of fast, irregular beating of the heart—cardiac or ventricular fibrillation. The
application of a large shock of electrical energy ca n terminate the arrhythmia and allow the body’s pace maker to resume normal
patterns. Today it is common for ambulances to carry a defibrillator, which also uses an electrocardiogram to analyze the patient’s
heartbeat pattern. Automated external defibrillators (AED) are found in many public places (Figure). These a re designed to be
used by lay persons. The device automatically diagno ses the patient’s heart condition and then applies t he shock with appropriate
energy and waveform. CPR is recommended in many cases be fore use of an AED.
Figure: Automated external defibrillators are found in many public places. These portable units provide ve rbal instructions for
use in the important first few minutes for a person suff ering a cardiac attack. (credit: Owain Davies, Wikim edia Commons)
A heart defibrillator delivers of energy by dischargin g a capacitor initially at. What is its capacitance?
Strategy
We are given and, and we are asked to find the cap acitance. Of the three expressions in the equation f or, the most
convenient relationship is
Solution
Solving this expression for and entering the given value s yields
Discussion
This is a fairly large, but manageable, capacitance at.
Summary
Capacitors are used in a variety of devices, including def ibrillators, microelectronics such as calculators, and fla sh lamps, to
supply energy.
The energy stored in a capacitor can be expressed in thr ee ways: where is the charge, is the
voltage, and is the capacitance of the capacitor. The energy is in joules when the charge is in coulombs, volta ge is in volts,
and capacitance is in farads.
Glossary
defibrillator
a machine used to provide an electrical shock to a heart a ttack victim's heart in order to restore the heart's norm al rhythmic
patternExample: Capacitance in a Heart Defibrillator

4.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839474.9: Energy Stored in Capacitors is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19.7: Energy Stored in Capacitors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

4.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839484.E: Exercises
Conceptual Questions
19.1: Electric Potential Energy: Potential Difference
1. V oltage is the common word for potential difference. Wh ich term is more descriptive, voltage or potential diffe rence?
2. If the voltage between two points is zero, can a test charge be moved between them with zero net work being done? Can
this necessarily be done without exerting a force? Explain.
3. What is the relationship between voltage and energy? More precisely, what is the relationship between poten tial difference
and electric potential energy?
4. V oltages are always measured between two points. Why?
5. How are units of volts and electron volts related? How do th ey differ?
19.2: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
6. Discuss how potential difference and electric field strengt h are related. Give an example.
7. What is the strength of the electric field in a region whe re the electric potential is constant?
8. Will a negative charge, initially at rest, move toward higher or lower potential? Explain why.
19.3: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
9. In what region of space is the potential due to a uni formly charged sphere the same as that of a point c harge? In what
region does it differ from that of a point charge?
10. Can the potential of a non-uniformly charged sphere be th e same as that of a point charge? Explain.
19.4: Equipotential Lines
11. What is an equipotential line? What is an equipotentia l surface?
12. Explain in your own words why equipotential lines and surfac es must be perpendicular to electric field lines.
13. Can different equipotential lines cross? Explain.
19.5: Capacitors and Dielectrics
14. Does the capacitance of a device depend on the applied volta ge? What about the charge stored in it?
15. Use the characteristics of the Coulomb force to explai n why capacitance should be proportional to the plate area of a
capacitor. Similarly, explain why capacitance should be inve rsely proportional to the separation between plates.
16. Give the reason why a dielectric material increases capa citance compared with what it would be with air between the
plates of a capacitor. What is the independent reason that a dielectric material also allows a greater vol tage to be applied to a
capacitor? (The dielectric thus increases and permits a greater.)
17. How does the polar character of water molecules help to exp lain water’s relatively large dielectric constant? (Figure)
18. Sparks will occur between the plates of an air-filled capacitor at lower voltage when the air is humid than when dry.
Explain why, considering the polar character of water mole cules.
19. Water has a large dielectric constant, but it is rarely use d in capacitors. Explain why.
20. Membranes in living cells, including those in humans, are characterized by a separation of charge acros s the membrane.
Effectively, the membranes are thus charged capacitors with important functions related to the potential di fference across the
membrane. Is energy required to separate these charge s in living membranes and, if so, is its source the metab olization of
food energy or some other source?

4.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83948
Figure 19.6.9: The semipermeable membrane of a cell has different concentrations of ions inside and out. Diffusion moves
the (potassium) and (chloride) ions in the directi ons shown, until the Coulomb force halts further tra nsfer.
This results in a layer of positive charge on the ou tside, a layer of negative charge on the inside, an d thus a voltage across the
cell membrane. The membrane is normally impermeable to (sodium ions).
19.6: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
21. If you wish to store a large amount of energy in a ca pacitor bank, would you connect capacitors in series or parallel?
Explain.
19.7: Energy Stored in Capacitors
22. How does the energy contained in a charged capacitor change when a dielectric is inserted, assuming the capacitor is
isolated and its charge is constant? Does this imply that work wa s done?
23. What happens to the energy stored in a capacitor co nnected to a battery when a dielectric is inserted? W as work done in
the process?
Problems & Exercises
19.1: Electric Potential Energy: Potential Difference
24. Find the ratio of speeds of an electron and a negati ve hydrogen ion (one having an extra electron) acce lerated through the
same voltage, assuming non-relativistic final speeds. Take the mass of the hydrogen ion to be.
Solution
25. An evacuated tube uses an accelerating voltage of 4 0 kV to accelerate electrons to hit a copper plate and produce x rays.
Non-relativistically, what would be the maximum speed of th ese electrons?
26. A bare helium nucleus has two positive charges and a m ass of
(a) Calculate its kinetic energy in joules at 2.00% of the speed of light.
(b) What is this in electron volts?
(c) What voltage would be needed to obtain this energy?
27. Integrated Concepts
Singly charged gas ions are accelerated from rest thr ough a voltage of 13.0 V. At what temperature will the a verage
kinetic energy of gas molecules be the same as that given these ions?
Solution
28. Integrated Concepts
The temperature near the center of the Sun is though t to be 15 million degrees Celsius ().Through what
voltage must a singly charged ion be accelerated to have the same energy as the average kinetic energy o f ions at this

4.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83948temperature?
29. Integrated Concepts
(a) What is the average power output of a heart defibrill ator that dissipates 400 J of energy in 10.0 ms?
(b) Considering the high-power output, why doesn’t the defibr illator produce serious burns?
Solution
(a)
(b) A defibrillator does not cause serious burns bec ause the skin conducts electricity well at high volta ges, like those
used in defibrillators. The gel used aids in the tran sfer of energy to the body, and the skin doesn’t abs orb the energy,
but rather lets it pass through to the heart.
30. Integrated Concepts
A lightning bolt strikes a tree, moving 20.0 C of cha rge through a potential difference of. (a) What
energy was dissipated? (b) What mass of water could be raised from to the boiling point and then boiled b y this
energy? (c) Discuss the damage that could be caused to the tree by the expansion of the boiling steam.
31. Integrated Concepts
A 12.0 V battery-operated bottle warmer heats 50.0 g of glass, of baby formula, and of
aluminum from to.
(a) How much charge is moved by the battery?
(b) How many electrons per second flow if it takes 5.0 0 min to warm the formula? (Hint: Assume that the
specific heat of baby formula is about the same as the sp ecific heat of water.)
Solution
(a)
(b)
32. Integrated Concepts
A battery-operated car utilizes a 12.0 V system. Find the charge the batteries must be able to move in or der to
accelerate the 750 kg car from rest to 25.0 m/s, make it climb a high hill, and then cause it to travel at a
constant 25.0 m/s by exerting a force for an hour.
Solution
33. Integrated Concepts
Fusion probability is greatly enhanced when appropriate nuclei are brought close together, but mutual Coulo mb
repulsion must be overcome. This can be done using the kinetic energy of high-temperature gas ions or by a ccelerating
the nuclei toward one another. (a) Calculate the pot ential energy of two singly charged nuclei separated by
by finding the voltage of one at that distance and multiplying by the charge of the other. (b) At what te mperature
will atoms of a gas have an average kinetic energy equal to this needed electrical potential energy?
34. Unreasonable Results
(a) Find the voltage near a 10.0 cm diameter metal sphere tha t has 8.00 C of excess positive charge on it.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
Solution
(a)
(b) This voltage is very high. A 10.0 cm diameter sphere c ould never maintain this voltage; it would discharge.
(c) An 8.00 C charge is more charge than can reasonably be accumulated on a sphere of that size.

4.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8394835. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a battery used to supply energy to a cellul ar phone. Construct a problem in which you determine the energy
that must be supplied by the battery, and then calcula te the amount of charge it must be able to move in order to supply
this energy. Among the things to be considered are the energy needs and battery voltage. You may need to lo ok ahead
to interpret manufacturer’s battery ratings in amper e-hours as energy in joules.
19.2: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
36. Show that units of V/m and N/C for electric field strength a re indeed equivalent.
37. What is the strength of the electric field between two parallel conducting plates separated by 1.00 cm and having a
potential difference (voltage) between them of?
38. The electric field strength between two parallel conductin g plates separated by 4.00 cm is.
(a) What is the potential difference between the plates?
(b) The plate with the lowest potential is taken to be at zero volts. What is the potential 1.00 cm from th at plate (and
3.00 cm from the other)?
Solution
(a)
(b)
39. How far apart are two conducting plates that have an electric field strength of between them, if their
potential difference is 15.0 kV?
40. (a) Will the electric field strength between two para llel conducting plates exceed the breakdown strength for air (
) if the plates are separated by 2.00 mm and a potential difference of is applied?
(b) How close together can the plates be with this applied voltage?
Solution
(a) No. The electric field strength between the plate s is which is lower than the breakdown strength for
air ().
(b)
41. The voltage across a membrane forming a cell wall is 80.0 mV and the membrane is 9.00 nm thick. What is the electric
field strength? (The value is surprisingly large, bu t correct. Membranes are discussed in Capacitors and Dielectrics and Nerve
Conduction—Electrocardiograms.) You may assume a uniform electric field.
42. Membrane walls of living cells have surprisingly lar ge electric fields across them due to separation of i ons. (Membranes
are discussed in some detail in Nerve Conduction—Electrocardiograms.) What is the voltage across an 8.00 nm–thick
membrane if the electric field strength across it is 5.50 MV/m? You may assume a uniform electric field.
Solution
43. Two parallel conducting plates are separated by 10.0 cm, an d one of them is taken to be at zero volts.
(a) What is the electric field strength between them, if the potential 8.00 cm from the zero volt plate (and 2.00 cm from
the other) is 450 V?
(b) What is the voltage between the plates?
44. Find the maximum potential difference between two para llel conducting plates separated by 0.500 cm of air, given the
maximum sustainable electric field strength in air to be.
Solution

4.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8394845. A doubly charged ion is accelerated to an energy of 32.0 keV by the electric field between two parallel conducting plates
separated by 2.00 cm. What is the electric field strengt h between the plates?
46. An electron is to be accelerated in a uniform electric f ield having a strength of.
(a) What energy in keV is given to the electron if it is ac celerated through 0.400 m?
(b) Over what distance would it have to be accelerated to inc rease its energy by 50.0 GeV?
Solution
(a)
(b)
19.3: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
47. A 0.500 cm diameter plastic sphere, used in a static e lectricity demonstration, has a uniformly distributed 40.0 pC charge
on its surface. What is the potential near its surface?
Solution
48. What is the potential from a proton (the average d istance between the proton and electron in a hydroge n
atom)?
49. (a) A sphere has a surface uniformly charged with 1.00 C. At what distance from its center is the potential 5.00 MV?
(b) What does your answer imply about the practical aspe ct of isolating such a large charge?
Solution
(a) 1.80 km
(b) A charge of 1 C is a very large amount of charge; a s phere of radius 1.80 km is not practical.
50. How far from a point charge will the potential be 100 V? At what distance will it be?
51. What are the sign and magnitude of a point charge that produces a potential of at a distance of 1.00 mm?
Solution
52. If the potential due to a point charge is at a di stance of 15.0 m, what are the sign and magnitude of t he
charge?
53. In nuclear fission, a nucleus splits roughly in half.
(a) What is the potential from a fragment that has 46 p rotons in it?
(b) What is the potential energy in MeV of a similarly c harged fragment at this distance?
Solution
(a)
(b)
54. A research Van de Graaff generator has a 2.00-m-diameter m etal sphere with a charge of 5.00 mC on it.
(a) What is the potential near its surface?
(b) At what distance from its center is the potential 1.00 MV?
(c) An oxygen atom with three missing electrons is rel eased near the Van de Graaff generator. What is its en ergy in
MeV at this distance?
55. An electrostatic paint sprayer has a 0.200-m-diamete r metal sphere at a potential of 25.0 kV that repels paint droplets
onto a grounded object.
(a) What charge is on the sphere?

4.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83948(b) What charge must a 0.100-mg drop of paint have to a rrive at the object with a speed of 10.0 m/s?
Solution
(a)
(b)
56. In one of the classic nuclear physics experiments at the beginning of the 20th century, an alpha particle was accelerated
toward a gold nucleus, and its path was substantially def lected by the Coulomb interaction. If the energy of the doubly
charged alpha nucleus was 5.00 MeV, how close to the gold nuc leus (79 protons) could it come before being deflected?
57. (a) What is the potential between two points situated 10 cm a nd 20 cm from a point charge?
(b) To what location should the point at 20 cm be mov ed to increase this potential difference by a factor of two?
58. Unreasonable Results
(a) What is the final speed of an electron accelera ted from rest through a voltage of 25.0 MV by a nega tively charged
Van de Graaff terminal?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
Solution
(a)
(b) This velocity is far too great. It is faster than the s peed of light.
(c) The assumption that the speed of the electron is far less than that of light and that the problem do es not require a
relativistic treatment produces an answer greater than the speed of light.
19.4: Equipotential Lines
59. (a) Sketch the equipotential lines near a point charge +. In dicate the direction of increasing potential.
(b) Do the same for a point charge.
60. Sketch the equipotential lines for the two equal posit ive charges shown in Figure 19.5.6. Indicate the direc tion of
increasing potential.
Figure 19.5.6: The electric field near two equal positive charges is dire cted away from each of the charges.
61. Figure 19.5.7 shows the electric field lines near two ch arges and, the first having a magnitude four time s that of the
second. Sketch the equipotential lines for these two charg es, and indicate the direction of increasing potential.
The electric field near two charges.

4.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8394862. Sketch the equipotential lines a long distance from t he charges shown in Figure 19.5.7. Indicate the directi on of
increasing potential.
63. Sketch the equipotential lines in the vicinity of t wo opposite charges, where the negative charge is thre e times as great in
magnitude as the positive. See Figure 19.5.7 for a similar situat ion. Indicate the direction of increasing potential.
64. Sketch the equipotential lines in the vicinity of th e negatively charged conductor in Figure 19.5.8. How wil l these
equipotentials look a long distance from the object?
Figure 19.5.8: A negatively charged conductor.
65. Sketch the equipotential lines surrounding the two c onducting plates shown in Figure 19.5.9, given the top plate is
positive and the bottom plate has an equal amount o f negative charge. Be certain to indicate the distr ibution of charge on the
plates. Is the field strongest where the plates are closest? Why should it be?
Figure 19.5.9
66. (a) Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the charged insulator in Figure 19.5.10. Note its n on-uniform charge
distribution. (b) Sketch equipotential lines surrounding the insulator. Indicate the direction of increasing pote ntial.
Figure 19.5.10: A charged insulating rod such as might be used in a class room demonstration.
67. The naturally occurring charge on the ground on a fine day out in the open country is.
(a) What is the electric field relative to ground at a he ight of 3.00 m?
(b) Calculate the electric potential at this height.
(c) Sketch electric field and equipotential lines for thi s scenario.
68. The lesser electric ray (Narcine bancroftii) maintains an incredible charge on its head and a c harge equal in magnitude
but opposite in sign on its tail (Figure).
(a) Sketch the equipotential lines surrounding the ray.
(b) Sketch the equipotentials when the ray is near a ship with a conducting surface.
(c) How could this charge distribution be of use to the ray?

4.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83948
Figure 19.5.11: Lesser electric ray (Narcine bancroftii) (credit: Nati onal Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA's
Fisheries Collection).
19.5: Capacitors and Dielectrics
69. What charge is stored in a capacitor when 120 V is applied to it?
Solution
70. Find the charge stored when 5.50 V is applied to an 8.00 p F capacitor.
71. What charge is stored in the capacitor in Example?
Solution
72. Calculate the voltage applied to a capacitor when it hol ds of charge.
73. What voltage must be applied to an 8.00 nF capacitor to sto re 0.160 mC of charge?
Solution
20.0 kV
74. What capacitance is needed to store of charge at a voltag e of 120 V?
75. What is the capacitance of a large Van de Graaff ge nerator’s terminal, given that it stores 8.00 mC of c harge at a voltage
of 12.0 MV?
Solution
76. Find the capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor having plates of area that are separated by 0.100 mm of Tefl on.
77. (a)What is the capacitance of a parallel plate capa citor having plates of area that are separated by 0.0200 mm of
neoprene rubber?
(b) What charge does it hold when 9.00 V is applied to it?
Solution
(a)
(b)
78. Integrated Concepts
A prankster applies 450 V to an capacitor and then tosses it to an unsuspecting victim. The victim’s fin ger is
burned by the discharge of the capacitor through 0. 200 g of flesh. What is the temperature increase of the flesh? Is it
reasonable to assume no phase change?
79. Unreasonable Results

4.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83948(a) A certain parallel plate capacitor has plates of area, separated by 0.0100 mm of nylon, and stores 0. 170 C of
charge. What is the applied voltage?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible or inconsistent?
Solution
(a) 14.2 kV
(b) The voltage is unreasonably large, more than 100 time s the breakdown voltage of nylon.
(c) The assumed charge is unreasonably large and cannot be stored in a capacitor of these dimensions.
19.6: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
80. Find the total capacitance of the combination of capacitor s in Figure 19.7.4.
Figure 19.7.4: A combination of series and parallel connections of cap acitors.
Solution
81. Suppose you want a capacitor bank with a total capacita nce of 0.750 F and you possess numerous 1.50 mF capacitor s.
What is the smallest number you could hook together to a chieve your goal, and how would you connect them?
82. What total capacitances can you make by connecting a and an capacitor together?
Solution
in series combination, in parallel combination
83. Find the total capacitance of the combination of capa citors shown in Figure 19.7.5.
Figure 19.7.5: A combination of series and parallel connections of cap acitors.
Solution
84. Find the total capacitance of the combination of capacitor s shown in Figure.

4.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83948
Figure 19.7.6: A combination of series and parallel connections of cap acitors.
85. (a) An capacitor is connected in parallel to another capacitor, producing a total capacitance of. What is the
capacitance of the second capacitor?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
Solution
(a)
(b) You cannot have a negative value of capacitance.
(c) The assumption that the capacitors were hooked u p in parallel, rather than in series, was incorrect. A parallel
connection always produces a greater capacitance, whi le here a smaller capacitance was assumed. This could happen
only if the capacitors are connected in series.
19.7: Energy Stored in Capacitors
86. (a) What is the energy stored in the capacitor of a h eart defibrillator charged to?
(b) Find the amount of stored charge.
Solution
(a)
(b)
87. In open heart surgery, a much smaller amount of energy wil l defibrillate the heart.
(a) What voltage is applied to the capacitor of a heart defibrillator that stores 40.0 J of energy?
(b) Find the amount of stored charge.
Solution
(a) 3.16 kV
(b) 25.3 mC
88. A capacitor is used in conjunction with a motor. How much en ergy is stored in it when 119 V is applied?
89. Suppose you have a 9.00 V battery, a capacitor, and a cap acitor.
(a) Find the charge and energy stored if the capacitors are connected to the battery in series.
(b) Do the same for a parallel connection.
Solution
(a)
(b)
90. A nervous physicist worries that the two metal shelves of his wood frame bookcase might obtain a high volta ge if
charged by static electricity, perhaps produced by fric tion.

4.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83948(a) What is the capacitance of the empty shelves if they h ave area and are 0.200 m apart?
(b) What is the voltage between them if opposite charges of magnitude 2.00 nC are placed on them?
(c) To show that this voltage poses a small hazard, calculate the energy stored.
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c)
91. Show that for a given dielectric material the maximum energy a parallel plate capacitor can store is direc tly proportional
to the volume of dielectric (). Note that the applied volt age is limited by the dielectric strength.
92. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a heart defibrillator similar to that discu ssed in Example. Construct a problem in which you examine the
charge stored in the capacitor of a defibrillator as a function of stored energy. Among the things to be con sidered are
the applied voltage and whether it should vary with en ergy to be delivered, the range of energies involved, and the
capacitance of the defibrillator. You may also wish t o consider the much smaller energy needed for defib rillation
during open-heart surgery as a variation on this problem.
93. (a) On a particular day, it takes of electric energy to start a truck’s engine. Calculate the capacitanc e of a
capacitor that could store that amount of energy at 12.0 V.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
Solution
(a)
(b) Such a capacitor would be too large to carry with a tru ck. The size of the capacitor would be enormous.
(c) It is unreasonable to assume that a capacitor can st ore the amount of energy needed.
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State University of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univer sity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
4.E: Exercises is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19: Electric Potential and Electric Field (Exercises) has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electricalengineering-and-computer-science/6-013-electromagnet ics-and-applications-spring-2009.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
5.1: Introduction
5.2: Current
5.3: Electrical Current
5.4: Model of Conduction in Metals
5.5: Resistance and Resistivity
5.6: Resistivity and Resistance
5.7: Ohm's Law
5.8: Electric Power and Energy
5.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
5.11: Superconductors
5.12: Practice
5.A: Current and Resistance (Answers)
5.E: Heat and Heat Transfer Methods (Exercise)
5.S: Summary
This page titled 5: Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839635.1: Introduction
The flicker of numbers on a handheld calculator, ner ve impulses carrying signals of vision to the brain, an ultrasound device
sending a signal to a computer screen, the brain se nding a message for a baby to twitch its toes, an elec tric train pulling its load
over a mountain pass, a hydroelectric plant sending en ergy to metropolitan and rural users—these and many other examples of
electricity involve electric current, the movement of charge. Humankind has indeed harnessed electricity, the ba sis of technology, to
improve our quality of life. Whereas the previous t wo chapters concentrated on static electricity and t he fundamental force
underlying its behavior, the next few chapters will be devoted to electric and magnetic phenomena involvin g current. In addition to
exploring applications of electricity, we shall gain n ew insights into nature—in particular, the fact that all magnetism results from
electric current.
Figure 20.1.1 Electric energy in massive quantities is t ransmitted from this hydroelectric facility, the Srisai lam power station
located along the Krishna River in India, by the mov ement of charge—that is, by electric current. (credi t: Chintohere, Wikimedia
Commons)
This page titled 5.1: Introduction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
20.0: Prelude to Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's La w by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

5.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839645.2: Current
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define electric current, ampere, and drift velocity
Describe the direction of charge flow in conventional cu rrent.
Use drift velocity to calculate current and vice versa.
Electric Current
Electric current is defined to be the rate at which c harge flows. A large current, such as that used to st art a truck engine, moves a
large amount of charge in a small time, whereas a sm all current, such as that used to operate a hand-held calculator, moves a small
amount of charge over a long period of time. In equation form, electric current is defined to be
where is the amount of charge passing through a giv en area in time. As in previous chapters, initial ti me is often taken to be
zero, in which case. (). The SI unit for current is t he ampere (A), named for the French physicist André-Marie Ampère
(1775–1836). From Equation, we see that an ampere is one cou lomb per second:
Not only are fuses and circuit breakers rated in amperes (or a mps), so are many electrical appliances.
Figure: The rate of flow of charge is current. An am pere is the flow of one coulomb through an area in o ne second.
a. What is the current involved when a truck battery sets i n motion 720 C of charge in 4.00 s while starting an engine?
b. How long does it take 1.00 C of charge to flow through a hand held calculator if a 0.300-mA current is flowing?
Strategy
We can use the definition of current in the equatio n to find the current in part (a), since charge and time are given.
In part (b), we rearrange the definition of current and use the given values of charge and current to find the time required.
Solution (a)
Entering the given values for charge and time into the d efinition of current givesLearning Objectives
Example: Calculating Currents: Current in a Truck Battery and a Handheld Calculator

5.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83964Discussion (a)
This large value for current illustrates the fact th at a large charge is moved in a small amount of tim e. The currents in these
“starter motors” are fairly large because large friction al forces need to be overcome when setting something i n motion.
Solution (b)
Solving the relationship for time, and entering the known values for charge and current gives
Discussion (b)
This time is slightly less than an hour. The small curr ent used by the hand-held calculator takes a much l onger time to move a
smaller charge than the large current of the truck starter. So why can we operate our calculators only sec onds after turning them
on? It’s because calculators require very little ene rgy. Such small current and energy demands allow handh eld calculators to
operate from solar cells or to get many hours of use o ut of small batteries. Remember, calculators do not hav e moving parts in
the same way that a truck engine has with cylinders and pis tons, so the technology requires smaller currents.
Figure shows a simple circuit and the standard schema tic representation of a battery, conducting path, and load (a resistor).
Schematics are very useful in visualizing the main f eatures of a circuit. A single schematic can represen t a wide variety of
situations. The schematic in Figure, for example, can represent anything from a truck battery connected to a headlight
lighting the street in front of the truck to a small battery connected to a penlight lighting a keyhole in a door. Such schematics are
useful because the analysis is the same for a wide varie ty of situations. We need to understand a few schematic s to apply the
concepts and analysis to many more situations.
Figure: (a) A simple electric circuit. A closed path for current to flow through is supplied by conducting wires connecting a
load to the terminals of a battery. (b) In this schema tic, the battery is represented by the two parallel r ed lines, conducting wires are
shown as straight lines, and the zigzag represents the lo ad. The schematic represents a wide variety of similar circuits.
Note that the direction of current flow in Figure is from positive to negative. The direction of conventional current is the
direction that positive charge would flow. Depending on the situation, positive charges, negativ e charges, or both may move. In

5.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83964metal wires, for example, current is carried by electr ons—that is, negative charges move. In ionic solutions, such as salt water, both
positive and negative charges move. This is also true i n nerve cells. A Van de Graaff generator used for nuclea r research can
produce a current of pure positive charges, such as protons. Figure illustrates the movement of charged particles that compose
a current. The fact that conventional current is ta ken to be in the direction that positive charge would flow can be traced back to
American politician and scientist Benjamin Franklin in the 1700s. He named the type of charge associated wit h electrons negative,
long before they were known to carry current in so ma ny situations. Franklin, in fact, was totally unaware o f the small-scale
structure of electricity.
Figure: Current is the rate at which charge moves th rough an area, such as the cross-section of a wire. Con ventional
current is defined to move in the direction of the e lectric field. (a) Positive charges move in the direc tion of the electric field and the
same direction as conventional current. (b) Negative charges move in the direction opposite to the electri c field. Conventional
current is in the direction opposite to the movement of negative charge. The flow of electrons is sometimes referred to as electronic
flow.
It is important to realize that there is an electri c field in conductors responsible for producing the current, as illustrated in Figure
Unlike static electricity, where a conductor in equil ibrium cannot have an electric field in it, conduct ors carrying a current
have an electric field and are not in static equilibr ium. An electric field is needed to supply energy to move th e charges.
Find a straw and little peas that can move freely in t he straw. Place the straw flat on a table and fill the straw with peas. When
you pop one pea in at one end, a different pea shou ld pop out the other end. This demonstration is an analogy for an electric
current. Identify what compares to the electrons and what compares to the supply of energy. What other ana logies can you find
for an electric current?
Note that the flow of peas is based on the peas physical ly bumping into each other; electrons flow due to mu tually repulsive
electrostatic forces.
If the 0.300-mA current through the calculator ment ioned in the example is carried by electrons, how many electrons per
second pass through it?
Strategy
The current calculated in the previous example was de fined for the flow of positive charge. For electrons, th e magnitude is the
same, but the sign is opposite,. Since each electron has a charge of, we can
convert the current in coulombs per second to electron s per second.
Solution:
Starting with the definition of current, we haveMAKING CONNECTIONS: TAKE-HOME INVESTIGATION-ELECTRIC CURRENT ILLUSTRATION
Example: Calculating the Number of Electrons that Move through a Calculator

5.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83964We divide this by the charge per electron, so that
Discussion:
There are so many charged particles moving, even in small currents, that individual charges are not notice d, just as individual
water molecules are not noticed in water flow. Even mo re amazing is that they do not always keep moving fo rward like
soldiers in a parade. Rather they are like a crowd of people with movement in different directions but a general trend to move
forward. There are lots of collisions with atoms in the metal wire and, of course, with other electrons.
Drift Velocity
Electrical signals are known to move very rapidly. Te lephone conversations carried by currents in wires cov er large distances
without noticeable delays. Lights come on as soon as a swi tch is flicked. Most electrical signals carried by cur rents travel at speeds
on the order of, a significant fraction of the spee d of light. Interestingly, the individual charges t hat make up the current
move much more slowly on average, typically drifting at speeds on the order of. How do we reconcile these two speeds,
and what does it tell us about standard conductors?
The high speed of electrical signals results from the f act that the force between charges acts rapidly at a distance. Thus, when a free
charge is forced into a wire, as in, the incoming ch arge pushes other charges ahead of it, which in turn p ush on charges farther
down the line. The density of charge in a system cann ot easily be increased, and so the signal is passed on rapidly. The resulting
electrical shock wave moves through the system at near ly the speed of light. To be precise, this rapidly mo ving signal or shock
wave is a rapidly propagating change in electric field.
Figure: When charged particles are forced into this v olume of a conductor, an equal number are quickly f orced to leave. The
repulsion between like charges makes it difficult to i ncrease the number of charges in a volume. Thus, as one charge enters, another
leaves almost immediately, carrying the signal rapidly forward.
Good conductors have large numbers of free charges in them. In metals, the free charges are free electrons. shows how free
electrons move through an ordinary conductor. The dist ance that an individual electron can move between co llisions with atoms or
other electrons is quite small. The electron paths t hus appear nearly random, like the motion of atoms in a gas. But there is an
electric field in the conductor that causes the ele ctrons to drift in the direction shown (opposite to th e field, since they are negative).
The drift velocity i s the average velocity of the free charges. Drif t velocity is quite small, since there are so many fr ee charges.
If we have an estimate of the density of free electr ons in a conductor, we can calculate the drift veloci ty for a given current. The
larger the density, the lower the velocity required for a gi ven current.

5.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83964
Figure: Free electrons moving in a conductor make man y collisions with other electrons and atoms. The path o f one electron
is shown. The average velocity of the free charges is c alled the drift velocity,, and it is in the directi on opposite to the electric
field for electrons. The collisions normally transfer e nergy to the conductor, requiring a constant supply o f energy to maintain a
steady current.
Good electrical conductors are often good heat condu ctors, too. This is because large numbers of free el ectrons can carry
electrical current and can transport thermal energy.
The free-electron collisions transfer energy to the atoms of the conductor. The electric field does work in moving the electrons
through a distance, but that work does not increase t he kinetic energy (nor speed, therefore) of the elect rons. The work is
transferred to the conductor’s atoms, possibly increa sing temperature. Thus a continuous power input is requ ired to keep a current
flowing. An exception, of course, is found in supercondu ctors, for reasons we shall explore in a later chapte r. Superconductors can
have a steady current without a continual supply of energy—a great energy savings. In contrast, the supply of energy can be useful,
such as in a lightbulb filament. The supply of energy is necessary to increase the temperature of the tun gsten filament, so that the
filament glows.
Find a lightbulb with a filament. Look carefully at th e filament and describe its structure. To what points is the filament
connected?
We can obtain an expression for the relationship bet ween current and drift velocity by considering the n umber of free charges in a
segment of wire, as illustrated in Figure. The number of free charges per unit volume is given the symbol and depends on the
material. The shaded segment has a volume, so that the number of free charges in it is. The charge i n this segment is
thus, where is the amount of charge on each carrie r. (Recall that for electrons, is.) Current is char ge moved
per unit time; thus, if all the original charges move out of this segment in time, the current is
Note that is the magnitude of the drift velocity,, since the charges move an average distance in a tim e. Rearranging
terms gives
where is the current through a wire of cross-sectional area made of a material with a free charge density. The carriers of the
current each have charge and move with a drift veloci ty of magnitude.
Figure: All the charges in the shaded volume of this w ire move out in a time, having a drift velocity of magnitude.
See text for further discussion.CONDUCTION OF ELECTRICITY AND HEAT
MAKING CONNECTIONS: TAKE-HOME INVESTIGATION--FILAMENT OBSERVATIONS

5.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83964Note that simple drift velocity is not the entire sto ry. The speed of an electron is much greater than i ts drift velocity. In addition, not
all of the electrons in a conductor can move freely, and those that do might move somewhat faster or slower than the drift velocity.
So what do we mean by free electrons? Atoms in a metall ic conductor are packed in the form of a lattice str ucture. Some electrons
are far enough away from the atomic nuclei that they do not experience the attraction of the nuclei as m uch as the inner electrons
do. These are the free electrons. They are not bound to a single atom but can instead move freely among the atoms in a “sea” of
electrons. These free electrons respond by acceleratin g when an electric field is applied. Of course as they mo ve they collide with
the atoms in the lattice and other electrons, generat ing thermal energy, and the conductor gets warmer. In an insulator, the
organization of the atoms and the structure do not allow f or such free electrons.
Calculate the drift velocity of electrons in a 12-g auge copper wire (which has a diameter of 2.053 mm) ca rrying a 20.0-A
current, given that there is one free electron per co pper atom. (Household wiring often contains 12-gauge c opper wire, and the
maximum current allowed in such wire is usually 20 A.) Th e density of copper is.
Strategy
We can calculate the drift velocity using the equati on. The current is given, and is the
charge of an electron. We can calculate the area of a cross-section of the wire using the formula, where is one-half
the given diameter, 2.053 mm. We are given the density of copper,, and the periodic table shows that the
atomic mass of copper is 63.54 g/mol. We can use the se two quantities along with Avogadro’s number,,
to determine, the number of free electrons per cubic m eter.
Solution
First, calculate the density of free electrons in cop per. There is one free electron per copper atom. Ther efore, is the same as the
number of copper atoms per. We can now find as follows:
The cross-sectional area of the wire is
Rearranging to isolate drift velocity gives
Discussion
The minus sign indicates that the negative charges ar e moving in the direction opposite to conventional current. The small
value for drift velocity (on the order of) confirm s that the signal moves on the order of times faster (about
) than the charges that carry it.
Summary
Electric current is the rate at which charge flows, given byExample: Calculating Drift Velocity in a Common Wire
Missing \end{align*}
Misplaced &

5.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83964where is the amount of charge passing through an area i n time.
The direction of conventional current is taken as the dir ection in which positive charge moves.
The SI unit for current is the ampere (A), where
Current is the flow of free charges, such as electrons and ion s.
Drift veloctiy is the average speed at which these cha rges move.
Current is proportional to drift velocity, as expresse d in the relationship. Here, is the current through a wir e of
cross-sectional area. The wire's material as a free-char ge density, and each carrier has charge and a drift vel ocity.
Electrical signals travel at speeds about times greater than the drift velocity of free electrons.
Glossary
electric current
the rate at which charge flows, I = ΔQ/Δt
ampere
(amp) the SI unit for current; 1 A = 1 C/s
drift velocity
the average velocity at which free charges flow in respons e to an electric field
This page titled 5.2: Current is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
20.1: Current by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

5.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839825.3: Electrical Current
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe an electrical current
Define the unit of electrical current
Explain the direction of current flow
In this chapter, we study the electrical current thro ugh a material, where the electrical current is the ra te of flow of charge. We also
examine a characteristic of materials known as the r esistance. Resistance is a measure of how much a mate rial impedes the flow of
charge, and it will be shown that the resistance depend s on temperature. In general, a good conductor, such as copper, gold, or
silver, has very low resistance. Some materials, called su perconductors, have zero resistance at very low temperat ures.
Figure: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses supercond ucting magnets and produces high-resolution images with out the
danger of radiation. The image on the left shows the spacing of vertebrae along a human spinal column, wit h the circle indicating
where the vertebrae are too close due to a ruptured disc. On the right is a picture of the MRI instrument, which surrounds the
patient on all sides. A large amount of electrical cu rrent is required to operate the electromagnets (cred it right: modification of work
by “digital cat”/Flickr).
High currents are required for the operation of elect romagnets. Superconductors can be used to make electrom agnets that are 10
times stronger than the strongest conventional elect romagnets. These superconducting magnets are used in the construction of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) devices that can be used to make high-resolution images of the human bod y. The chapteropening picture shows an MRI image of the vertebrae o f a human subject and the MRI device itself. Supercondu cting magnets
have many other uses. For example, superconducting magne ts are used in the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) to curv e the path of
protons in the ring.
When charges move, they are accelerated in response to an electrical field created by a voltage differe nce. The charges lose
potential energy and gain kinetic energy as they tra vel through a potential difference where the electri cal field does work on the
charge.
Although charges do not require a material to flow th rough, the majority of this chapter deals with understa nding the movement of
charges through a material. The rate at which the ch arges flow past a location—that is, the amount of cha rge per unit time—is
known as the electrical current. When charges flow through a medium, the current de pends on the voltage applied, the material
through which the charges flow, and the state of the material. Of particular interest is the motion of ch arges in a conducting wire. In
previous chapters, charges were accelerated due to the f orce provided by an electrical field, losing potent ial energy and gaining
kinetic energy. In this chapter, we discuss the situa tion of the force provided by an electrical field i n a conductor, where chargesLEARNING OBJECTIVES

5.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83982lose kinetic energy to the material reaching a const ant velocity, known as the “ drift velocity.” This is analogous to an object falling
through the atmosphere and losing kinetic energy to the air, reaching a constant terminal velocity.
If you have ever taken a course in first aid or saf ety, you may have heard that in the event of electr ic shock, it is the current, not the
voltage, which is the important factor on the severit y of the shock and the amount of damage to the human body. Current is
measured in units called amperes; you may have noti ced that circuit breakers in your home and fuses in your car are rated in amps
(or amperes). But what is the ampere and what does it measur e?
Defining Current and the Ampere
Electrical current is defined to be the rate at whic h charge flows. When there is a large current present, such as that used to run a
refrigerator, a large amount of charge moves through the wire in a small amount of time. If the current is small, such as that used to
operate a handheld calculator, a small amount of charge mo ves through the circuit over a long period of time.
The average electrical current is the rate at which cha rge flows,
where is the amount of net charge passing through a given cross-sectional area in time (Figure). The SI unit for
current is the ampere (A), named for the French physicist André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836). Since, we see that an
ampere is defined as one coulomb of charge passing throu gh a given area per second:
The instantaneous electrical current, or simply the electrical current, is the time derivative of the charge that flows an d is
found by taking the limit of the average electrical curre nt as.
Most electrical appliances are rated in amperes (or amps) r equired for proper operation, as are fuses and circuit b reakers.
Figure: The rate of flow of charge is current. An am pere is the flow of one coulomb of charge through an area in one second.
A current of one amp would result from electrons flo wing through the area A each second.
The main purpose of a battery in a car or truck is to run the electric starter motor, which starts the engine. The operation of
starting the vehicle requires a large current to be supplied by the battery. Once the engine starts, a devi ce called an alternator
takes over supplying the electric power required for ru nning the vehicle and for charging the battery.
a. What is the average current involved when a truck batte ry sets in motion 720 C of charge in 4.00 s while starting an e ngine?
b. How long does it take 1.00 C of charge to flow from the batt ery?
StrategyElectrical Current
culating the Average Current

5.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83982We can use the definition of the average current in Equation to find the average current in part (a), since charge and time
are given. For part (b), once we know the average curre nt, we use Equation to find the time required for 1.00 C of charge
to flow from the battery.
Solution
a. Entering the given values for charge and time into the d efinition of current gives
b. Solving the relationship for time and entering the known values for charge and current gives
Significance
a. This large value for current illustrates the fact tha t a large charge is moved in a small amount of time. The currents in these
“starter motors” are fairly large to overcome the iner tia of the engine.
b. A high current requires a short time to supply a large a mount of charge. This large current is needed to supply the large
amount of energy needed to start the engine.
Consider a charge moving through a cross-section of a wire where the charge is modeled as. Here, is
the charge after a long period of time, as time app roaches infinity, with units of coulombs, and is a tim e constant with units of
seconds (Figure). What is the current through the wire?
Figure: A graph of the charge moving through a cross- section of a wire over time.
Strategy
The current through the cross-section can be found f rom. Notice from the figure that the charge increase s to and
the derivative decreases, approaching zero, as time incr eases (Figure).
Solution
The derivative can be found using.Calculating Instantaneous Currents

5.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83982
Figure: A graph of the current flowing through the wire over time.
Significance
The current through the wire in question decreases exp onentially, as shown in Figure. In later chapters, it will be shown
that a time-dependent current appears when a capacito r charges or discharges through a resistor. Recall th at a capacitor is a
device that stores charge. You will learn about the re sistor in Model of Conduction in Metals.
Handheld calculators often use small solar cells to supply the energy required to complete the calculati ons needed to complete
your next physics exam. The current needed to run you r calculator can be as small as 0.30 mA. How long would it take for
1.00 C of charge to flow from the solar cells? Can so lar cells be used, instead of batteries, to start tr aditional internal
combustion engines presently used in most cars and trucks?
Answer
The time for 1.00 C of charge to flow would be
This is slightly less than an hour. This is quite differ ent from the 5.55 ms for the truck battery. The calc ulator takes a very
small amount of energy to operate, unlike the truck’ s starter motor. There are several reasons that vehicle s use batteries and
not solar cells. Aside from the obvious fact that a ligh t source to run the solar cells for a car or truck is not always available,
the large amount of current needed to start the engi ne cannot easily be supplied by present-day solar cel ls. Solar cells can
possibly be used to charge the batteries. Charging t he battery requires a small amount of energy when co mpared to the
energy required to run the engine and the other acc essories such as the heater and air conditioner. Prese nt day solarpowered cars are powered by solar panels, which may power an el ectric motor, instead of an internal combustion engine.
Circuit breakers in a home are rated in amperes, no rmally in a range from 10 amps to 30 amps, and are use d to protect the
residents from harm and their appliances from damag e due to large currents. A single 15-amp circuit brea ker may be used to
protect several outlets in the living room, whereas a single 20-amp circuit breaker may be used to prote ct the refrigerator in the
kitchen. What can you deduce from this about current used b y the various appliances?
AnswerExercise
Exercise

5.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83982The total current needed by all the appliances in th e living room (a few lamps, a television, and your lap top) draw less
current and require less power than the refrigerator.
Current in a Circuit
In the previous paragraphs, we defined the current a s the charge that flows through a cross-sectional area per unit time. In order for
charge to flow through an appliance, such as the headl ight shown in Figure, there must be a complete path (or circuit) from
the positive terminal to the negative terminal. Consi der a simple circuit of a car battery, a switch, a he adlight lamp, and wires that
provide a current path between the components. In ord er for the lamp to light, there must be a complete p ath for current flow. In
other words, a charge must be able to leave the posi tive terminal of the battery, travel through the com ponent, and back to the
negative terminal of the battery. The switch is ther e to control the circuit. Part (a) of the figure shows the simple circuit of a car
battery, a switch, a conducting path, and a headlight l amp. Also shown is the schematic of the circuit [part (b)]. A schematic is a
graphical representation of a circuit and is very u seful in visualizing the main features of a circuit. Schematics use standardized
symbols to represent the components in a circuits an d solid lines to represent the wires connecting the components. The battery is
shown as a series of long and short lines, represent ing the historic voltaic pile. The lamp is shown as a c ircle with a loop inside,
representing the filament of an incandescent bulb. T he switch is shown as two points with a conducting bar to connect the two
points and the wires connecting the components are sho wn as solid lines. The schematic in part (c) shows the di rection of current
flow when the switch is closed.
Figure: (a) A simple electric circuit of a headlight (lamp), a battery, and a switch. When the switch is c losed, an uninterrupted
path for current to flow through is supplied by condu cting wires connecting a load to the terminals of a b attery. (b) In this
schematic, the battery is represented by parallel line s, which resemble plates in the original design of a ba ttery. The longer lines
indicate the positive terminal. The conducting wires are shown as solid lines. The switch is shown, in the open position, as two
terminals with a line representing a conducting bar t hat can make contact between the two terminals. The lamp is represented by a
circle encompassing a filament, as would be seen in an incandescent light bulb. (c) When the switch is closed, the circuit is
complete and current flows from the positive terminal to the negative terminal of the battery.
When the switch is closed in Figure, there is a compl ete path for charges to flow, from the positive term inal of the battery,
through the switch, then through the headlight and b ack to the negative terminal of the battery. Note th at the direction of current
flow is from positive to negative. The direction of co nventional current is always represented in the direc tion that positive charge
would flow, from the positive terminal to the negative term inal.
The conventional current flows from the positive term inal to the negative terminal, but depending on the actual situation, positive
charges, negative charges, or both may move. In met al wires, for example, current is carried by electron s—that is, negative charges
move. In ionic solutions, such as salt water, both positiv e and negative charges move. This is also true in nerve cells. A Van de
Graaff generator, used for nuclear research, can produ ce a current of pure positive charges, such as proton s. In the Tevatron
Accelerator at Fermilab, before it was shut down in 2011, beams of protons and antiprotons traveling in opposi te directions were
collided. The protons are positive and therefore the ir current is in the same direction as they travel. T he antiprotons are negativity
charged and thus their current is in the opposite directio n that the actual particles travel.
A closer look at the current flowing through a wire i s shown in Figure. The figure illustrates the movement of charged
particles that compose a current. The fact that conv entional current is taken to be in the direction th at positive charge would flow

5.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83982can be traced back to American scientist and statesman Benjamin Franklin in the 1700s. Having no knowledge o f the particles that
make up the atom (namely the proton, electron, and n eutron), Franklin believed that electrical current f lowed from a material that
had more of an “electrical fluid” and to a material that had less of this “electrical fluid.” He coined t he term positive for the
material that had more of this electrical fluid and negative for the material that lacked the electrical fluid. He surmised that current
would flow from the material with more electrical fluid —the positive material—to the negative material, whic h has less electrical
fluid. Franklin called this direction of current a p ositive current flow. This was pretty advanced thinki ng for a man who knew
nothing about the atom.
Figure: Current I is the rate at which charge moves through an area A, such as the cross-section of a wire. Conventional
current is defined to move in the direction of the e lectrical field. (a) Positive charges move in the dire ction of the electrical field,
which is the same direction as conventional current. (b) Negative charges move in the direction opposite to the electrical field.
Conventional current is in the direction opposite to the movement of negative charge. The flow of electr ons is sometimes referred
to as electronic flow.
We now know that a material is positive if it has a g reater number of protons than electrons, and it is n egative if it has a greater
number of electrons than protons. In a conducting m etal, the current flow is due primarily to electrons fl owing from the negative
material to the positive material, but for historical reasons, we consider the positive current flow and the current is shown to flow
from the positive terminal of the battery to the negative terminal.
It is important to realize that an electrical field is present in conductors and is responsible for produ cing the current (Figure).
In previous chapters, we considered the static electrica l case, where charges in a conductor quickly redistri bute themselves on the
surface of the conductor in order to cancel out the external electrical field and restore equilibrium. In the case of an electrical
circuit, the charges are prevented from ever reachi ng equilibrium by an external source of electric po tential, such as a battery. The
energy needed to move the charge is supplied by the elec tric potential from the battery.
Although the electrical field is responsible for the motion of the charges in the conductor, the work don e on the charges by the
electrical field does not increase the kinetic ener gy of the charges. We will show that the electrical fiel d is responsible for keeping
the electric charges moving at a “drift velocity.”
This page titled 5.3: Electrical Current is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.2: Electrical Current by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.
9.1: Prelude to Current and Resistance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

5.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839835.4: Model of Conduction in Metals
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define the drift velocity of charges moving through a met al
Define the vector current density
Describe the operation of an incandescent lamp
When electrons move through a conducting wire, they d o not move at a constant velocity, that is, the elect rons do not move in a
straight line at a constant speed. Rather, they inter act with and collide with atoms and other free electr ons in the conductor. Thus,
the electrons move in a zig-zag fashion and drift th rough the wire. We should also note that even though it is convenient to discuss
the direction of current, current is a scalar quantit y. When discussing the velocity of charges in a curren t, it is more appropriate to
discuss the current density. We will come back to this ide a at the end of this section.
Drift Velocity
Electrical signals move very rapidly. Telephone conv ersations carried by currents in wires cover large di stances without noticeable
delays. Lights come on as soon as a light switch is mo ved to the ‘on’ position. Most electrical signals car ried by currents travel at
speeds on the order of a significant fraction of t he speed of light. Interestingly, the individual char ges that make up the
current move much slower on average, typically drifti ng at speeds on the order of. How do we reconcile thes e two speeds,
and what does it tell us about standard conductors?
The high speed of electrical signals results from the f act that the force between charges acts rapidly at a distance. Thus, when a free
charge is forced into a wire, as in Figure, the inco ming charge pushes other charges ahead of it due to the repulsive force
between like charges. These moving charges push on char ges farther down the line. The density of charge in a system cannot easily
be increased, so the signal is passed on rapidly. The re sulting electrical shock wave moves through the system at nearly the speed of
light. To be precise, this fast-moving signal, or shock wave, i s a rapidly propagating change in the electrical field.
Figure: When charged particles are forced into this v olume of a conductor, an equal number are quickly f orced to leave. The
repulsion between like charges makes it difficult to i ncrease the number of charges in a volume. Thus, as one charge enters, another
leaves almost immediately, carrying the signal rapidly forward.
Good conductors have large numbers of free charges. In metals, the free charges are free electrons. (In fa ct, good electrical
conductors are often good heat conductors too, becau se large numbers of free electrons can transport ther mal energy as well as
carry electrical current.) Figure shows how free electr ons move through an ordinary conductor. The distance that an individual
electron can move between collisions with atoms or ot her electrons is quite small. The electron paths th us appear nearly random,
like the motion of atoms in a gas. But there is an el ectrical field in the conductor that causes the ele ctrons to drift in the direction
shown (opposite to the field, since they are negative). The drift velocity is the average velocity of the free charges. Drift
velocity is quite small, since there are so many fre e charges. If we have an estimate of the density of fre e electrons in a conductor,
we can calculate the drift velocity for a given current. The larger the density, the lower the velocity required for a given current.LEARNING OBJECTIVES

5.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83983
Figure: Free electrons moving in a conductor make ma ny collisions with other electrons and other particles. A typical path of
one electron is shown. The average velocity of the fr ee charges is called the drift velocity and for elec trons, it is in the direction
opposite to the electrical field. The collisions norma lly transfer energy to the conductor, requiring a co nstant supply of energy to
maintain a steady current.
Free-electron collisions transfer energy to the atoms o f the conductor. The electrical field does work in mo ving the electrons
through a distance, but that work does not increase t he kinetic energy (nor speed) of the electrons. The work is transferred to the
conductor’s atoms, often increasing temperature. Th us, a continuous power input is required to keep a curr ent flowing. (An
exception is superconductors, for reasons we shall ex plore in a later chapter. Superconductors can have a steady current without a
continual supply of energy—a great energy savings.) For a conductor that is not a superconductor, the su pply of energy can be
useful, as in an incandescent light bulb filament (Fi gure). The supply of energy is necessary to increase the temperature of the
tungsten filament, so that the filament glows.
Figure: The incandescent lamp is a simple design. A tun gsten filament is placed in a partially evacuated gla ss envelope. One
end of the filament is attached to the screw base, whi ch is made out of a conducting material. The second e nd of the filament is
attached to a second contact in the base of the bulb. The two contacts are separated by an insulating mater ial. Current flows through
the filament, and the temperature of the filament b ecomes large enough to cause the filament to glow and produce light. However,
these bulbs are not very energy efficient, as evident from the heat coming from the bulb. In the year 201 2, the United States, along
with many other countries, began to phase out incande scent lamps in favor of more energy-efficient lamps, su ch as light-emitting
diode (LED) lamps and compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) (credit right: modification of work by Serge Saint).
We can obtain an expression for the relationship bet ween current and drift velocity by considering the n umber of free charges in a
segment of wire, as illustrated in Figure. The number of free charges per unit volume, or the number densi ty of free charges, is
given the symbol where
The value of depends on the material. The shaded seg ment has a volume, so that the number of free charg es in the volume
is. The charge in this segment is thus, where is the amount of charge on each carrier. (The magnitud e of the
charge of electrons is.) Current is charge moved per unit time; thus, if all the original charges move o ut of this
segment in time dt, the current is

5.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83983Rearranging terms gives
where
is the drift velocity,
is the free charge density,
is the cross-sectional area of the wire, and
is the current through the wire.
The carriers of the current each have charge q and move with a drift velocity of magnitude.
Figure: All the charges in the shaded volume of this w ire move out in a time dt, having a drift velocity of magnitude.
Note that simple drift velocity is not the entire sto ry. The speed of an electron is sometimes much greater than its drift velocity. In
addition, not all of the electrons in a conductor can move freely, and those that do move might move somewha t faster or slower
than the drift velocity. So what do we mean by free electron s?
Atoms in a metallic conductor are packed in the form of a lattice structure. Some electrons are far enoug h away from the atomic
nuclei that they do not experience the attraction o f the nuclei as strongly as the inner electrons do. Th ese are the free electrons.
They are not bound to a single atom but can instead move freely among the atoms in a “sea” of electrons. When an electrical field
is applied, these free electrons respond by accelerat ing. As they move, they collide with the atoms in the lattice and with other
electrons, generating thermal energy, and the conducto r gets warmer. In an insulator, the organization of the atoms and the structure
do not allow for such free electrons.
As you know, electric power is usually supplied to equi pment and appliances through round wires made of a co nducting material
(copper, aluminum, silver, or gold) that are strande d or solid. The diameter of the wire determines the c urrent-carrying capacity—
the larger the diameter, the greater the current-car rying capacity. Even though the current-carrying cap acity is determined by the
diameter, wire is not normally characterized by the d iameter directly. Instead, wire is commonly sold in a unit known as “gauge.”
Wires are manufactured by passing the material throu gh circular forms called “drawing dies.” In order to make thinner wires,
manufacturers draw the wires through multiple dies of successively thinner diameter. Historically, the gauge o f the wire was related
to the number of drawing processes required to manufac ture the wire. For this reason, the larger the gauge, t he smaller the
diameter. In the United States, the American Wire Gauge (A WG) was developed to standardize the system. Household wir ing
commonly consists of 10-gauge (2.588-mm diameter) t o 14-gauge (1.628-mm diameter) wire. A device used to m easure the gauge
of wire is shown in Figure.

5.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83983
Figure: A device for measuring the gauge of electric al wire. As you can see, higher gauge numbers indicate thinner wires.
Calculate the drift velocity of electrons in a copp er wire with a diameter of 2.053 mm (12-gauge) carryin g a 20.0-A current,
given that there is one free electron per copper ato m. (Household wiring often contains 12-gauge copper wire, and the
maximum current allowed in such wire is usually 20.0 A.) The density of copper is and the atomic mass of
copper is 63.54 g/mol.
Strategy
We can calculate the drift velocity using the equat ion. The current is and is the charge
of an electron. We can calculate the area of a cross- section of the wire using the formula, where is one -half the
diameter. The given diameter is 2.053 mm, so r is 1.0265 mm. We are given the density of copper,, an d the
atomic mass of copper is. We can use these two quanti ties along with Avogadro’s number,, to
determine n, the number of free electrons per cubic meter.
Solution
First, we calculate the density of free electrons in c opper. There is one free electron per copper atom. Th erefore, the number of
free electrons is the same as the number of copper atoms pe r. We can now find n as follows:
The cross-sectional area of the wire is
Rearranging to isolate drift velocity givesExample: Calculating Drift Velocity in a Common Wire

5.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83983Significance
The minus sign indicates that the negative charges ar e moving in the direction opposite to conventional current. The small
value for drift velocity (on the order of confirms that the signal moves on the order of times faster (about
than the charges that carry it.
In Example, the drift velocity was calculated for a 2.053-mm diameter (12-gauge) copper wire carrying a 20-amp current.
Would the drift velocity change for a 1.628-mm diameter (14-gauge) wire carrying the same 20-amp current?
Answer
The diameter of the 14-gauge wire is smaller than th e diameter of the 12-gauge wire. Since the drift veloc ity is inversely
proportional to the cross-sectional area, the drift velocity in the 14-gauge wire is larger than the dri ft velocity in the 12gauge wire carrying the same current. The number of elec trons per cubic meter will remain constant.
Current Density
Although it is often convenient to attach a negative or positive sign to indicate the overall direction of motion of the charges,
current is a scalar quantity, It is often necessary to discuss the details of the motion of the charge, instead of discussing the
overall motion of the charges. In such cases, it is ne cessary to discuss the current density,, a vector qua ntity. The current density
is the flow of charge through an infinitesimal area, d ivided by the area. The current density must take int o account the local
magnitude and direction of the charge flow, which va ries from point to point. The unit of current density is ampere per meter
squared, and the direction is defined as the direction of net flow of positive charges through the area.
Figure: The current density is defined as the current passing through an infinitesimal cross-sectional area di vided by the
area. The direction of the current density is the dir ection of the net flow of positive charges and the ma gnitude is equal to the
current divided by the infinitesimal area.
The relationship between the current and the current density can be seen in Figure. The differential cur rent flow through the
area is found as
where is the angle between the area and the current density. The total current passing through area can be found by integrating
over the area,
Consider the magnitude of the current density, which is th e current divided by the area:
Thus, the current density is. If q is positive, is in the same direction as the elect rical field. If q is negative, is in
the opposite direction of. Either way, the direction of the current density is in the direction of the electr ical field.
The current supplied to a lamp with a 100-W light bu lb is 0.87 amps. The lamp is wired using a copper wire wit h diameter
2.588 mm (10-gauge). Find the magnitude of the current de nsity.Exercise
Example: Calculating the Current Density in a Wire

5.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83983Strategy
The current density is the current moving through a n infinitesimal cross-sectional area divided by the area. We can calculate
the magnitude of the current density using. The cu rrent is given as 0.87 A. The cross-sectional area can be calculated to
be.
Solution
Calculate the current density using the given current a nd the area, found to be.
Significance
The current density in a conducting wire depends on the current through the conducting wire and the cros s-sectional area of the
wire. For a given current, as the diameter of the wire increa ses, the charge density decreases.
The current density is proportional to the current a nd inversely proportional to the area. If the curren t density in a conducting
wire increases, what would happen to the drift velocity of th e charges in the wire?
Answer
The current density in a conducting wire increases due to an increase in current. The drift velocity is i nversely proportional
to the current, so the drift velocity would decrease.
What is the significance of the current density? Th e current density is proportional to the current, and the current is the number of
charges that pass through a cross-sectional area per second. The charges move through the conductor, ac celerated by the electric
force provided by the electrical field. The electri cal field is created when a voltage is applied across t he conductor. In Ohm’s Law,
we will use this relationship between the current dens ity and the electrical field to examine the relatio nship between the current
through a conductor and the voltage applied.
This page titled 5.4: Model of Conduction in Metals is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.3: Model of Conduction in Metals by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Exercise

5.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839665.5: Resistance and Resistivity
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the concept of resistivity.
Use resistivity to calculate the resistance of specified configurations of material.
Use the thermal coefficient of resistivity to calculate the change of resistance with temperature.
Material and Shape Dependence of Resistance
The resistance of an object depends on its shape and the material of which it is composed. The cylindrica l resistor in Figure 1 is
easy to analyze, and, by so doing, we can gain insight i nto the resistance of more complicated shapes. As you might expect, the
cylinder’s electric resistance is directly proportio nal to its length, similar to the resistance of a pi pe to fluid flow. The longer the
cylinder, the more collisions charges will make with i ts atoms. The greater the diameter of the cylinder, the more current it can
carry (again similar to the flow of fluid through a pipe). In f act, is inversely proportional to the cylinder’s cross- sectional area.
Figure: A uniform cylinder of length and cross-sectio nal area. Its resistance to the flow of current is simi lar to the
resistance posed by a pipe to fluid flow. The longer t he cylinder, the greater its resistance. The larger it s cross-sectional area, the
smaller its resistance.
For a given shape, the resistance depends on the mater ial of which the object is composed. Different material s offer different
resistance to the flow of charge. We define the resistivity of a substance so that the resistance of an object is directly
proportional to. Resistivity is an intrinsic property of a material, independent of its shape or s ize. The resistance of a uniform
cylinder of length, of cross-sectional area, and made of a material with resistivity, is
The table below gives representative values of. The materials listed in the table are separated into cat egories of conductors,
semiconductors, and insulators, based on broad grouping s of resistivities. Conductors have the smallest resisti vities, and insulators
have the largest; semiconductors have intermediate resistivities. Conductors have varying but large free c harge densities, whereas
most charges in insulators are bound to atoms and are not free to move. Semiconductors are intermediate, h aving far fewer free
charges than conductors, but having properties that m ake the number of free charges depend strongly on th e type and amount of
impurities in the semiconductor. These unique proper ties of semiconductors are put to use in modern elec tronics, as will be
explored in later chapters.
Table gives representative values of ρ. The materia ls listed in the table are separated into categorie s of conductors,
semiconductors, and insulators, based on broad grouping s of resistivities. Conductors have the smallest resisti vities, and insulators
have the largest; semiconductors have intermediate resistivities. Conductors have varying but large free c harge densities, whereas
most charges in insulators are bound to atoms and are not free to move. Semiconductors are intermediate, h aving far fewer free
charges than conductors, but having properties that m ake the number of free charges depend strongly on th e type and amount of
impurities in the semiconductor. These unique proper ties of semiconductors are put to use in modern elec tronics, as will be
explored in later chapters.
The greater the resistivity, the larger the field ne eded to produce a given current density. The lower the resistivity, the larger the
current density produced by a given electrical fiel d. Good conductors have a high conductivity and low re sistivity. Good insulatorsLearning Objectives

5.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83966have a low conductivity and a high resistivity. Table l ists resistivity and conductivity values for various mate rials.
Table: Resistivities and Conductivities of Various Mate rials at 20 °C[1] Values depend strongly on amounts and types of impurities.
Material Conductivity, Resistivity, Temperature Coefficient
Conductors
Silver 0.0038
Copper 0.0039
Gold 0.0034
Aluminum 0.0039
Tungsten 0.0045
Iron 0.0065
Platinum 0.0039
Steel
Lead
Manganin (Cu, Mn. Ni alloy) 0.000002
Constantan (Cu, Ni alloy) 0.00003
Mercury 0.0009
Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy) 0.0004
Semiconductors [1]
Carbon (pure) -0.0005
Carbon -0.0005
Germanium (pure) -0.048
Germanium -0.050
Silicon (pure) 2300 -0.075
Silicon 0.1 - 2300 -0.07
Insulators
Amber
Glass
Lucite
Mica
Quartz (fused)
Rubber (hard)
Sulfur
Teflon
Wood TM

5.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83966The materials listed in the table are separated int o categories of conductors, semiconductors, and insula tors, based on broad
groupings of resistivity. Conductors have the smalles t resistivity, and insulators have the largest; sem iconductors have intermediate
resistivity. Conductors have varying but large, free charge densities, whereas most charges in insulators are bound to atoms and are
not free to move. Semiconductors are intermediate, ha ving far fewer free charges than conductors, but havi ng properties that make
the number of free charges depend strongly on the ty pe and amount of impurities in the semiconductor. The se unique properties of
semiconductors are put to use in modern electronics, as we will explore in later chapters.
A car headlight filament is made of tungsten and has a cold resistance of 0.350Ω. If the filament is a cylinder 4.00 cm long (it
may be coiled to save space), what is its diameter?
Strategy
We can rearrange the equation to find the cross-sec tional area of the filament from the given informa tion. Then its
diameter can be found by assuming it has a circular cross-s ection.
Solution
The cross-sectional area, found by rearranging the exp ression for the resistance of a cylinder given in, is
Substituting the given values, and taking ρ from Table, yie lds
The area of a circle is related to its diameter by
Solving for the diameter, and substituting the value foun d for, gives
Discussion
The diameter is just under a tenth of a millimeter. It is quoted to only two digits, because ρ is known to only two d igits.
Temperature Variation of Resistance
The resistivity of all materials depends on temperature. Some even become superconductors (zero resistivity) a t very low
temperatures. (See Figure 2.) Conversely, the resistiv ity of conductors increases with increasing temperat ure. Since the atoms
vibrate more rapidly and over larger distances at h igher temperatures, the electrons moving through a m etal make more collisions,
effectively making the resistivity higher. Over rela tively small temperature changes (about or less), resi stivity varies with
temperature change as expressed in the following equatio n
where is the original resistivity and is the temperature coefficient of resistivity. (See the values of in the table below.) For
larger temperature changes, may vary or a nonlinear equation may be needed to find. Note that is posit ive for metals,
meaning their resistivity increases with temperature. Som e alloys have been developed specifically to have a small temperature
dependence. Manganin (which is made of copper, mangan ese and nickel), for example, has close to zero (to three digits on the
scale in the table), and so its resistivity varies onl y slightly with temperature. This is useful for making a temperature-independent
resistance standard, for example.Example:Calculating Resistor Diameter: A Headlight Filament

5.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83966
Figure: The resistance of a sample of mercury is zero a t very low temperatures—it is a superconductor up to a bout 4.2 K.
Above that critical temperature, its resistance makes a sudden jump and then increases nearly linearly with t emperature.
Table: Tempature Coefficients of Resistivity α
Material Coefficient α(1/°C)
Conductors
Silver
Copper
Gold
Aluminum
Tungsten
Iron
Platinum
Lead
Manganin (Cu, Mn, Ni alloy)
Constantan (Cu, Ni, alloy)
Mercury
Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy)
Semiconductors
Carbon (pure)
Germanium (pure)
Silicon (pure)
Note also that is negative for the semiconductors lis ted in the table, meaning that their resistivity de creases with increasing
temperature. They become better conductors at higher temperature, because increased thermal agitation incr eases the number of
free charges available to carry current. This proper ty of decreasing with temperature is also related to the type and amount of
impurities present in the semiconductors.
The resistance of an object also depends on tempera ture, since is directly proportional to. For a cyli nder we know,
and so, if and do not change greatly with temperat ure, will have the same temperature dependence as. (Examination of the
coefficients of linear expansion shows them to be abou t two orders of magnitude less than typical temperatu re coefficients of
resistivity, and so the effect of temperature on and is about two orders of magnitude less than on.) Thus,

5.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83966is the temperature dependence of the resistance of an object, where is the original resistance and is the resistance after a
temperature change. Numerous thermometers are based on the effect of temperature on resistance. (See Figure 3.) One of the
most common is the thermistor, a semiconductor crysta l with a strong temperature dependence, the resistance of which is measured
to obtain its temperature. The device is small, so that it quickly comes into thermal equilibrium with the par t of a person it touches.
Figure:These familiar thermometers are based on the au tomated measurement of a thermistor’s temperature-depe ndent
resistance. (credit: Biol, Wikimedia Commons)
Although caution must be used in applying and for temperature changes greater than
, for tungsten the equations work reasonably well for very large temperature changes. What, then, is the re sistance of the
tungsten filament in the previous example if its temp erature is increased from room temperature () to a t ypical operating
temperature of?
Strategy
This is a straightforward application of, since the o riginal resistance of the filament was givent o eb
, and the temperature change is.
Solution
The hot resistance is obtained by entering known val ues into the above equation:
Discussion
This value is consistent with the headlight resistance examp le in 20.3.
Learn about the physics of resistance in a wire. Chang e its resistivity, length, and area to see how they a ffect the wire's
resistance. The sizes of the symbols in the equation change along with the diagram of a wire.
Figure: Resistance in a Wire
Summary
The resistance of a cylinder of length and cross-sectio nal area is, where is the resistivity of the material.
Values of in the Table show that materials fall into t hree groups— conductors, semiconductors, and insulators.
Temperature affects resistivity; for relatively small t emperature changes, resistivity is is the
original resistivity and is the temperature coeffici ent of resistivity.
The Table gives values for, the temperature coefficie nt of resistivity.Example:Calculating Resistance: Hot-Filament Resistance:
PHET EXPLORATIONS: RESISTANCE IN A WIRE

5.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83966The resistance of an object also varies with temperature:, wh ere is the original resistance, and is the
resistance after the temperature change.
Footnotes
1 Values depend strongly on amounts and types of impuriti es
2 Values at 20°C.
Glossary
resistivity
an intrinsic property of a material, independent of its shape or size, directly proportional to the resistance, den oted by ρ
temperature coefficient of resistivity
an empirical quantity, denoted by α, which describes the change in resistance or resistivity o f a material with temperature
This page titled 5.5: Resistance and Resistivity is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
20.3: Resistance and Resistivity by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.
9.4: Resistivity and Resistance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

5.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839845.6: Resistivity and Resistance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Differentiate between resistance and resistivity
Define the term conductivity
Describe the electrical component known as a resistor
State the relationship between resistance of a resistor and i ts length, cross-sectional area, and resistivity
State the relationship between resistivity and temperature
What drives current? We can think of various devices—s uch as batteries, generators, wall outlets, and so on—tha t are necessary to
maintain a current. All such devices create a potent ial difference and are referred to as voltage source s. When a voltage source is
connected to a conductor, it applies a potential di fference V that creates an electrical field. The electrical fi eld, in turn, exerts force
on free charges, causing current. The amount of curr ent depends not only on the magnitude of the voltag e, but also on the
characteristics of the material that the current is flowing through. The material can resist the flow of the charges, and the measure
of how much a material resists the flow of charges is known as the resistivity. This resistivity is crudely analogous to the fricti on
between two materials that resists motion.
Resistivity
When a voltage is applied to a conductor, an electri cal field is created, and charges in the conductor feel a force due to the
electrical field. The current density that results d epends on the electrical field and the properties of the material. This dependence
can be very complex. In some materials, including me tals at a given temperature, the current density is a pproximately proportional
to the electrical field. In these cases, the current den sity can be modeled as
where is the electrical conductivity. The electrical conductivity is analogous to therm al conductivity and is a measure of a
material’s ability to conduct or transmit electricit y. Conductors have a higher electrical conductivity than insulators. Since the
electrical conductivity is, the units are
Here, we define a unit named the ohm with the Greek symbol uppercase omega,. The unit is named after Georg Simon Ohm,
whom we will discuss later in this chapter. The is use d to avoid confusion with the number 0. One ohm equals one volt per amp:
. The units of electrical conductivity are therefore.
Conductivity is an intrinsic property of a material. Another intrinsic property of a material is the resi stivity, or electrical resistivity.
The resistivity of a material is a measure of how str ongly a material opposes the flow of electrical curr ent. The symbol for
resistivity is the lowercase Greek letter rho,, and resist ivity is the reciprocal of electrical conductivity:
The unit of resistivity in SI units is the ohm-meter. We can define the resistivity in terms of the elect rical field and the
current density.
The greater the resistivity, the larger the field ne eded to produce a given current density. The lower the resistivity, the larger the
current density produced by a given electrical fiel d. Good conductors have a high conductivity and low re sistivity. Good insulators
have a low conductivity and a high resistivity. Table l ists resistivity and conductivity values for various mate rials.
Table: Resistivities and Conductivities of Various Mate rials at 20 °C[1] Values depend strongly on amounts and types of impurities.Learning Objectives

5.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83984Material Conductivity, Resistivity, Temperature Coefficient
Conductors
Silver 0.0038
Copper 0.0039
Gold 0.0034
Aluminum 0.0039
Tungsten 0.0045
Iron 0.0065
Platinum 0.0039
Steel
Lead
Manganin (Cu, Mn. Ni alloy) 0.000002
Constantan (Cu, Ni alloy) 0.00003
Mercury 0.0009
Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy) 0.0004
Semiconductors [1]
Carbon (pure) -0.0005
Carbon -0.0005
Germanium (pure) -0.048
Germanium -0.050
Silicon (pure) 2300 -0.075
Silicon 0.1 - 2300 -0.07
Insulators
Amber
Glass
Lucite
Mica
Quartz (fused)
Rubber (hard)
Sulfur
Teflon
Wood TM

5.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83984The materials listed in the table are separated int o categories of conductors, semiconductors, and insula tors, based on broad
groupings of resistivity. Conductors have the smalles t resistivity, and insulators have the largest; sem iconductors have intermediate
resistivity. Conductors have varying but large, free charge densities, whereas most charges in insulators are bound to atoms and are
not free to move. Semiconductors are intermediate, ha ving far fewer free charges than conductors, but havi ng properties that make
the number of free charges depend strongly on the ty pe and amount of impurities in the semiconductor. The se unique properties of
semiconductors are put to use in modern electronics, as we will explore in later chapters.
Calculate the current density, resistance, and electric al field of a 5-m length of copper wire with a diamet er of 2.053 mm (12gauge) carrying a current of.
Strategy
We can calculate the current density by first findin g the cross-sectional area of the wire, which is, and the
definition of current density. The resistance can be found using the length of the wire, the area, an d the
resistivity of copper, where. The resistivity and current density can be used to find the electrical
field.
Solution
First, we calculate the current density:
The resistance of the wire is
Finally, we can find the electrical field:
Significance
From these results, it is not surprising that copper is used for wires for carrying current because the resist ance is quite small.
Note that the current density and electrical field a re independent of the length of the wire, but the vo ltage depends on the
length.
Copper wires use routinely used for extension cords a nd house wiring for several reasons. Copper has the hi ghest electrical
conductivity rating, and therefore the lowest resisti vity rating, of all nonprecious metals. Also important is the tensile strength,
where the tensile strength is a measure of the force required to pull an object to the point where it bre aks. The tensile strength
of a material is the maximum amount of tensile stre ss it can take before breaking. Copper has a high tens ile strength, Example: Current Density, Resistance, and Electrical field for a Current-Carrying Wire
Exercise

5.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83984. A third important characteristic is ductility. Ductil ity is a measure of a material’s ability to be drawn i nto wires and a
measure of the flexibility of the material, and copp er has a high ductility. Summarizing, for a conductor to be a suitable
candidate for making wire, there are at least three i mportant characteristics: low resistivity, high tensi le strength, and high
ductility. What other materials are used for wiring and what are the advantages and disadvantages?
Answer
Silver, gold, and aluminum are all used for making wir es. All four materials have a high conductivity, silve r having the
highest. All four can easily be drawn into wires and hav e a high tensile strength, though not as high as cop per. The obvious
disadvantage of gold and silver is the cost, but silv er and gold wires are used for special applications, such as speaker wires.
Gold does not oxidize, making better connections betwe en components. Aluminum wires do have their drawbacks.
Aluminum has a higher resistivity than copper, so a la rger diameter is needed to match the resistance per le ngth of copper
wires, but aluminum is cheaper than copper, so this is not a major drawback. Aluminum wires do not have as hi gh of a
ductility and tensile strength as copper, but the duc tility and tensile strength is within acceptable leve ls. There are a few
concerns that must be addressed in using aluminum a nd care must be used when making connections. Aluminum has a
higher rate of thermal expansion than copper, which can lead to loose connections and a possible fire haz ard. The oxidation
of aluminum does not conduct and can cause problems. Spe cial techniques must be used when using aluminum wires and
components, such as electrical outlets, must be designed t o accept aluminum wires.
Temperature Dependence of Resistivity
Looking back at Table, you will see a column labele d “Temperature Coefficient.” The resistivity of some materials has a
strong temperature dependence. In some materials, su ch as copper, the resistivity increases with increasi ng temperature. In fact, in
most conducting metals, the resistivity increases with increasing temperature. The increasing temperature ca uses increased
vibrations of the atoms in the lattice structure of the metals, which impede the motion of the electron s. In other materials, such as
carbon, the resistivity decreases with increasing tempera ture. In many materials, the dependence is approximate ly linear and can be
modeled using a linear equation:
where is the resistivity of the material at temperat ure T, is the temperature coefficient of the material, and is the resistivity at
, usually taken as.
Note also that the temperature coefficient is negati ve for the semiconductors listed in Table, meaning that their resistivity
decreases with increasing temperature. They become b etter conductors at higher temperature, because inc reased thermal agitation
increases the number of free charges available to ca rry current. This property of decreasing with temperat ure is also related to the
type and amount of impurities present in the semiconduct ors.
Resistance
We now consider the resistance of a wire or component. The resistance is a measure of how difficult it is to pass current through a
wire or component. Resistance depends on the resistivi ty. The resistivity is a characteristic of the materia l used to fabricate a wire
or other electrical component, whereas the resistance is a characteristic of the wire or component.
To calculate the resistance, consider a section of c onducting wire with cross-sectional area A, length L, and resistivity. A battery
is connected across the conductor, providing a pote ntial difference across it (Figure). The potential di fference produces an
electrical field that is proportional to the current d ensity, according to.

5.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83984
Figure: A potential provided by a battery is applied to a segment of a conductor with a cross-sectional are a and a length.
The magnitude of the electrical field across the seg ment of the conductor is equal to the voltage divide d by the length,,
and the magnitude of the current density is equal t o the current divided by the cross-sectional area,. Using this information
and recalling that the electrical field is proporti onal to the resistivity and the current density, we c an see that the voltage is
proportional to the current:
The ratio of the voltage to the current is defined as the resistance:
The resistance of a cylindrical segment of a conducto r is equal to the resistivity of the material times the length divided by the
area:
The unit of resistance is the ohm,. For a given voltage, the higher the resistance, the lower the current.
Resistors
A common component in electronic circuits is the re sistor. The resistor can be used to reduce current fl ow or provide a voltage
drop. Figure shows the symbols used for a resistor in sc hematic diagrams of a circuit. Two commonly used stan dards for
circuit diagrams are provided by the American National Standard Institute (ANSI, pronounced “AN-see”) and the In ternational
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). Both systems are commonly used. We use the ANSI standard in this text fo r its visual
recognition, but we note that for larger, more comple x circuits, the IEC standard may have a cleaner pre sentation, making it easier
to read.
Figure: Symbols for a resistor used in circuit diagrams. (a) The ANSI symbol; (b) the IEC symbol.
Material and shape dependence of resistance
A resistor can be modeled as a cylinder with a cross-s ectional area A and a length L, made of a material with a resistivity (Figure
). The resistance of the resistor is Definition: Resistance

5.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83984
Figure: A model of a resistor as a uniform cylinder of length L and cross-sectional area A. Its resistance to the flow of current
is analogous to the resistance posed by a pipe to fluid flow. The longer the cylinder, the greater its resista nce. The larger its crosssectional area A, the smaller its resistance.
The most common material used to make a resistor is carbon. A carbon track is wrapped around a ceramic co re, and two copper
leads are attached. A second type of resistor is the me tal film resistor, which also has a ceramic core. The track is made from a
metal oxide material, which has semiconductive prope rties similar to carbon. Again, copper leads are insert ed into the ends of the
resistor. The resistor is then painted and marked for id entification. A resistor has four colored bands, as shown i n Figure.
Figure: Many resistors resemble the figure shown above. The four bands are used to identify the resistor. The f irst two colored
bands represent the first two digits of the resistance of the resistor. The third color is the multiplier. The fourth color represents the
tolerance of the resistor. The resistor shown has a resista nce of
Resistances range over many orders of magnitude. Som e ceramic insulators, such as those used to support po wer lines, have
resistances of or more. A dry person may have a ha nd-to-foot resistance of whereas the resistance of t he human heart is
about A meter-long piece of large-diameter copper wire may have a resistance of, and superconductors ha ve no
resistance at all at low temperatures. As we have seen, resistance is related to the shape of an object and the material of which it is
composed.
The resistance of an object also depends on temperatu re, since is directly proportional to. For a cylin der, we know, so
if L and A do not change greatly with temperature, R has the same temperature dependence as. (Examinati on of the coefficients
of linear expansion shows them to be about two orders of magnitude less than typical temperature coeffic ients of resistivity, so the
effect of temperature on L and A is about two orders of magnitude less than on.) Thus,
is the temperature dependence of the resistance of an object, where is the original resistance (usually taken to be
and R is the resistance after a temperature change. The color code gives the resistance of the resistor at a temperature of
Numerous thermometers are based on the effect of tempe rature on resistance (Figure). One of the most common thermometers
is based on the thermistor, a semiconductor crystal with a strong temperature dependence, the resistance o f which is measured to
obtain its temperature. The device is small, so that it quickly comes into thermal equilibrium with the part o f a person it touches.

5.6.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83984
Figure: These familiar thermometers are based on the a utomated measurement of a thermistor’s temperature-dep endent
resistance.
Although caution must be used in applying and for temperature changes greater than,
for tungsten, the equations work reasonably well for ve ry large temperature changes. A tungsten filament a t has a
resistance of. What would the resistance be if the tempe rature is increased to?
Strategy
This is a straightforward application of Equation, sin ce the original resistance of the filament is given as and
the temperature change is.
Solution
The resistance of the hotter filament is obtained by en tering known values into the above equation:
Significance
Notice that the resistance changes by more than a fac tor of 10 as the filament warms to the high temperat ure and the current
through the filament depends on the resistance of the filament and the voltage applied. If the filament is used in an
incandescent light bulb, the initial current throug h the filament when the bulb is first energized will be higher than the current
after the filament reaches the operating temperature.
A strain gauge is an electrical device to measure st rain, as shown below. It consists of a flexible, insulating backing that
supports a conduction foil pattern. The resistance of the foil changes as the backing is stretched. How doe s the strain gauge
resistance change? Is the strain gauge affected by temp erature changes?Example: Calculating Resistance
Exercise

5.6.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83984
Answer
The foil pattern stretches as the backing stretches, and the foil tracks become longer and thinner. Since the resistance is
calculated as, the resistance increases as the foi l tracks are stretched. When the temperature changes, so does the
resistivity of the foil tracks, changing the resistan ce. One way to combat this is to use two strain gauges, one used as a
reference and the other used to measure the strain. The t wo strain gauges are kept at a constant temperature
Long cables can sometimes act like antennas, picking up electronic noise, which are signals from other equi pment and
appliances. Coaxial cables are used for many applicat ions that require this noise to be eliminated. For exa mple, they can be
found in the home in cable TV connections or other a udiovisual connections. Coaxial cables consist of an i nner conductor of
radius surrounded by a second, outer concentric cond uctor with radius (Figure). The space between the two i s
normally filled with an insulator such as polyethylene plastic. A small amount of radial leakage current o ccurs between the two
conductors. Determine the resistance of a coaxial cable of length L.
Figure: Coaxial cables consist of two concentric condu ctors separated by insulation. They are often used in c able TV or
other audiovisual connections.
Strategy
We cannot use the equation directly. Instead, we look a t concentric cylindrical shells, with thickness dr, and integrate.
Solution
We first find an expression for and then integrate from to,The Resistance of Coaxial Cable

5.6.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83984Integrating both sides
Significance
The resistance of a coaxial cable depends on its lengt h, the inner and outer radii, and the resistivity of the material separating
the two conductors. Since this resistance is not infini te, a small leakage current occurs between the two co nductors. This
leakage current leads to the attenuation (or weakening) of the signal being sent through the cable.
The resistance between the two conductors of a coaxial cable depends on the resistivity of the material se parating the two
conductors, the length of the cable and the inner a nd outer radius of the two conductor. If you are design ing a coaxial cable,
how does the resistance between the two conductors depend on these variables?
Answer
The longer the length, the smaller the resistance. T he greater the resistivity, the higher the resistanc e. The larger the
difference between the outer radius and the inner rad ius, that is, the greater the ratio between the two, th e greater the
resistance. If you are attempting to maximize the re sistance, the choice of the values for these variable s will depend on the
application. For example, if the cable must be flexible, the choice of materials may be limited.
This page titled 5.6: Resistivity and Resistance is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.4: Resistivity and Resistance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.Exercise

5.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839855.7: Ohm's Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe Ohm’s law
Recognize when Ohm’s law applies and when it does not
We have been discussing three electrical properties so far in this chapter: current, voltage, and resista nce. It turns out that many
materials exhibit a simple relationship among the v alues for these properties, known as Ohm’s law. Many othe r materials do not
show this relationship, so despite being called Ohm’s l aw, it is not considered a law of nature, like Newton’s l aws or the laws of
thermodynamics. But it is very useful for calculations invol ving materials that do obey Ohm’s law.
Description of Ohm’s Law
The current that flows through most substances is dir ectly proportional to the voltage V applied to it. The German physicist Georg
Simon Ohm (1787–1854) was the first to demonstrate experiment ally that the current in a metal wire is directly proportional to
the voltage applied:
This important relationship is the basis for Ohm’s law. It can be viewed as a cause-and-effect relationship, with voltage the cause
and current the effect. This is an empirical law, whi ch is to say that it is an experimentally observed phenomenon, like friction.
Such a linear relationship doesn’t always occur. Any ma terial, component, or device that obeys Ohm’s law, wher e the current
through the device is proportional to the voltage a pplied, is known as an ohmic material or ohmic component. Any material or
component that does not obey Ohm’s law is known as a nonohmic material or nonohmic component.
Ohm’s Experiment
In a paper published in 1827, Georg Ohm described an e xperiment in which he measured voltage across and curr ent through
various simple electrical circuits containing variou s lengths of wire. A similar experiment is shown in Figu re. This experiment
is used to observe the current through a resistor th at results from an applied voltage. In this simple c ircuit, a resistor is connected in
series with a battery. The voltage is measured with a vo ltmeter, which must be placed across the resistor (in parallel with the
resistor). The current is measured with an ammeter, which m ust be in line with the resistor (in series with the resistor).
Figure: The experimental set-up used to determine if a resistor is an ohmic or nonohmic device. (a) When th e battery is
attached, the current flows in the clockwise directio n and the voltmeter and ammeter have positive readin gs. (b) When the leads of
the battery are switched, the current flows in the co unterclockwise direction and the voltmeter and ammet er have negative readings.
In this updated version of Ohm’s original experiment, several measurements of the current were made for sev eral different
voltages. When the battery was hooked up as in Figure, the current flowed in the clockwise direction and th e readings of the
voltmeter and ammeter were positive. Does the behavior of the current change if the current flowed in the opposite direction? ToLearning Objectives

5.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83985get the current to flow in the opposite direction, t he leads of the battery can be switched. When the lead s of the battery were
switched, the readings of the voltmeter and ammeter readings were negative because the current flowed in t he opposite direction, in
this case, counterclockwise. Results of a similar experiment are shown in Figure.
Figure: A resistor is placed in a circuit with a batte ry. The voltage applied varies from −10.00 V to +10. 00 V, increased by
1.00-V increments. A plot shows values of the voltage v ersus the current typical of what a casual experimente r might find.
In this experiment, the voltage applied across the r esistor varies from −10.00 to +10.00 V, by increments of 1.00 V. The current
through the resistor and the voltage across the resistor are measured. A plot is made of the voltage versus the current, and the result
is approximately linear. The slope of the line is th e resistance, or the voltage divided by the current. This result is known as Ohm’s
law:
where V is the voltage measured in volts across the object in question, I is the current measured through the object in amps, and R
is the resistance in units of ohms. As stated previou sly, any device that shows a linear relationship betwe en the voltage and the
current is known as an ohmic device. A resistor is therefo re an ohmic device.
A carbon resistor at room temperature is attached to a 9.00-V battery and the current measured through the resistor is
3.00 mA. (a) What is the resistance of the resistor mea sured in ohms? (b) If the temperature of the resist or is increased to
by heating the resistor, what is the current through the resistor?
Strategy
(a) The resistance can be found using Ohm’s law. Ohm’s law st ates that, so the resistance can be found using.
(b) First, the resistance is temperature dependent so the new resistance after the resistor has been heat ed can be found using
. The current can be found using Ohm’s law in the form.
Solution
1. Using Ohm’s law and solving for the resistance yields the resistance at room temperature:
2. The resistance at can be found using where the temper ature coefficient for carbon is.Example: Measuring Resistance

5.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83985The current through the heated resistor is
Significance
A change in temperature of resulted in a 2.00% cha nge in current. This may not seem like a very great change, but
changing electrical characteristics can have a strong effect on the circuits. For this reason, many electro nic appliances, such as
computers, contain fans to remove the heat dissipated by c omponents in the electric circuits.
The voltage supplied to your house varies as. If a r esistor is connected across this voltage, will Ohm’s
law still be valid?
Answer
Yes, Ohm’s law is still valid. At every point in time the current is equal to, so the current is also a function of
time,.
Nonohmic devices do not exhibit a linear relationship between the voltage and the current. One such device is the semiconducting
circuit element known as a diode. A diode is a circuit device that allows current fl ow in only one direction. A diagram of a simple
circuit consisting of a battery, a diode, and a resi stor is shown in Figure. Although we do not cover the th eory of the diode in
this section, the diode can be tested to see if it is an ohmi c or a nonohmic device.
Figure: A diode is a semiconducting device that allow s current flow only if the diode is forward biased, wh ich means that the
anode is positive and the cathode is negative.
A plot of current versus voltage is shown in Figure. Not e that the behavior of the diode is shown as current ve rsus voltage,
whereas the resistor operation was shown as voltage vers us current. A diode consists of an anode and a cath ode. When the anode is
at a negative potential and the cathode is at a posi tive potential, as shown in part (a), the diode is s aid to have reverse bias. With
reverse bias, the diode has an extremely large resista nce and there is very little current flow—essentially zero current—through the
diode and the resistor. As the voltage applied to the circuit increases, the current remains essentially z ero, until the voltage reaches
the breakdown voltage and the diode conducts current. When the battery and the potential across the diod e are reversed, making the
anode positive and the cathode negative, the diode conducts and current flows through the diode if the vo ltage is greater than 0.7 V.
The resistance of the diode is close to zero. (This i s the reason for the resistor in the circuit; if it wer e not there, the current would
become very large.) You can see from the graph in Fig ure that the voltage and the current do not have a linear relationship.
Thus, the diode is an example of a nonohmic device.Exercise

5.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83985
Figure: When the voltage across the diode is negative and small, there is very little current flow through the diode. As the
voltage reaches the breakdown voltage, the diode con ducts. When the voltage across the diode is positive and greater than 0.7 V
(the actual voltage value depends on the diode), the diode conducts. As the voltage applied increases, the current through the diode
increases, but the voltage across the diode remains appr oximately 0.7 V.
Ohm’s law is commonly stated as, but originally it was s tated as a microscopic view, in terms of the curren t density, the
conductivity, and the electrical field. This microsco pic view suggests the proportionality comes from th e drift velocity of the
free electrons in the metal that results from an ap plied electrical field. As stated earlier, the current density is proportional to the
applied electrical field. The reformulation of Ohm’s l aw is credited to Gustav Kirchhoff, whose name we will see again in the next
chapter.
This page titled 5.7: Ohm's Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
9.5: Ohm's Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

5.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839675.8: Electric Power and Energy
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the power dissipated by a resistor and power suppl ied by a power supply.
Calculate the cost of electricity under various circums tances.
Express electrical power in terms of the voltage and the cu rrent
Describe the power dissipated by a resistor in an electric circuit
Calculate the energy efficiency and cost effectiveness of appliances and equipment
In an electric circuit, electrical energy is continu ously converted into other forms of energy. For exampl e, when a current flows in a
conductor, electrical energy is converted into therma l energy within the conductor. The electrical field, supplied by the voltage
source, accelerates the free electrons, increasing the ir kinetic energy for a short time. This increased kin etic energy is converted into
thermal energy through collisions with the ions of the lattice structure of the conductor. Power is defined as the rate at which work
is done by a force and is measured in watts. Power can also be defined as the rate at which energy is transf erred. In this section, we
discuss the time rate of energy transfer, or power, in an e lectric circuit.
Power in Electric Circuits
Knowing that power is the rate of energy use or energy conv ersion, what is the expression for electric power?
Let us compare a 25-W bulb with a 60-W bulb (Figure). The 60-W bulb glows brighter than the 25-W bulb. Altho ugh it is
not shown, a 60-W light bulb is also warmer than the 25 -W bulb. The heat and light is produced by from the c onversion of
electrical energy. The kinetic energy lost by the el ectrons in collisions is converted into the internal energy of the conductor and
radiation. How are voltage, current, and resistance relate d to electric power?
Figure: (a) Pictured above are two incandescent bulbs: a 25-W bulb (left) and a 60-W bulb (right). The 60 -W bulb provides a
higher intensity light than the 25-W bulb. The elect rical energy supplied to the light bulbs is converted into heat and light. (b) This
compact fluorescent light (CFL) bulb puts out the same intensity of light as the 60-W bulb, but at 1/4 to 1 /10 the input power.
(credit a: modification of works by “Dickbauch”/Wiki media Commons and Greg Westfall; credit b: modificati on of work by
“dbgg1979”/Flickr)
Electric energy depends on both the voltage involved and the charge moved. This is expressed most simply as, where is
the charge moved and is the voltage (or more precis ely, the potential difference the charge moves throu gh). Power is the rate at
which energy is moved, and so electric power isLearning Objectives

5.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83967Recognizing that current is (note that here), the exp ression for power becomes
Electric power () is simply the product of current ti mes voltage. Power has familiar units of watts. Since the SI unit for potential
energy (PE) is the joule, power has units of joules pe r second, or watts. Thus,. For example, cars often have one or
more auxiliary power outlets with which you can charge a cell phone or other electronic devices. These out lets may be rated at 20
A, so that the circuit can deliver a maximum power. In some applications, electric power may be
expressed as volt-amperes or even kilovolt-amperes ().
To see the relationship of power to resistance, we com bine Ohm’s law with. Substituting Ohm Law () into
Equation gives
Similarly, substituting gives
Three expressions for electric power are listed together here for convenience:
Note that the first equation is always valid, whereas th e other two can be used only for resistors. In a simple circuit, with one
voltage source and a single resistor, the power supplied by the voltage source and that dissipated by the re sistor are identical. (In
more complicated circuits, can be the power dissipated b y a single device and not the total power in the circui t.)
The electric power gained or lost by any device has the fo rm
The power dissipated by a resistor has the form
Different insights can be gained from the three diff erent expressions for electric power. For example, imp lies that the
lower the resistance connected to a given voltage sou rce, the greater the power delivered. Furthermore, si nce voltage is squared in
, the effect of applying a higher voltage is perhap s greater than expected. Thus, when the voltage is doub led to a 25-W
bulb, its power nearly quadruples to about 100 W, burn ing it out. If the bulb’s resistance remained constant, its power would be
exactly 100 W, but at the higher temperature its resista nce is higher, too.
(a) Consider the examples given in 20.3 and 20.4. Then find the power dissipated by the car headlight in the se examples, both
when it is hot and when it is cold.
Strategy
For the hot headlight, we know voltage and current, so we can use to find the power. For the cold headlight, we know
the voltage and resistance, so we can use to find the power.
Solution
Entering the known values of current and voltage for the hot headlight, we obtainDefinition: Electric Power
Example: Calculating Power Dissipation and Current: Hot and Cold Power

5.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83967The cold resistance was, and so the power it uses when first switched on is
Discussion
The 30 W dissipated by the hot headlight is typical. But the 411 W when cold is surprisingly higher. The i nitial power quickly
decreases as the bulb’s temperature increases and its r esistance increases.
(b) What current does it draw when cold?
Solution
The current when the bulb is cold can be found sever al different ways. We rearrange one of the power equa tions,, and
enter known values, obtaining
Discussion
The cold current is remarkably higher than the stea dy-state value of 2.50 A, but the current will quickl y decline to that value as
the bulb’s temperature increases. Most fuses and circui t breakers (used to limit the current in a circuit) are designed to tolerate
very high currents briefly as a device comes on. In so me cases, such as with electric motors, the current re mains high for
several seconds, necessitating special “slow blow” fuses.
A DC winch motor is rated at 20.00 A with a voltage of 1 15 V. When the motor is running at its maximum power, it can lift an
object with a weight of 4900.00 N a distance of 10.00 m, in 30.00 s, at a constant speed.
a. What is the power consumed by the motor?
b. What is the power used in lifting the object? Ignore air resistance. (c) Assuming that the difference in the p ower consumed
by the motor and the power used lifting the object are dissi pated as heat by the resistance of the motor, estimate th e
resistance of the motor?
Strategy
a. The power consumed by the motor can be found using.
b. The power used in lifting the object at a constant spee d can be found using, where the speed is the distance divid ed
by the time. The upward force supplied by the motor is equa l to the weight of the object because the acceleration i s zero. (c)
The resistance of the motor can be found using.
Solution
1. The power consumed by the motor is equal to and the cur rent is given as 20.00 A and the voltage is 115.00 V:
2. The power used lifting the object is equal to where th e force is equal to the weight of the object (1960 N) and the
magnitude of the velocity is
3. The difference in the power equals and the resistan ce can be found using:Example: Calculating Power in Electric Devices

5.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83967Significance The resistance of the motor is quite smal l. The resistance of the motor is due to many windings of copper wire.
The power dissipated by the motor can be significant since the thermal power dissipated by the motor is p roportional to the
square of the current.
A fuse (Figure) is a device that protects a circuit f rom currents that are too high. A fuse is basically a s hort piece of wire
between two contacts. As we have seen, when a current is ru nning through a conductor, the kinetic energy of the charge carriers is
converted into thermal energy in the conductor. The piece of wire in the fuse is under tension and has a l ow melting point. The wire
is designed to heat up and break at the rated curren t. The fuse is destroyed and must be replaced, but it protects the rest of the
circuit. Fuses act quickly, but there is a small time dela y while the wire heats up and breaks.
Figure: A fuse consists of a piece of wire between two contacts. When a current passes through the wire that i s greater than the
rated current, the wire melts, breaking the connecti on. Pictured is a “blown” fuse where the wire broke pr otecting a circuit (credit:
modification of work by “Shardayyy”/Flickr).
Circuit breakers are also rated for a maximum curren t, and open to protect the circuit, but can be reset. Circuit breakers react much
faster. The operation of circuit breakers is not with in the scope of this chapter and will be discussed in l ater chapters. Another
method of protecting equipment and people is the gr ound fault circuit interrupter (GFCI), which is common in bathrooms and
kitchens. The GFCI outlets respond very quickly to chan ges in current. These outlets open when there is a c hange in magnetic field
produced by current-carrying conductors, which is also beyond the scope of this chapter and is covered in a la ter chapter.
The Cost of Electricity
The more electric appliances you use and the longer they are left on, the higher your electric bill. T his familiar fact is based on the
relationship between energy and power. You pay for the ene rgy used. Since, we see that
is the energy used by a device using power for a tim e interval. For example, the more lightbulbs burning, the greater used; the
longer they are on, the greater is. The energy unit on electric bills is the killowatt-hour (), consist ent with the relationship
. It is easy to estimate the cost of operating electr ic appliances if you have some idea of their power c onsumption rate in
watts or kilowatts, the time they are on in hours, and t he cost per kilowatt-hour for your electric utility. Kilowatt-hours, like all
other specialized energy units such as food calories, c an be converted to joules. You can prove to yourself t hat.
The electric energy () used can be reduced either by reducing the time of use or by reducing the power consumption of that
appliance or fixture. This will not only reduce the c ost, but it will also result in a reduced impact on th e environment.
Improvements to lighting are some of the fastest ways to reduce the electrical energy used in a home or b usiness. About 20% of a
home’s use of energy goes to lighting, while the number for commercial establishments is closer to 40%. Fluo rescent lights are
about four times more efficient than incandescent li ghts—this is true for both the long tubes and the comp act fluorescent lights
(CFL). (See Figure 1b.) Thus, a 60-W incandescent bulb can be replaced by a 15-W CFL, which has the same bright ness and color.
CFLs have a bent tube inside a globe or a spiral-shap ed tube, all connected to a standard screw-in base tha t fits standard
incandescent light sockets. (Original problems with c olor, flicker, shape, and high initial investment fo r CFLs have been addressed
in recent years.) The heat transfer from these CFLs i s less, and they last up to 10 times longer. The sign ificance of an investment in
such bulbs is addressed in the next example. New white L ED lights (which are clusters of small LED bulbs) are e ven more efficient
(twice that of CFLs) and last 5 times longer than CFLs. However, t heir cost is still high.

5.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83967The relationship is one that you will find useful i n many different contexts. The energy your body use s in exercise is
related to the power level and duration of your acti vity, for example. The amount of heating by a power s ource is related to the
power level and time it is applied. Even the radiation dos e of an X-ray image is related to the power and time of exposu re.
(a) If the cost of electricity in your area is 12 c ents per kWh, what is the total cost (capital plus op eration) of using a 60-W
incandescent bulb for 1000 hours (the lifetime of that bu lb) if the bulb cost 25 cents?
Strategy
To find the operating cost, we first find the energy used in kilowatt-hours and then multiply by the cost per kilowatt-ho ur.
Solution
The energy used in kilowatt-hours is found by entering the power and time into the expression for energy:
In kilowatt-hours, this is \]E = 60.0 kW \cdot h.\] Now th e electricity cost is
The total cost will be $7.20 for 1000 hours (about one- half year at 5 hours per day).
(b) If we replace this bulb with a compact fluorescen t light that provides the same light output, but at one-quarter the wattage,
and which costs $1.50 but lasts 10 times longer (10,000 h ours), what will that total cost be?
Solution
Since the CFL uses only 15 W and not 60 W, the electric ity cost will be $7.20/4 = $1.80. The CFL will last 10 t imes longer
than the incandescent, so that the investment cost wi ll be 1/10 of the bulb cost for that time period of use, or 0.1($1.50) =
$0.15. Therefore, the total cost will be $1.95 for 1000 hou rs.
Discussion
Therefore, it is much cheaper to use the CFLs, even t hough the initial investment is higher. The increased cost of labor that a
business must include for replacing the incandescent bul bs more often has not been figured in here.
The heat transfer from these CFLs is less, and they la st up to 10 times longer than incandescent bulbs. The si gnificance of an
investment in such bulbs is addressed in the next exa mple. New white LED lights (which are clusters of small LED bulbs) are even
more efficient (twice that of CFLs) and last five times lo nger than CFLs.
The typical replacement for a 100-W incandescent bu lb is a 20-W LED bulb. The 20-W LED bulb can provide the same
amount of light output as the 100-W incandescent li ght bulb. What is the cost savings for using the LED bulb in place of the
incandescent bulb for one year, assuming $0.10 per ki lowatt-hour is the average energy rate charged by the power company?
Assume that the bulb is turned on for three hours a day.
Strategy
a. Calculate the energy used during the year for each bul b, using.
b. Multiply the energy by the cost.
Solution
a. Calculate the power for each bulb.Making Connections: Energy, Power, and Time
Example: Calculating the Cost Effectiveness of Compact Fluorescent Lights (CFL)
Example \(\PageIndex{4\): Calculating the Cost Effectiveness of LED Bulb

5.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83967b. Calculate the cost for each.
Significance
A LED bulb uses 80% less energy than the incandescent bulb, saving $8.76 over the incandescent bulb for one year. The LED
bulb can cost $20.00 and the 100-W incandescent bul b can cost $0.75, which should be calculated into the computation. A
typical lifespan of an incandescent bulb is 1200 hours and is 50,000 hours for the LED bulb. The incandescen t bulb would last
1.08 years at 3 hours a day and the LED bulb would la st 45.66 years. The initial cost of the LED bulb is h igh, but the cost to
the home owner will be $0.69 for the incandescent bulb s versus $0.44 for the LED bulbs per year. (Note that t he LED bulbs are
coming down in price.) The cost savings per year is approxim ately $8.50, and that is just for one bulb.
Changing light bulbs from incandescent bulbs to CFL or LED bulbs is a simple way to reduce energy consumption in homes and
commercial sites. CFL bulbs operate with a much differen t mechanism than do incandescent lights. The mechanism is complex and
beyond the scope of this chapter, but here is a very general description of the mechanism. CFL bulbs contai n argon and mercury
vapor housed within a spiral-shaped tube. The CFL bul bs use a “ballast” that increases the voltage used by the CFL bulb. The
ballast produce an electrical current, which passes thr ough the gas mixture and excites the gas molecules. The excited gas
molecules produce ultraviolet (UV) light, which in turn stimulates the fluorescent coating on the inside o f the tube. This coating
fluoresces in the visible spectrum, emitting visible li ght. Traditional fluorescent tubes and CFL bulbs had a short time delay of up to
a few seconds while the mixture was being “warmed up” and the molecules reached an excited state. It should b e noted that these
bulbs do contain mercury, which is poisonous, but if the bulb is broken, the mercury is never released. Eve n if the bulb is broken,
the mercury tends to remain in the fluorescent coatin g. The amount is also quite small and the advantage of the energy saving may
outweigh the disadvantage of using mercury.
The CFL light bulbs are being replaced with LED light b ulbs, where LED stands for “light-emitting diode.” The diode was briefly
discussed as a nonohmic device, made of semiconducti ng material, which essentially permits current flow in one direction. LEDs
are a special type of diode made of semiconducting materials infused with impurities in combinations and concentrations that
enable the extra energy from the movement of the el ectrons during electrical excitation to be converted into visible light.
Semiconducting devices will be explained in greater det ail in Condensed Matter Physics.
Commercial LEDs are quickly becoming the standard fo r commercial and residential lighting, replacing inca ndescent and CFL
bulbs. They are designed for the visible spectrum an d are constructed from gallium doped with arsenic and phosphorous atoms. The
color emitted from an LED depends on the materials u sed in the semiconductor and the current. In the earl y years of LED
development, small LEDs found on circuit boards were r ed, green, and yellow, but LED light bulbs can now be programmed to
produce millions of colors of light as well as many diffe rent hues of white light.
1) Make a list of the power ratings on a range of appl iances in your home or room. Explain why something li ke a toaster has a
higher rating than a digital clock. Estimate the ene rgy consumed by these appliances in an average day (by estimating their
time of use). Some appliances might only state the operati ng current. If the household voltage is 120 V, then use.
2) Check out the total wattage used in the rest room s of your school’s floor or building. (You might nee d to assume the long
fluorescent lights in use are rated at 32 W.) Suppose that the building was closed all weekend and that the se lights were left on
from 6 p.m. Friday until 8 a.m. Monday. What would this oversig ht cost? How about for an entire year of weekends?Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Electrical Energy Use Inventory

5.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83967Comparison of Incandescent, CFL, and LED Light Bulbs
The energy savings can be significant when replacing an incandescent light bulb or a CFL light bulb with a n LED light. Light bulbs
are rated by the amount of power that the bulb consu mes, and the amount of light output is measured in lu mens. The lumen (lm) is
the SI -derived unit of luminous flux and is a measure of the total quantity of visible light emitted by a source. A 60-W
incandescent light bulb can be replaced with a 13- t o 15-W CFL bulb or a 6- to 8-W LED bulb, all three of which have a light
output of approximately 800 lm. A table of light output for some commonly used light bulbs appears in Table.
The life spans of the three types of bulbs are signif icantly different. An LED bulb has a life span of 50,0 00 hours, whereas the CFL
has a lifespan of 8000 hours and the incandescent l asts a mere 1200 hours. The LED bulb is the most durable, easily withstanding
rough treatment such as jarring and bumping. The in candescent light bulb has little tolerance to the s ame treatment since the
filament and glass can easily break. The CFL bulb is also less durable than the LED bulb because of its g lass construction. The
amount of heat emitted is 3.4 btu/h for the 8-W LED bulb, 85 btu/h for the 60-W incandescent bulb, and 30 btu/h for the CFL bulb.
As mentioned earlier, a major drawback of the CFL bulb i s that it contains mercury, a neurotoxin, and must b e disposed of as
hazardous waste. From these data, it is easy to understan d why the LED light bulb is quickly becoming the standard in lighting.
Table: Light Output of LED, Incandescent, and CFL Li ght Bulbs
Light Output (lumens) LED Light Bulbs (watts)Incandescent Light Bulbs
(watts)CFL Light Bulbs (watts)
450 4−5 40 9−13
800 6−8 60 13−15
1100 9−13 75 18−25
1600 16−20 100 23−30
2600 25−28 150 30−55
Summary of Relationships
In this chapter, we have discussed relationships betwe en voltages, current, resistance, and power. Figure sho ws a summary of
the relationships between these measurable quantitie s for ohmic devices. (Recall that ohmic devices follow Ohm’s law.)
For example, if you need to calculate the power, use the pi nk section, which shows that, and.
Figure: This circle shows a summary of the equations for the relationships between power, current, voltage, a nd resistance.
Which equation you use depends on what values you are given, or you measure. For example if you are given th e current and the
resistance, use. Although all the possible combinatio ns may seem overwhelming, don’t forget that they all a re
combinations of just two equations, Ohm’s law and power.

5.8.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83967Summary
Electric power is the rate (in watts) that energy is suppli ed by a source or dissipated by a device.
Three expressions for electrical power are
and
The energy used by a device with a power over a time is.
Glossary
electric power
the rate at which electrical energy is supplied by a source o r dissipated by a device; it is the product of current t imes voltage
This page titled 5.8: Electric Power and Energy is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.6: Electrical Energy and Power by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
20.4: 20.4 Electric Power and Energy by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

5.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839695.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define thermal hazard, shock hazard, and short circuit.
Explain what effects various levels of current have on the human body.
There are two known hazards of electricity—thermal an d shock. A thermal hazard is one where excessive electric power causes
undesired thermal effects, such as starting a fire i n the wall of a house. A shock hazard occurs when electric current passes through
a person. Shocks range in severity from painful, but oth erwise harmless, to heart-stopping lethality. This sect ion considers these
hazards and the various factors affecting them in a q uantitative manner. Electrical Safety: Systems and Devic es will consider
systems and devices for preventing electrical hazards.
Thermal Hazards
Electric power causes undesired heating effects whene ver electric energy is converted to thermal energy at a rate faster than it can
be safely dissipated. A classic example of this is the short circuit, a low-resistance path between terminals of a voltage source. An
example of a short circuit is shown in Figure 1. Insul ation on wires leading to an appliance has worn throu gh, allowing the two
wires to come into contact. Such an undesired contact with a high voltage is called a short. Since the resistance of the short,, is
very small, the power dissipated in the short,, is ve ry large. for example, if is 120 V and is, then th e power is
144kW, much greater than that used by a typical household appli ance. Thermal energy delivered at this rate will ver y quickly raise
the temperature of surrounding materials, melting or per haps igniting them.
Figure: A short circuit is an undesired low-resistance p ath across a voltage source. (a) Worn insulation on the wires of a toaster
allow them to come into contact with a low resistance. Since, thermal power is created so rapidly that th e cord melts or
burns. (b) A schematic of the short circuit.
One particularly insidious aspect of a short circuit is that its resistance may actually be decreased due to the increase in
temperature. This can happen if the short creates ioniz ation. These charged atoms and molecules are free to m ove and, thus, lower
the resistance. Since, the power dissipated in the sho rt rises, possibly causing more ionization, more power, and so on.
High voltages, such as the 480-V AC used in some industria l applications, lend themselves to this hazard, becaus e higher voltages
create higher initial power production in a short.
Another serious, but less dramatic, thermal hazard oc curs when wires supplying power to a user are overload ed with too great a
current. As discussed in the previous section, the powe r dissipated in the supply wires is, where is the resi stance of
the wires and the current flowing through them. If e ither or is too large, the wires overheat. For examp le, a worn appliance
cord (with some of its braided wires broken) may have rather than the it should be. If 10.0 A of current pa sses
through the cord, then is dissipated in the cord—muc h more than is safe. Similarly, if a wire with a
resistance is meant to carry a few amps, but is inste ad carrying 100 A, it will severely overheat. The power dissipated in the wire
will in that case be. Fuses and circuit breakers are u sed to limit excessive currents. (See Figure 2 and Figur e 3.) Each
device opens the circuit automatically when a sustained c urrent exceeds safe limits.Learning Objectives

5.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83969
Figure: (a) A fuse has a metal strip with a low meltin g point that, when overheated by an excessive current, permanently
breaks the connection of a circuit to a voltage sourc e. (b) A circuit breaker is an automatic but restorab le electric switch. The one
shown here has a bimetallic strip that bends to the rig ht and into the notch if overheated. The spring then forces the metal strip
downward, breaking the electrical connection at the points.
Figure: Schematic of a circuit with a fuse or circuit breaker in it. Fuses and circuit breakers act like aut omatic switches that
open when sustained current exceeds desired limits.
Fuses and circuit breakers for typical household voltag es and currents are relatively simple to produce, but those for large voltages
and currents experience special problems. For example, when a circuit breaker tries to interrupt the flow of high-voltage electricity,
a spark can jump across its points that ionizes the ai r in the gap and allows the current to continue flowi ng. Large circuit breakers
found in power-distribution systems employ insulating gas and even use jets of gas to blow out such sparks. He re AC is safer than
DC, since AC current goes through zero 120 times per seco nd, giving a quick opportunity to extinguish these arcs.
Shock Hazards
Electrical currents through people produce tremendo usly varied effects. An electrical current can be us ed to block back pain. The
possibility of using electrical current to stimulate muscle action in paralyzed limbs, perhaps allowing pa raplegics to walk, is under
study. TV dramatizations in which electrical shocks are used to bring a heart attack victim out of ventricu lar fibrillation (a
massively irregular, often fatal, beating of the hear t) are more than common. Yet most electrical shock f atalities occur because a
current put the heart into fibrillation. A pacemake r uses electrical shocks to stimulate the heart to b eat properly. Some fatal shocks
do not produce burns, but warts can be safely burned off with electric current (though freezing using liq uid nitrogen is now more
common). Of course, there are consistent explanations for these disparate effects. The major factors upon which the effects of
electrical shock depend are
1. The amount current
2. The path taken by the current
3. The duration of the shock
4. The frequency of the current (for DC)
The table below gives the effects of electrical shocks as a function of current for a typical accidental sh ock. The effects are for a
shock that passes through the trunk of the body, has a duration of 1 s, and is caused by 60-Hz power.

5.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83969
Figure: An electric current can cause muscular contra ctions with varying effects. (a) The victim is “thrown ” backward by
involuntary muscle contractions that extend the legs a nd torso. (b) The victim can’t let go of the wire th at is stimulating all the
muscles in the hand. Those that close the fingers are str onger than those that open them.
Current (mA) Effect
1 Threshold of sensation
5 Maximum harmless current
10-20Onset of sustained muscular contraction; cannot let go for duration
of shock; contraction of chest muscles may stop breathin g during
shock
50 Onset of pain
100-300+ Ventricular fibrillation possible; often fatal
300 Onset of burns depending on concentration of current
6000 (6A)Onset of sustained ventricular contraction and respirat ory
paralysis; both cease when shock ends; heartbeat may ret urn to
normal; used to defibrillate the heart
Effects of Electrical Shock as a Function of Current
Our bodies are relatively good conductors due to the water in our bodies. Given that larger currents will flow through sections with
lower resistance (to be further discussed in the next chapter), electric currents preferentially flow throu gh paths in the human body
that have a minimum resistance in a direct path to earth. The earth is a natural electron sink. Wearing insulating shoes, a
requirement in many professions, prohibits a pathway for electrons by providing a large resistance in that p ath. Whenever working
with high-power tools (drills), or in risky situations, ensure that you do not provide a pathway for curren t flow (especially through
the heart).
Very small currents pass harmlessly and unfelt throug h the body. This happens to you regularly without yo ur knowledge. The
threshold of sensation is only 1 mA and, although unple asant, shocks are apparently harmless for currents less than 5 mA. A great
number of safety rules take the 5-mA value for the m aximum allowed shock. At 10 to 20 mA and above, the cur rent can stimulate
sustained muscular contractions much as regular nerve impulses do. People sometimes say they were knocked ac ross the room by a
shock, but what really happened was that certain muscles contracted, propelling them in a manner not of thei r own choosing. (See
Figure 4a.) More frightening, and potentially more dangero us, is the “can’t let go” effect illustrated in Figure 4 b.
The muscles that close the fingers are stronger than those that open them, so the hand closes involuntar ily on the wire shocking it.
This can prolong the shock indefinitely. It can also be a danger to a person trying to rescue the victim, b ecause the rescuer’s hand
may close about the victim’s wrist. Usually the best way to help the victim is to give the fist a hard knoc k/blow/jar with an insulator
or to throw an insulator at the fist. Modern electric fences, used in animal enclosures, are now pulsed on an d off to allow people
who touch them to get free, rendering them less lethal tha n in the past.
Greater currents may affect the heart. Its electrical patterns can be disrupted, so that it beats irregul arly and ineffectively in a
condition called “ventricular fibrillation.” This con dition often lingers after the shock and is fatal du e to a lack of blood circulation.

5.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83969The threshold for ventricular fibrillation is between 100 and 300 mA. At about 300 mA and above, the shock can cause burns,
depending on the concentration of current—the more con centrated, the greater the likelihood of burns.
Very large currents cause the heart and diaphragm to contract for the duration of the shock. Both the he art and breathing stop.
Interestingly, both often return to normal following the shock. The electrical patterns on the heart are completely erased in a
manner that the heart can start afresh with normal be ating, as opposed to the permanent disruption caused by smaller currents that
can put the heart into ventricular fibrillation. The latter is something like scribbling on a blackboard, whereas the former
completely erases it. TV dramatizations of electric shock used to bring a heart attack victim out of v entricular fibrillation also show
large paddles. These are used to spread out current passed th rough the victim to reduce the likelihood of burns.
Current is the major factor determining shock severi ty (given that other conditions such as path, duratio n, and frequency are fixed,
such as in the table and preceding discussion). A la rger voltage is more hazardous, but since, the sever ity of the shock
depends on the combination of voltage and resistance. For example, a person with dry skin has a resistance of about. If he
comes into contact with 120-V AC, a current passes ha rmlessly through him. The same person soaking
wet may have a resistance of and the same 120 V will produce a current of 12 mA—above the “can’t let go” threshold and
potentially dangerous.
Most of the body’s resistance is in its dry skin. When wet, salts go into ion form, lowering the resistance signi ficantly. The interior
of the body has a much lower resistance than dry skin because of all the ionic solutions and fluids it c ontains. If skin resistance is
bypassed, such as by an intravenous infusion, a cathe ter, or exposed pacemaker leads, a person is rendered microshock sensitive.
In this condition, currents about 1/1000 those liste d in the table above produce similar effects. During op en-heart surgery, currents
as small as can be used to still the heart. Stringen t electrical safety requirements in hospitals, particula rly in surgery and
intensive care, are related to the doubly disadvanta ged microshock-sensitive patient. The break in the sk in has reduced his
resistance, and so the same voltage causes a greater current, and a much smaller current has a greater effect.
Figure: Graph of average values for the threshold of sensation and the “can’t let go” current as a function of frequency. The
lower the value, the more sensitive the body is at tha t frequency.
Factors other than current that affect the severity o f a shock are its path, duration, and AC frequency. Pa th has obvious
consequences. For example, the heart is unaffected by an electric shock through the brain, such as may be used to treat manic
depression. And it is a general truth that the longer t he duration of a shock, the greater its effects. Figure 5 presents a graph that
illustrates the effects of frequency on a shock. Th e curves show the minimum current for two different ef fects, as a function of
frequency. The lower the current needed, the more sensit ive the body is at that frequency. Ironically, the b ody is most sensitive to
frequencies near the 50- or 60-Hz frequencies in comm on use. The body is slightly less sensitive for DC (), m ildly confirming
Edison’s claims that AC presents a greater hazard. At hi gher and higher frequencies, the body becomes progre ssively less sensitive
to any effects that involve nerves. This is related to the maximum rates at which nerves can fire or be stim ulated. At very high
frequencies, electrical current travels only on the sur face of a person. Thus a wart can be burned off with very high frequency
current without causing the heart to stop. (Do not try this at home with 60-Hz AC!) Some of the spectacular d emonstrations of
electricity, in which high-voltage arcs are passed thr ough the air and over people’s bodies, employ high frequencies and low
currents. (See Figure 6.) Electrical safety safety dev ices and techniques are discussed in detail in Electric al Safety: Systems and
Devices.

5.9.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83969
Figure: Is this electric arc dangerous? The answ er depends on the AC frequency and the power involve d. (credit: Khimich
Alex, Wikimedia Commons)
Summary
The two types of electric hazards are thermal (excessive power) and shock (current through a person).
Shock severity is determined by current, path, duration, an d AC frequency.
The table lists shock hazards as a function of current.
Figure 5 graphs the threshold current for two hazards as a fun ction of frequency.
Footnotes
1 For an average male shocked through trunk of body for 1 s by 60-Hz AC. Values for females are 60–80% of those list ed.
Glossary
thermal hazard
a hazard in which electric current causes undesired ther mal effects
shock hazard
when electric current passes through a person
short circuit
also known as a “short,” a low-resistance path between term inals of a voltage source
microshock sensitive
a condition in which a person’s skin resistance is bypassed, possibly by a medical procedure, rendering the person vul nerable to
electrical shock at currents about 1/1000 the normally req uired level
This page titled 5.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
20.6: Electric Hazards and the Human Body by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

5.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839705.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the process by which electric signals are transmitt ed along a neuron.
Explain the effects myelin sheaths have on signal propag ation.
Explain what the features of an ECG signal indicate.
Electric currents in the vastly complex system of bi llions of nerves in our body allow us to sense the world, control parts of our
body, and think. These are representative of the thre e major functions of nerves. First, nerves carry mess ages from our sensory
organs and others to the central nervous system, con sisting of the brain and spinal cord. Second, nerves carry messages from the
central nervous system to muscles and other organs. T hird, nerves transmit and process signals within the ce ntral nervous system.
The sheer number of nerve cells and the incredibly g reater number of connections between them makes this system the subtle
wonder that it is. Nerve conduction is a general term for electrical signals carried by nerve cells. It is o ne aspect of bioelectricity, or
electrical effects in and created by biological system s.
Nerve cells, properly called neurons, look different from other cells—they have tendril s, some of them many centimeters long,
connecting them with other cells (Figure). Signals arri ve at the cell body across synapses or through dendrites, stimulating
the neuron to generate its own signal, sent along it s long axon to other nerve or muscle cells. Signals may arrive f rom many other
locations and be transmitted to yet others, conditio ning the synapses by use, giving the system its com plexity and its ability to
learn.
Figure: A neuron with its dendrites and long axon. Sig nals in the form of electric currents reach the cell body through
dendrites and across synapses, stimulating the neuron to g enerate its own signal sent down the axon. The number of
interconnections can be far greater than shown here.
The method by which these electric currents are gener ated and transmitted is more complex than the simple movement of free
charges in a conductor, but it can be understood wit h principles already discussed in this text. The most i mportant of these are the
Coulomb force and diffusion.Learning Objectives

5.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83970Figure illustrates how a voltage (potential difference) is created across the cell membrane of a neuron in its resting state. This
thin membrane separates electrically neutral fluids having differing concentrations of ions, the most important varieties being,
, and. (these are sodium, potassium, and chlorine i ons with single plus or minus charges as indicated). As d iscussed in
Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Re lated Processes, free ions will diffuse from a region of high
concentration to one of low concentration. But the c ell membrane is semipermeable, meaning that some ions may cross it while
others cannot. In its resting state, the cell membrane is permeable to and, and impermeable to. Diffusio n of and
thus creates the layers of positive and negative ch arge on the outside and inside of the membrane. The Coulomb force prevents
the ions from diffusing across in their entirety. Once the charge layer has built up, the repulsion of like c harges prevents more from
moving across, and the attraction of unlike charges prevents more from leaving either side. The result is two layers of charge right
on the membrane, with diffusion being balanced by the Coulomb force. A tiny fraction of the charges move ac ross and the fluids
remain neutral (other ions are present), while a separation o f charge and a voltage have been created across the membra ne.
Figure: The semipermeable membrane of a cell has diff erent concentrations of ions inside and out. Diffusion moves the
and ions in the direction shown, until the Coulomb f orce halts further transfer. This results in a layer of positive charge on the
outside, a layer of negative charge on the inside, an d thus a voltage across the cell membrane. The membran e is normally
impermeable to.
Figure: An action potential is the pulse of voltage i nside a nerve cell graphed here. It is caused by movem ents of ions across
the cell membrane as shown. Depolarization occurs when a stimulus makes the membrane permeable to ions. Repo larization
follows as the membrane again becomes impermeable to, and moves from high to low concentration. In the l ong term,
active transport slowly maintains the concentration di fferences, but the cell may fire hundreds of times in rapid succession without
seriously depleting them.

5.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83970The separation of charge creates a potential differe nce of 70 to 90 mV across the cell membrane. While t his is a small voltage, the
resulting electric field () across the only 8-nm-th ick membrane is immense (on the order of 11 MV/m!) an d has
fundamental effects on its structure and permeability. Now, if the exterior of a neuron is taken to be at 0 V, then the interior has a
resting potential of about –90 mV. Such voltages are created across t he membranes of almost all types of animal cells but are
largest in nerve and muscle cells. In fact, fully 25% of the energy used by cells goes toward creating and maintaining these
potentials.
Electric currents along the cell membrane are creat ed by any stimulus that changes the membrane’s perm eability. The membrane
thus temporarily becomes permeable to, which then ru shes in, driven both by diffusion and the Coulomb f orce. This inrush of
first neutralizes the inside membrane, or depolarizes it, and then makes it slightly positive. The depolari zation causes the
membrane to again become impermeable to, and the m ovement of quickly returns the cell to its resting p otential, or
repolarizes it. This sequence of events results in a voltage pul se, called the action potential. (See Figure 3.) Only small fractions of
the ions move, so that the cell can fire many hundre ds of times without depleting the excess concentration s of and.
Eventually, the cell must replenish these ions to mai ntain the concentration differences that create bio electricity. This sodiumpotassium pump is an example of active transport, wherein cell energy is used to move ions across mem branes against diffusion
gradients and the Coulomb force.
The action potential is a voltage pulse at one locati on on a cell membrane. How does it get transmitted al ong the cell membrane,
and in particular down an axon, as a nerve impulse? The answer is that the changing voltage and electric fields affect the
permeability of the adjacent cell membrane, so that the same process takes place there. The adjacent mem brane depolarizes,
affecting the membrane further down, and so on, as i llustrated in Figure. Thus the action potential sti mulated at one location
triggers a nerve impulse that moves slowly (about 1 m/s) along the cell membran e.
Figure: A nerve impulse is the propagation of an acti on potential along a cell membrane. A stimulus causes a n action
potential at one location, which changes the permeab ility of the adjacent membrane, causing an action po tential there. This in turn
affects the membrane further down, so that the action potential moves slowly (in electrical terms) along th e cell membrane.
Although the impulse is due to and going across the m embrane, it is equivalent to a wave of charge moving along the
outside and inside of the membrane.

5.10.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83970Some axons, like that in Figure, are sheathed with myelin, consisting of fat-containing cells. Figure shows an enlarged
view of an axon having myelin sheaths characteristic ally separated by unmyelinated gaps (called nodes of R anvier). This
arrangement gives the axon a number of interesting p roperties. Since myelin is an insulator, it prevents sig nals from jumping
between adjacent nerves (cross talk). Additionally, th e myelinated regions transmit electrical signals at a very high speed, as an
ordinary conductor or resistor would. There is no act ion potential in the myelinated regions, so that no cell energy is used in them.
There is an signal loss in the myelin, but the signa l is regenerated in the gaps, where the voltage pulse triggers the action
potential at full voltage. So a myelinated axon tran smits a nerve impulse faster, with less energy consumpt ion, and is better
protected from cross talk than an unmyelinated one. Not all axons are myelinated, so that cross talk and s low signal transmission
are a characteristic of the normal operation of these ax ons, another variable in the nervous system.
Figure: Propagation of a nerve impulse down a myelinated axon, from left to right. The signal trav els very fast and without
energy input in the myelinated regions, but it loses v oltage. It is regenerated in the gaps. The signal move s faster than in
unmyelinated axons and is insulated from signals in othe r nerves, limiting cross talk.
The degeneration or destruction of the myelin sheath s that surround the nerve fibers impairs signal tran smission and can lead to
numerous neurological effects. One of the most promin ent of these diseases comes from the body’s own immune system attacking
the myelin in the central nervous system—multiple scl erosis. MS symptoms include fatigue, vision problems, we akness of arms
and legs, loss of balance, and tingling or numbness i n one’s extremities (neuropathy). It is more apt to s trike younger adults,
especially females. Causes might come from infection, environmental or geographic affects, or genetics. At the moment there is no
known cure for MS.
Most animal cells can fire or create their own action potential. Muscle cells contract when they fire and are often induced to do so
by a nerve impulse. In fact, nerve and muscle cells ar e physiologically similar, and there are even hybrid cells, such as in the heart,
that have characteristics of both nerves and muscles. Some animals, like the infamous electric eel (Figure), use muscles
ganged so that their voltages add in order to create a sho ck great enough to stun prey.
Figure: An electric eel flexes its muscles to cr eate a voltage that stuns prey. (credit: chrisbb, Flic kr)
Electrocardiograms
Just as nerve impulses are transmitted by depolariza tion and repolarization of adjacent membrane, the d epolarization that causes
muscle contraction can also stimulate adjacent muscle cells to depolarize (fire) and contract. Thus, a depo larization wave can be
sent across the heart, coordinating its rhythmic cont ractions and enabling it to perform its vital functi on of propelling blood through
the circulatory system. Figure is a simplifi ed graphic of a depolarization wave spreading across the heart from the
sinoarterial (SA) node, the heart's natural pacemaker.

5.10.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83970
Figure: The outer surface of the heart change s from positive to negative during depolarization. Th is wave of depolarization is
spreading from the top of the heart and is represented by a vector pointing in the direction of the wave. This vector is a voltage
(potential difference) vector. Three electrodes, lab eled RA, LA, and LL, are placed on the patient. Eac h pair (called leads I, II, and
III) measures a component of the depolarization vecto r and is graphed in an ECG.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a record of the voltages created by the wave of depolarization and subsequent repolarization in
the heart. V oltages between pairs of electrodes placed on the chest are vector components of the voltage wave on the heart.
Standard ECGs have 12 or more electrodes, but only thr ee are shown in Figure 7 for clarity. Decades ago, three -electrode ECGs
were performed by placing electrodes on the left and right arms and the left leg. The voltage between the right arm and the left leg
is called the lead II potential and is the most often graphed. We shall examine the lead II potential as an indicator of heart-muscle
function and see that it is coordinated with arterial blo od pressure as well.
Heart function and its four-chamber action are explo red in Viscosity and Laminar Flow: Poiseuille's Law. Ba sically, the right and
left atria receive blood from the body and lungs, re spectively, and pump the blood into the ventricles. The right and left ventricles,
in turn, pump blood through the lungs and the rest o f the body, respectively. Depolarization of the heart muscle causes it to
contract. After contraction it is repolarized to read y it for the next beat. The ECG measures components of de polarization and
repolarization of the heart muscle and can yield signific ant information on the functioning and malfunctioning of the heart.
Figure shows an ECG of the lead II potential an d a graph of the corresponding arterial blood pressu re. The major features are
labeled P, Q, R, S, and T. The P wave is generated by the depolarization and contraction of the atria as they pump blood into the
ventricles. The QRS complex is created by the depolarization of the ventricles as they pump blood to the lungs and body. Since the
shape of the heart and the path of the depolarizati on wave are not simple, the QRS complex has this typical shape and time span.
The lead II QRS signal also masks the repolarization of the atria, which occur at the same time. Finally, the T wave is generated by
the repolarization of the ventricles and is followed by the next P wave in the next heartbeat. Arterial blo od pressure varies with each
part of the heartbeat, with systolic (maximum) pressu re occurring closely after the QRS complex, which signa ls contraction of the
ventricles.
Figure: A lead II ECG with corresponding arte rial blood pressure. The QRS complex is created by the depolarization and
contraction of the ventricles and is followed shortly by the maximum or systolic blood pressure. See text for further description.
Taken together, the 12 leads of a state-of-the-art E CG can yield a wealth of information about the heart. For example, regions of
damaged heart tissue, called infarcts, reflect elect rical waves and are apparent in one or more lead pot entials. Subtle changes due to
slight or gradual damage to the heart are most readi ly detected by comparing a recent ECG to an older on e. This is particularly the
case since individual heart shape, size, and orientati on can cause variations in ECGs from one individual t o another. ECG

5.10.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83970technology has advanced to the point where a portabl e ECG monitor with a liquid crystal instant display an d a printer can be
carried to patients' homes or used in emergency vehicles (Figure).
Figure: This NASA scientist and NEEMO 5 aquanaut ’s heart rate and other vital signs are being recorded by a portable
device while living in an underwater habitat. (cred it: NASA, Life Sciences Data Archive at Johnson Space Cen ter, Houston, Texas)
Stimulate a neuron and monitor what happens. Pause, rewi nd, and move forward in time in order to observe the ions as they
move across the neuron membrane.
Summary
Electric potentials in neurons and other cells are cre ated by ionic concentration differences across semiperm eable membranes.
Stimuli change the permeability and create action potenti als that propagate along neurons.
Myelin sheaths speed this process and reduce the needed e nergy input.
This process in the heart can be measured with an electro cardiogram (ECG).
Glossary
nerve conduction
the transport of electrical signals by nerve cells
bioelectricity
electrical effects in and created by biological system s
semipermeable
property of a membrane that allows only certain types o f ions to cross it
electrocardiogram (ECG)
usually abbreviated ECG, a record of voltages created by de polarization and repolarization, especially in the hear t
This page titled 5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
20.7: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.PHET EXPLORATIONS: NEURON

5.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839875.11: Superconductors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the phenomenon of superconductivity
List applications of superconductivity
Touch the power supply of your laptop computer or so me other device. It probably feels slightly warm. Tha t heat is an unwanted
byproduct of the process of converting household ele ctric power into a current that can be used by your device. Although electric
power is reasonably efficient, other losses are associate d with it. As discussed in the section on power and energy, transmission of
electric power produces line losses. These line losses exist whether the power is generated from conventiona l power plants
(using coal, oil, or gas), nuclear plants, solar plant s, hydroelectric plants, or wind farms. These losses can be reduced, but not
eliminated, by transmitting using a higher voltage. It would be wonderful if these line losses could be el iminated, but that would
require transmission lines that have zero resistance. In a world that has a global interest in not wasting energy, the reduction or
elimination of this unwanted thermal energy would be a signi ficant achievement. Is this possible?
The Resistance of Mercury
In 1911, Heike Kamerlingh Onnes of Leiden University, a Dutch physicist, was looking a t the temperature dependence of the
resistance of the element mercury. He cooled the sampl e of mercury and noticed the familiar behavior of a linear dependence of
resistance on temperature; as the temperature decre ased, the resistance decreased. Kamerlingh Onnes continue d to cool the sample
of mercury, using liquid helium. As the temperature appr oached, the resistance abruptly went to zero (Figure
). This temperature is known as the critical temperature for mercury. The sample of mercury entered into a phase where
the resistance was absolutely zero. This phenomenon is k nown as superconductivity. (Note: If you connect the leads of a threedigit ohmmeter across a conductor, the reading commo nly shows up as. The resistance of the conductor is not actually zero,
it is less than.) There are various methods to measu re very small resistances, such as the four-point meth od, but an ohmmeter
is not an acceptable method to use for testing resistance in superconductivity.
Figure: The resistance of a sample of mercury is zero a t very low temperatures—it is a superconductor up to t he temperature
of about 4.2 K. Above that critical temperature, it s resistance makes a sudden jump and then increases nearly linearly with
temperature.
Other Superconducting Materials
As research continued, several other materials were fou nd to enter a superconducting phase, when the tempera ture reached near
absolute zero. In 1941, an alloy of niobium-nitride was found that could become superconducting at and i n
1953, vanadium-silicon was found to become supercondu ctive at. The temperatures for the transition into
superconductivity were slowly creeping higher. Strangely, many materials that make good conductors, such as copper, silver, and
gold, do not exhibit superconductivity. Imagine the e nergy savings if transmission lines for electric po wer-generating stations could
be made to be superconducting at temperatures near room temperature! A resistance of zero ohms means no losses and a greatLEARNING OBJECTIVES

5.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83987boost to reducing energy consumption. The problem is that is still very cold and in the range of liqui d helium
temperatures. At this temperature, it is not cost effective to transmit electrical energy because of the cooling req uirements.
A large jump was seen in 1986, when a team of researche rs, headed by Dr. Ching Wu Chu of Houston University, f abricated a
brittle, ceramic compound with a transition temperat ure of. The ceramic material, composed of yttrium ba rium
copper oxide (YBCO), was an insulator at room temperatu re. Although this temperature still seems quite cold, it is near the boiling
point of liquid nitrogen, a liquid commonly used in r efrigeration. You may have noticed refrigerated truc ks traveling down the
highway labeled as “Liquid Nitrogen Cooled.”
YBCO ceramic is a material that could be useful for tr ansmitting electrical energy because the cost saving of reducing the
losses are larger than the cost of cooling the super conducting cable, making it financially feasible. Ther e were and are many
engineering problems to overcome. For example, unlike traditional electrical cables, which are flexible an d have a decent tensile
strength, ceramics are brittle and would break rathe r than stretch under pressure. Processes that are rather simple with traditional
cables, such as making connections, become difficult whe n working with ceramics. The problems are difficult and complex, and
material scientists and engineers are coming up with in novative solutions.
An interesting consequence of the resistance going to zero is that once a current is established in a su perconductor, it persists
without an applied voltage source. Current loops in a superconductor have been set up and the current lo ops have been observed to
persist for years without decaying.
Zero resistance is not the only interesting phenomeno n that occurs as the materials reach their transitio n temperatures. A second
effect is the exclusion of magnetic fields. This is k nown as the Meissner effect (Figure). A light, permanent magnet placed
over a superconducting sample will levitate in a stab le position above the superconductor. High-speed train s have been developed
that levitate on strong superconducting magnets, el iminating the friction normally experienced between the train and the tracks. In
Japan, the Yamanashi Maglev test line opened on April 3, 1997. In April 2015, the MLX01 test vehicle attained a speed of 374 mph
(603 km/h).
Figure: A small, strong magnet levitates over a superco nductor cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature. The magnet levitates
because the superconductor excludes magnetic fields.
Table shows a select list of elements, compounds, and high-temperature superconductors, along with the critic al temperatures
for which they become superconducting. Each section is sorted from the highest critical temperature to t he lowest. Also listed is the
critical magnetic field for some of the materials. T his is the strength of the magnetic field that destro ys superconductivity. Finally,
the type of the superconductor is listed.
There are two types of superconductors. There are 30 pu re metals that exhibit zero resistivity below their critical temperature and
exhibit the Meissner effect, the property of excluding magnetic fields from the interior of the supercondu ctor while the
superconductor is at a temperature below the critical temperature. These metals are called Type I superco nductors. The
superconductivity exists only below their critical tem peratures and below a critical magnetic field streng th. Type I superconductors
are well described by the BCS theory (described next). Type I superconductors have limited practical appl ications because the
strength of the critical magnetic field needed to destro y the superconductivity is quite low.
Type II superconductors are found to have much high er critical magnetic fields and therefore can carry much higher current
densities while remaining in the superconducting stat e. A collection of various ceramics containing barium- copper-oxide have

5.11.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83987much higher critical temperatures for the transition into a superconducting state. Superconducting materia ls that belong to this
subcategory of the Type II superconductors are often c ategorized as high-temperature superconductors.
Introduction to BCS Theory
Type I superconductors, along with some Type II super conductors can be modeled using the BCS theory, proposed by John
Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and Robert Schrieffer. Although the theory is beyond the scope of this chap ter, a short summary of the
theory is provided here. (More detail is provided in Condensed Matter Physics.) The theory considers pairs of electrons and how
they are coupled together through lattice-vibration interactions. Through the interactions with the crysta lline lattice, electrons near
the Fermi energy level feel a small attractive force and form pairs (Cooper pairs), and the coupling is known as a phonon
interaction. Single electrons are fermions, which are par ticles that obey the Pauli exclusion principle. The Pauli exclusion principle
in quantum mechanics states that two identical fermion s (particles with half-integer spin) cannot occupy th e same quantum state
simultaneously. Each electron has four quantum number s. The principal quantum number () describes the ene rgy of
the electron, the orbital angular momentum quantum number () indicates the most probable distance from the nucleus, the
magnetic quantum number describes the energy levels in the subshell, and the electron spin quantum numb er describes the
orientation of the spin of the electron, either up o r down. As the material enters a superconducting stat e, pairs of electrons act more
like bosons, which can condense into the same energy le vel and need not obey the Pauli exclusion principle. The electron pairs
have a slightly lower energy and leave an energy gap above them on the order of 0.001 eV. This energy ga p inhibits collision
interactions that lead to ordinary resistivity. When the material is below the critical temperature, the thermal energy is less than the
band gap and the material exhibits zero resistivity.
Table: Superconductor Critical Temperatures
Material Symbol or FormulaCritical Temperature Critical Magnetic FieldType
Elements
Lead Pb 7.19 0.08 I
Lanthanum La 4.90 - 6.30 I
Tantalum Ta 4.48 0.09 I
Mercury Hg 4.15 - 3.95 0.04 I
Tin Sn 3.72 0.03 I
Indium In 3.40 0.03 I
Thallium Tl 2.39 0.03 I
Rhenium Re 2.40 0.03 I
Thorium Th 1.37 0.013 I
Protactinium Pa 1.40 I
Aluminum Al 1.20 0.01 I
Gallium Ga 1.10 0.005 I
Zinc Zn 0.86 0.014 I
Titanium Ti 0.39 0.01 I
Uranium U 0.68 - 1.80 I
Cadmium Cd 11.4 4.00 I

5.11.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83987Material Symbol or FormulaCritical Temperature Critical Magnetic FieldType
Compounds
Niobium-germanium 23.20 37.00 II
Niobium-tin 18.30 30.00 II
Niobium-nitrite NbN 16.00 II
Niobium-titanium NbTi 10.00 15.00 II
High-Temperature
Oxides
134.00 II
125.00 II
92.00 120.00 II
Applications of Superconductors
Superconductors can be used to make superconducting m agnets. These magnets are 10 times stronger than the strongest
electromagnets. These magnets are currently in use i n magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which produces hig h-quality images of
the body interior without dangerous radiation.
Another interesting application of superconductivity is the SQUID (superconducting quantum interference device). A SQUID is a
very sensitive magnetometer used to measure extreme ly subtle magnetic fields. The operation of the SQUID is based on
superconducting loops containing Josephson junctions. A Josephson junction is the result of a theoretical prediction made by B.
D. Josephson in an article published in 1962. In the article, Josep hson described how a supercurrent can flow between two pieces of
superconductor separated by a thin layer of insulato r. This phenomenon is now called the Josephson effect. The SQUID consists of
a superconducting current loop containing two Josephso n junctions, as shown in Figure. When the loop is plac ed in even a
very weak magnetic field, there is an interference effec t that depends on the strength of the magnetic field.
Figure: The SQUID (superconducting quantum interferen ce device) uses a superconducting current loop and two Josephson
junctions to detect magnetic fields as low as (Earth’s magnet field is on the order of).
Superconductivity is a fascinating and useful phenom enon. At critical temperatures near the boiling point of liquid nitrogen,
superconductivity has special applications in MRIs, part icle accelerators, and high-speed trains. Will we re ach a state where we can

5.11.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83987have materials enter the superconducting phase at ne ar room temperatures? It seems a long way off, but if sci entists in 1911 were
asked if we would reach liquid-nitrogen temperatures with a ceramic, they might have thought it implausible.
This page titled 5.11: Superconductors is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.7: Superconductors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

5.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839885.12: Practice
Conceptual Questions
Electrical Current
1. Can a wire carry a current and still be neutral—that is, hav e a total charge of zero? Explain.
2. Car batteries are rated in ampere-hours (A⋅h). To what physical quantity do ampere-hours correspon d (voltage, current,
charge, energy, power,…)?
3. When working with high-power electric circuits, it is a dvised that whenever possible, you work “one-handed” or “keep
one hand in your pocket.” Why is this a sensible suggestion?
Model of Conduction in Metals
4. Incandescent light bulbs are being replaced with more efficient LED and CFL light bulbs. Is there any obvi ous evidence
that incandescent light bulbs might not be that energy efficient? Is energy converted into anything but visibl e light?
5. It was stated that the motion of an electron appears nearly random when an electrical field is applied to the conductor.
What makes the motion nearly random and differentiates it from the random motion of molecules in a gas?
6. Electric circuits are sometimes explained using a c onceptual model of water flowing through a pipe. In t his conceptual
model, the voltage source is represented as a pump that pumps water through pipes and the pipes connect comp onents in the
circuit. Is a conceptual model of water flowing throu gh a pipe an adequate representation of the circuit? How are electrons
and wires similar to water molecules and pipes? How are they d ifferent?
7. An incandescent light bulb is partially evacuated. Why do you suppose that is?
Resistivity and Resistance
8. The IR drop across a resistor means that there is a c hange in potential or voltage across the resistor. Is there any change in
current as it passes through a resistor? Explain.
9. Do impurities in semiconducting materials listed in T able 9.1 supply free charges? (Hint: Examine the rang e of resistivity
for each and determine whether the pure semiconductor has the higher or lower conductivity.)
10. Does the resistance of an object depend on the path cu rrent takes through it? Consider, for example, a rect angular bar—is
its resistance the same along its length as across its width?
11. If aluminum and copper wires of the same length have the same resistance, which has the larger diameter? Why?
Ohm's Law
12. In Determining Field from Potential, resistance was defi ned as. In this section, we presented Ohm’s law, which i s
commonly expressed as V=IR. The equations look exactly alike. What is the diffe rence between Ohm’s law and the
definition of resistance?
13. Shown below are the results of an experiment where four devices were connected across a variable voltage sourc e. The
voltage is increased and the current is measured. Whic h device, if any, is an ohmic device?

5.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988
14. The current I is measured through a sample of an ohm ic material as a voltage V is applied. (a) What is th e current when
the voltage is doubled to 2V (assume the change in t emperature of the material is negligible)? (b) What is the voltage applied
is the current measured is 0.2I (assume the change in temperature of the material is negligible)? What wil l happen to the
current if the material if the voltage remains constant, but the temperature of the material increases signific antly?
Electrical Energy and Power
15. Common household appliances are rated at 110 V, but p ower companies deliver voltage in the kilovolt range and then
step the voltage down using transformers to 110 V to b e used in homes. You will learn in later chapters that transformers
consist of many turns of wire, which warm up as current flows through them, wasting some of the energy that is given off as
heat. This sounds inefficient. Why do the power companies tr ansport electric power using this method?
16. Your electric bill gives your consumption in units of kilowatt-hour (kW ⋅· h). Does this unit represent the amount of
charge, current, voltage, power, or energy you buy?
17. Resistors are commonly rated at, 1 W and 2 W for u se in electrical circuits. If a current of I=2.00A is
accidentally passed through a R=1.00Ω resistor rated at 1 W, what would be the most probable outcome? Is there anything
that can be done to prevent such an accident?
18. An immersion heater is a small appliance used to heat a cup of water for tea by passing current through a resistor. If the
voltage applied to the appliance is doubled, will the time required to heat the water change? By how much? Is this a good
idea?
Superconductors
19. What requirement for superconductivity makes current s uperconducting devices expensive to operate?
20. Name two applications for superconductivity listed in th is section and explain how superconductivity is used in the
application. Can you think of a use for superconductivi ty that is not listed?
Problems
Electrical Current
21. A Van de Graaff generator is one of the original part icle accelerators and can be used to accelerate cha rged particles like
protons or electrons. You may have seen it used to make human hair stand on end or produce large sparks. On e application of
the Van de Graaff generator is to create X-rays by bom barding a hard metal target with the beam. Consider a beam of protons
at 1.00 keV and a current of 5.00 mA produced by the gener ator.
(a) What is the speed of the protons?
(b) How many protons are produced each second?
22. A cathode ray tube (CRT) is a device that produces a focused beam of electrons in a vacuum. The electron s strike a
phosphor-coated glass screen at the end of the tube, which produces a bright spot of light. The position of the bright spot of
light on the screen can be adjusted by deflecting th e electrons with electrical fields, magnetic fields, or both. Although the
CRT tube was once commonly found in televisions, com puter displays, and oscilloscopes, newer appliances u se a liquid

5.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988crystal display (LCD) or plasma screen. You still may co me across a CRT in your study of science. Consider a CRT with an
electron beam average current of 25.00μA25.00μA. How many elect rons strike the screen every minute?
23. How many electrons flow through a point in a wire in 3.00 s if th ere is a constant current of I=4.00A?
24. A conductor carries a current that is decreasing exp onentially with time. The current is modeled as, wher e
is the current at time t=0.00s and τ=0.50s is the time constant. How much charge flows through the conductor
between t=0.00s and t=3τ?
25. The quantity of charge through a conductor is mode led as. What is the current at time
t=3.00s?
26. The current through a conductor is modeled as. Wri te an equation for the charge as a function of
time.
27. The charge on a capacitor in a circuit is modeled as. What is the current through the circuit as a
function of time?
Model of Conduction in Metals
28. An aluminum wire 1.628 mm in diameter (14-gauge) carrie s a current of 3.00 amps.
(a) What is the absolute value of the charge density in the wire?
(b) What is the drift velocity of the electrons?
(c) What would be the drift velocity if the same gau ge copper were used instead of aluminum? The density of copper is
and the density of aluminum is. The molar mass of a luminum is 26.98 g/mol and the molar mass
of copper is 63.5 g/mol. Assume each atom of metal contrib utes one free electron.
29. The current of an electron beam has a measured curr ent of I=50.00μA with a radius of mm. What is the magnitude
of the current density of the beam?
30. A high-energy proton accelerator produces a proton beam with a radius of r=0.90mm. The beam current is I=9.00μA and
is constant. The charge density of the beam is protons p er cubic meter.
(a) What is the current density of the beam?
(b) What is the drift velocity of the beam?
(c) How much time does it take for protons to be emitted by t he accelerator?
31. Consider a wire of a circular cross-section with a rad ius of R=3.00mm. The magnitude of the current density is modeled
as. What is the current through the inner section of th e wire from the center to r=0.5R?
32. A cylindrical wire has a current density from the cent er of the wire’s cross section as where is in meters, is
in amps per square meter, and A/m. This current density continues to the end of the wire at a radius of 1.0 mm.
Calculate the current just outside of this wire.
33. The current supplied to an air conditioner unit is 4.0 0 amps. The air conditioner is wired using a 10-gauge (diameter
2.588 mm) wire. The charge density is. Find the magnitude o f
(a) current density and
(b) the drift velocity.
Resistivity and Resistance
34. What current flows through the bulb of a 3.00-V flashli ght when its hot resistance is 3.60Ω?
35. Calculate the effective resistance of a pocket calculat or that has a 1.35-V battery and through which 0.200 mA flo ws.
36. How many volts are supplied to operate an indicator lig ht on a DVD player that has a resistance of 140Ω, given that 25.0
mA passes through it?
37. What is the resistance of a 20.0-m-long piece of 12-gauge copper wire having a 2.053-mm diameter?4

5.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8398838. The diameter of 0-gauge copper wire is 8.252 mm. Find the resistance of a 1.00-km length of such wire used for power
transmission.
39. If the 0.100-mm-diameter tungsten filament in a lig ht bulb is to have a resistance of 0.200Ω at 20.0°C, how long should
it be?
40. A lead rod has a length of 30.00 cm and a resistance of 5.00μΩ. What is the radius of the rod?
41. Find the ratio of the diameter of aluminum to copper wire, if they have the same resistance per unit len gth (as they might
in household wiring).
42. What current flows through a 2.54-cm-diameter rod of pure silicon that is 20.0 cm long, when is applied to it?
(Such a rod may be used to make nuclear-particle detector s, for example.)
43. (a) To what temperature must you raise a copper wire, originally at 20.0°C, to double its resistance, neglecting any
changes in dimensions? (b) Does this happen in househ old wiring under ordinary circumstances?
44. A resistor made of nichrome wire is used in an applic ation where its resistance cannot change more than 1. 00% from its
value at 20.0°C. Over what temperature range can it be used?
45. Of what material is a resistor made if its resistance is 40.0 % greater at 100.0°C than at 20.0°C?
46. An electronic device designed to operate at any temp erature in the range from −10.0°C to 55.0°C contains pure carbon
resistors. By what factor does their resistance increas e over this range? 47.
(a) Of what material is a wire made, if it is 25.0 m lo ng with a diameter of 0.100 mm and has a resistance o f 77.7Ω at
20.0°C? (b) What is its resistance at 150.0°C?
48. Assuming a constant temperature coefficient of resisti vity, what is the maximum percent decrease in the resi stance of a
constantan wire starting at 20.0°C?
49. A copper wire has a resistance of 0.500Ω at 20.0°C, and an iron wire has a resistance of 0.525Ω at the same temperature.
At what temperature are their resistances equal?
Ohm's Law
50. A 2.2-kΩ resistor is connected across a D cell battery (1.5 V). What is the current through the resistor?
51. A resistor rated at 250kΩ is connected across two D cell batteries (each 1.50 V) in series, with a total voltage of 3.00 V.
The manufacturer advertises that their resistors ar e within 5% of the rated value. What are the possible minimum current and
maximum current through the resistor?
52. A resistor is connected in series with a power supply of 20.00 V. The current measure is 0.50 A. What is the resistance of
the resistor?
53. A resistor is placed in a circuit with an adjustable voltage source. The voltage across and the current thr ough the resistor
and the measurements are shown below. Estimate the resist ance of the resistor.
54. The following table show the measurements of a current through and the voltage across a sample of material. Plot the
data, and assuming the object is an ohmic device, estimate t he resistance.

5.12.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988Table: Measurements of current through and the voltag e across a sample of material
I(A) V(V)
0 3
2 23
4 39
6 58
8 77
10 100
12 119
14 142
16 162
Electrical Energy and Power
55. A 20.00-V battery is used to supply current to a 10-kΩ resistor. Assume the voltage drop across any wires used for
connections is negligible.
(a) What is the current through the resistor?
(b) What is the power dissipated by the resistor?
(c) What is the power input from the battery, assuming all th e electrical power is dissipated by the resistor?
(d) What happens to the energy dissipated by the resistor?
56. What is the maximum voltage that can be applied to a 20-kΩ resistor rated at?
57. A heater is being designed that uses a coil of 14-gau ge nichrome wire to generate 300 W using a voltage o f V=110V.
How long should the engineer make the wire?
58. An alternative to CFL bulbs and incandescent bulbs are light-emitting diode (LED) bulbs. A 100-W incandesce nt bulb
can be replaced by a 16-W LED bulb. Both produce 160 0 lumens of light. Assuming the cost of electricity i s $0.10 per
kilowatt-hour, how much does it cost to run the bulb for one year if it runs for four hours a day?
59. The power dissipated by a resistor with a resistance of R=100Ω is P=2.0W. What are the current through and the voltage
drop across the resistor?
60. Running late to catch a plane, a driver accidentall y leaves the headlights on after parking the car in the airport parking lot.
During takeoff, the driver realizes the mistake. Havi ng just replaced the battery, the driver knows that th e battery is a 12-V
automobile battery, rated at 100 A⋅h. The driver, knowing there is nothing that can be d one, estimates how long the lights
will shine, assuming there are two 12-V headlights, each rat ed at 40 W. What did the driver conclude?
61. A physics student has a single-occupancy dorm room. T he student has a small refrigerator that runs with a current of 3.00
A and a voltage of 110 V, a lamp that contains a 10 0-W bulb, an overhead light with a 60-W bulb, and var ious other small
devices adding up to 3.00 W.
(a) Assuming the power plant that supplies 110 V electri city to the dorm is 10 km away and the two aluminum
transmission cables use 0-gauge wire with a diameter of 8.252 mm, estimate the percentage of the total power supplied
by the power company that is lost in the transmission.
(b) What would be the result is the power company delivere d the electric power at 110 kV?
62. A 0.50-W, 220-Ω resistor carries the maximum current possible without damaging the resistor. If the current were
reduced to half the value, what would be the power consumed?

5.12.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988Superconductors
63. Consider a power plant is located 60 km away from a re sidential area uses 0-gauge wire of copper to
transmit power at a current of I=100.00A. How much more power is dissipated in the copper wires th an it would be in
superconducting wires?
64. A wire is drawn through a die, stretching it to four times it s original length. By what factor does its resistance increase?
65. Digital medical thermometers determine temperature b y measuring the resistance of a semiconductor devic e called a
thermistor (which has α=−0.06/°C) when it is at the same temperature as the patient. W hat is a patient’s temperature if the
thermistor’s resistance at that temperature is 82.0% of i ts value at 37°C (normal body temperature)?
66. Electrical power generators are sometimes “load test ed” by passing current through a large vat of water. A similar method
can be used to test the heat output of a resistor. A R=30Ω resistor is connected to a 9.0-V battery and the resist or leads are
waterproofed and the resistor is placed in 1.0 kg of room temperature water (T=20°C). Current runs through the resistor for
20 minutes. Assuming all the electrical energy dissip ated by the resistor is converted to heat, what is th e final temperature of
the water?
67. A 12-guage gold wire has a length of 1 meter.
(a) What would be the length of a silver 12-gauge wire with the same resistance?
(b) What are their respective resistances at the tempera ture of boiling water?
68. What is the change in temperature required to decrease t he resistance for a carbon resistor by 10%?
Additional Problems
69. A coaxial cable consists of an inner conductor with radius and an outer radius of and has a length
of 10 meters. Plastic, with a resistivity of, separa tes the two conductors. What is the resistance of th e
cable?
70. A 10.00-meter long wire cable that is made of copper has a resistance of 0.051 ohms.
(a) What is the weight if the wire was made of copper?
(b) What is the weight of a 10.00-meter-long wire of the same gauge made of aluminum?
(c)What is the resistance of the aluminum wire? The density of copper is and the density of aluminum i s
71. A nichrome rod that is 3.00 mm long with a cross-sectional area of is used for a digital thermometer.
(a) What is the resistance at room temperature?
(b) What is the resistance at body temperature?
72. The temperature in Philadelphia, PA can vary between 68.00°F and 100.00°F in one summer day. By what percentage
will an aluminum wire’s resistance change during the day?
73. When 100.0 V is applied across a 5-gauge (diameter 4. 621 mm) wire that is 10 m long, the magnitude of the current
density is. What is the resistivity of the wire?
74. A wire with a resistance of 5.0Ω is drawn out through a die so that its new length is t wice times its original length. Find
the resistance of the longer wire. You may assume that the r esistivity and density of the material are unchanged.
75. What is the resistivity of a wire of 5-gauge wire (), 5.00 m l ength, and 5.10mΩ resistance?
76. Coils are often used in electrical and electronic ci rcuits. Consider a coil which is formed by winding 1000 turns of
insulated 20-gauge copper wire (area in a single la yer on a cylindrical non-conducting core of radius 2.0 mm. What
is the resistance of the coil? Neglect the thickness of t he insulation.
77. Currents of approximately 0.06 A can be potentially fatal. Currents in that range can make the heart fi brillate (beat in an
uncontrolled manner). The resistance of a dry human bod y can be approximately 100kΩ.

5.12.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988(a) What voltage can cause 0.2 A through a dry human bo dy?
(b) When a human body is wet, the resistance can fall to 100Ω. What voltage can cause harm to a wet body?
78. A 20.00-ohm, 5.00-watt resistor is placed in series with a power supply.
(a) What is the maximum voltage that can be applied to th e resistor without harming the resistor?
(b) What would be the current through the resistor?
79. A battery with an emf of 24.00 V delivers a constant cu rrent of 2.00 mA to an appliance. How much work does the
battery do in three minutes?
80. A 12.00-V battery has an internal resistance of a tenth of an ohm.
(a) What is the current if the battery terminals are moment arily shorted together?
(b) What is the terminal voltage if the battery deliv ers 0.25 amps to a circuit?
Challenge Problems
81. A 10-gauge copper wire has a cross-sectional area an d carries a current of I=5.00A. The density of copper
is. One mole of copper atoms () has a mass of approx imately 63.50 g. What is the magnitude
of the drift velocity of the electrons, assuming that each copper atom contributes one free electron to the curre nt?
82. The current through a 12-gauge wire is given as I(t)=(5.00A)sin(2π60Hzt). What is the current density at time 15.00 ms?
83. A particle accelerator produces a beam with a radius of 1.25 mm with a current of 2.00 mA. Each proton has a kinetic
energy of 10.00 MeV.
(a) What is the velocity of the protons?
(b) What is the number (n) of protons per unit volume?
(c) How many electrons pass a cross sectional area each seco nd?
84. In this chapter, most examples and problems involved direct current (DC). DC circuits have the current flowin g in one
direction, from positive to negative. When the curren t was changing, it was changed linearly from to
and the voltage changed linearly from to, where. Suppose a voltage source is placed in
series with a resistor of R=10Ω that supplied a current that alternated as a sine wa ve, for example,.
(a) What would a graph of the voltage drop across the resistor V(t) versus time look like? (b) What would a plot of V(t)
versus I(t) for one period look like? (Hint: If you are not sure, try p lotting V(t) versus I(t) using a spreadsheet.)
85. A current of I=25A is drawn from a 100-V battery for 30 seconds. By how muc h is the chemical energy reduced?
86. Consider a square rod of material with sides of length L=3.00cm with a current density of
as shown below. Find the current that passes through the face of

5.12.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988
87. A resistor of an unknown resistance is placed in an in sulated container filled with 0.75 kg of water. A volt age source is
connected in series with the resistor and a current o f 1.2 amps flows through the resistor for 10 minutes. During this time, the
temperature of the water is measured and the temperature c hange during this time is ΔT=10.00°C.
(a) What is the resistance of the resistor?
(b) What is the voltage supplied by the power supply?
88. The charge that flows through a point in a wire as a func tion of time is modeled as.
(a) What is the initial current through the wire at tim e t=0.00s?
(b) Find the current at time.
(c) At what time t will the current be reduced by one-half?
89. Consider a resistor made from a hollow cylinder of c arbon as shown below. The inner radius of the cylinder is
Ri=0.20mmRi=0.20mm and the outer radius is. The len gth of the resistor is L=0.90mm. The resistivity of the
carbon is. (a) Prove that the resistance perpendicu lar from the axis is. (b) What is the
resistance?
90. What is the current through a cylindrical wire of radius R=0.1mm if the current density is, where?
91. A student uses a 100.00-W, 115.00-V radiant heater to heat the student’s dorm room, during the hours betwee n sunset and
sunrise, 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(a) What current does the heater operate at?
(b) How many electrons move through the heater?
(c) What is the resistance of the heater?
(d) How much heat was added to the dorm room?

5.12.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8398892. A 12-V car battery is used to power a 20.00-W, 12.00-V lamp during the physics club camping trip/star party. The cable
to the lamp is 2.00 meters long, 14-gauge copper wire with a charge density of.
(a) What is the current draw by the lamp?
(b) How long would it take an electron to get from the batter y to the lamp?
93. A physics student uses a 115.00-V immersion heater to heat 400.00 grams (almost two cups) of water for her bal tea.
During the two minutes it takes the water to heat, the p hysics student becomes bored and decides to figure out the resistance
of the heater. The student starts with the assumption that the water is initially at the temperature of the room and
reaches. The specific heat of the water is. What is the resistance of the heater?
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
Practice Answers
Check Your Understanding
1. The time for 1.00 C of charge to flow would be, slightly less than an hour.
This is quite different from the 5.55 ms for the truc k battery. The calculator takes a very small amount of energy to operate,
unlike the truck’s starter motor. There are several r easons that vehicles use batteries and not solar cells. Aside from the
obvious fact that a light source to run the solar ce lls for a car or truck is not always available, the la rge amount of current
needed to start the engine cannot easily be supplie d by present-day solar cells. Solar cells can possibl y be used to charge the
batteries. Charging the battery requires a small am ount of energy when compared to the energy required to run the engine
and the other accessories such as the heater and air conditioner. Present day solar-powered cars are powered by solar panels,
which may power an electric motor, instead of an internal combustion engine.
2. The total current needed by all the appliances in th e living room (a few lamps, a television, and your lap top) draw less
current and require less power than the refrigerator.
3. The diameter of the 14-gauge wire is smaller than th e diameter of the 12-gauge wire. Since the drift veloc ity is inversely
proportional to the cross-sectional area, the drift velocity in the 14-gauge wire is larger than the dri ft velocity in the 12-gauge
wire carrying the same current. The number of electrons per cubic meter will remain constant.
4. The current density in a conducting wire increases d ue to an increase in current. The drift velocity is i nversely proportional
to the current (), so the drift velocity would decrease.
5. Silver, gold, and aluminum are all used for making wire s. All four materials have a high conductivity, silver having the
highest. All four can easily be drawn into wires and hav e a high tensile strength, though not as high as cop per. The obvious
disadvantage of gold and silver is the cost, but silve r and gold wires are used for special applications, suc h as speaker wires.
Gold does not oxidize, making better connections betwe en components. Aluminum wires do have their drawbacks.
Aluminum has a higher resistivity than copper, so a larger diameter is needed to match the resistance per length of copper
wires, but aluminum is cheaper than copper, so this is not a major drawback. Aluminum wires do not have as hi gh of a
ductility and tensile strength as copper, but the du ctility and tensile strength is within acceptable leve ls. There are a few
concerns that must be addressed in using aluminum and care must be used when making connections. Aluminum ha s a
higher rate of thermal expansion than copper, which ca n lead to loose connections and a possible fire hazard. The oxidation
of aluminum does not conduct and can cause problems. Special techniques must be used when using aluminum wires and
components, such as electrical outlets, must be designed t o accept aluminum wires.
6. The foil pattern stretches as the backing stretches, and the foil tracks become longer and thinner. Since the resistance is
calculated as, the resistance increases as the foi l tracks are stretched. When the temperature change s, so does the
resistivity of the foil tracks, changing the resistan ce. One way to combat this is to use two strain gauges, o ne used as a
reference and the other used to measure the strain. The t wo strain gauges are kept at a constant temperature

5.12.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839887. The longer the length, the smaller the resistance. T he greater the resistivity, the higher the resistanc e. The larger the
difference between the outer radius and the inner ra dius, that is, the greater the ratio between the two, t he greater the
resistance. If you are attempting to maximize the re sistance, the choice of the values for these variable s will depend on the
application. For example, if the cable must be flexible, the choice of materials may be limited.
8. Yes, Ohm’s law is still valid. At every point in time t he current is equal to I(t)=V(t)/RI(t)=V(t)/R, so the c urrent is also a
function of time,.
9. Even though electric motors are highly efficient 10 –20% of the power consumed is wasted, not being used for doing useful
work. Most of the 10–20% of the power lost is transferre d into heat dissipated by the copper wires used to ma ke the coils of
the motor. This heat adds to the heat of the enviro nment and adds to the demand on power plants providi ng the power. The
demand on the power plant can lead to increased greenhouse gases, particularly if the power plant uses coal or gas as fuel.
10. No, the efficiency is a very important consideration of the light bulbs, but there are many other consider ations. As
mentioned above, the cost of the bulbs and the life span of the bulbs are important considerations. For example, CFL bulbs
contain mercury, a neurotoxin, and must be disposed of as hazardous waste. When replacing incandescent bulb s that are
being controlled by a dimmer switch with LED, the dimme r switch may need to be replaced. The dimmer switches for LED
lights are comparably priced to the incandescent li ght switches, but this is an initial cost which should be considered. The
spectrum of light should also be considered, but th ere is a broad range of color temperatures availabl e, so you should be able
to find one that fits your needs. None of these consi derations mentioned are meant to discourage the use of LED or CFL light
bulbs, but they are considerations.
Conceptual Questions
1. If a wire is carrying a current, charges enter the wir e from the voltage source’s positive terminal and le ave at the negative
terminal, so the total charge remains zero while the curr ent flows through it.
3. Using one hand will reduce the possibility of “completi ng the circuit” and having current run through your body,
especially current running through your heart.
5. Even though the electrons collide with atoms and other electrons in the wire, they travel from the negative terminal to the
positive terminal, so they drift in one direction. Gas molec ules travel in completely random directions.
7. In the early years of light bulbs, the bulbs are par tially evacuated to reduce the amount of heat condu cted through the air to
the glass envelope. Dissipating the heat would cool t he filament, increasing the amount of energy needed to produce light
from the filament. It also protects the glass from th e heat produced from the hot filament. If the glass heats, it expands, and as
it cools, it contacts. This expansion and contraction could cause the glass to become brittle and crack, reducing the life of the
bulbs. Many bulbs are now partially filled with an ine rt gas. It is also useful to remove the oxygen to red uce the possibility of
the filament actually burning. When the original fil aments were replaced with more efficient tungsten fil aments, atoms from
the tungsten would evaporate off the filament at such high temperatures. The atoms collide with the atoms of the inert gas
and land back on the filament.
9. In carbon, resistivity increases with the amount of i mpurities, meaning fewer free charges. In silicon and germanium,
impurities decrease resistivity, meaning more free electro ns.
11. Copper has a lower resistivity than aluminum, so if length i s the same, copper must have the smaller diameter.
13. Device B shows a linear relationship and the device is ohmi c.
15. Although the conductors have a low resistance, the lin es from the power company can be kilometers long. Using a high
voltage reduces the current that is required to supply th e power demand and that reduces line losses.
17. The resistor would overheat, possibly to the point o f causing the resistor to burn. Fuses are commonly add ed to circuits to
prevent such accidents.
19. Very low temperatures necessitate refrigeration. Some materials require liquid nitrogen to cool them bel ow their critical
temperatures. Other materials may need liquid helium, whic h is even more costly.

5.12.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988Problems
21. a.;
b.,no. of protons=
23., no. of electrons=
25.
27.
29.
31.
33. a.;
b.
35.
37.
39.;
41.
43. a.;
b. Under normal conditions, no it should not occur.
45., iron
47. a., gold;
b.
49.
51.
53.
55. a.;
b.;
c.;
d. It is converted into heat.
57.
59.
61. a.

5.12.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988b.
63.
65.
67. a.;
b.
Additional Problems
69.
71. a.;
b.
73.
75.
77.;
b.
79.
Challenge Problems
81.
83. a.;
b.;
c. 1.25
85.
87. a.;
b.
89. a.;
b.
91. a.;
b. #electrons

5.12.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83988c.;
d.
93.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.12: Practice is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
9.9: Current and Resistance (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
9.10: Current and Resistance (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

5.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839895.A: Current and Resistance (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
9.1. The time for 1.00 C of charge to flow would be, slightly less than an hour.
This is quite different from the 5.55 ms for the truc k battery. The calculator takes a very small amount of energy to operate,
unlike the truck’s starter motor. There are several r easons that vehicles use batteries and not solar cells. Aside from the
obvious fact that a light source to run the solar ce lls for a car or truck is not always available, the la rge amount of current
needed to start the engine cannot easily be supplie d by present-day solar cells. Solar cells can possibl y be used to charge the
batteries. Charging the battery requires a small am ount of energy when compared to the energy required to run the engine
and the other accessories such as the heater and air conditioner. Present day solar-powered cars are powered by solar panels,
which may power an electric motor, instead of an internal combustion engine.
9.2. The total current needed by all the appliances in t he living room (a few lamps, a television, and your lap top) draw less
current and require less power than the refrigerator.
9.3. The diameter of the 14-gauge wire is smaller than the diameter of the 12-gauge wire. Since the drift veloci ty is inversely
proportional to the cross-sectional area, the drift velocity in the 14-gauge wire is larger than the dri ft velocity in the 12-gauge
wire carrying the same current. The number of electrons per cubic meter will remain constant.
9.4. The current density in a conducting wire increases due to an increase in current. The drift velocity is in versely
proportional to the current (), so the drift velocity woul d decrease.
9.5. Silver, gold, and aluminum are all used for making wir es. All four materials have a high conductivity, silver h aving the
highest. All four can easily be drawn into wires and hav e a high tensile strength, though not as high as cop per. The obvious
disadvantage of gold and silver is the cost, but silve r and gold wires are used for special applications, suc h as speaker wires.
Gold does not oxidize, making better connections betwe en components. Aluminum wires do have their drawbacks.
Aluminum has a higher resistivity than copper, so a larger diameter is needed to match the resistance per length of copper
wires, but aluminum is cheaper than copper, so this is not a major drawback. Aluminum wires do not have as hi gh of a
ductility and tensile strength as copper, but the du ctility and tensile strength is within acceptable leve ls. There are a few
concerns that must be addressed in using aluminum and care must be used when making connections. Aluminum ha s a
higher rate of thermal expansion than copper, which ca n lead to loose connections and a possible fire hazard. The oxidation
of aluminum does not conduct and can cause problems. Special techniques must be used when using aluminum wires and
components, such as electrical outlets, must be designed t o accept aluminum wires.
9.6. The foil pattern stretches as the backing stretches, a nd the foil tracks become longer and thinner. Since the resistance is
calculated as, the resistance increases as the foi l tracks are stretched. When the temperature change s, so does the
resistivity of the foil tracks, changing the resistan ce. One way to combat this is to use two strain gauges, o ne used as a
reference and the other used to measure the strain. The t wo strain gauges are kept at a constant temperature
9.7. The longer the length, the smaller the resistance. The greater the resistivity, the higher the resistance. The larger the
difference between the outer radius and the inner ra dius, that is, the greater the ratio between the two, t he greater the
resistance. If you are attempting to maximize the re sistance, the choice of the values for these variable s will depend on the
application. For example, if the cable must be flexible, the choice of materials may be limited.
9.8. Yes, Ohm’s law is still valid. At every point in time t he current is equal to I(t)=V(t)/RI(t)=V(t)/R, so the current is also a
function of time,.
9.9. Even though electric motors are highly efficient 10– 20% of the power consumed is wasted, not being used for doing
useful work. Most of the 10–20% of the power lost is tr ansferred into heat dissipated by the copper wires use d to make the
coils of the motor. This heat adds to the heat of th e environment and adds to the demand on power plants providing the
power. The demand on the power plant can lead to incre ased greenhouse gases, particularly if the power plant u ses coal or
gas as fuel.

5.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839899.10. No, the efficiency is a very important consideration o f the light bulbs, but there are many other considerat ions. As
mentioned above, the cost of the bulbs and the life span of the bulbs are important considerations. For example, CFL bulbs
contain mercury, a neurotoxin, and must be disposed of as hazardous waste. When replacing incandescent bulb s that are
being controlled by a dimmer switch with LED, the dimme r switch may need to be replaced. The dimmer switches for LED
lights are comparably priced to the incandescent li ght switches, but this is an initial cost which should be considered. The
spectrum of light should also be considered, but th ere is a broad range of color temperatures availabl e, so you should be able
to find one that fits your needs. None of these consi derations mentioned are meant to discourage the use of LED or CFL light
bulbs, but they are considerations.
Conceptual Questions
1. If a wire is carrying a current, charges enter the wir e from the voltage source’s positive terminal and le ave at the negative
terminal, so the total charge remains zero while the curr ent flows through it.
3. Using one hand will reduce the possibility of “completi ng the circuit” and having current run through your body,
especially current running through your heart.
5. Even though the electrons collide with atoms and other electrons in the wire, they travel from the negative terminal to the
positive terminal, so they drift in one direction. Gas molec ules travel in completely random directions.
7. In the early years of light bulbs, the bulbs are par tially evacuated to reduce the amount of heat condu cted through the air to
the glass envelope. Dissipating the heat would cool t he filament, increasing the amount of energy needed to produce light
from the filament. It also protects the glass from th e heat produced from the hot filament. If the glass heats, it expands, and as
it cools, it contacts. This expansion and contraction could cause the glass to become brittle and crack, reducing the life of the
bulbs. Many bulbs are now partially filled with an ine rt gas. It is also useful to remove the oxygen to red uce the possibility of
the filament actually burning. When the original fil aments were replaced with more efficient tungsten fil aments, atoms from
the tungsten would evaporate off the filament at such high temperatures. The atoms collide with the atoms of the inert gas
and land back on the filament.
9. In carbon, resistivity increases with the amount of i mpurities, meaning fewer free charges. In silicon and germanium,
impurities decrease resistivity, meaning more free electro ns.
11. Copper has a lower resistivity than aluminum, so if length i s the same, copper must have the smaller diameter.
13. Device B shows a linear relationship and the device is ohmi c.
15. Although the conductors have a low resistance, the lin es from the power company can be kilometers long. Using a high
voltage reduces the current that is required to supply th e power demand and that reduces line losses.
17. The resistor would overheat, possibly to the point o f causing the resistor to burn. Fuses are commonly add ed to circuits to
prevent such accidents.
19. Very low temperatures necessitate refrigeration. Some materials require liquid nitrogen to cool them bel ow their critical
temperatures. Other materials may need liquid helium, whic h is even more costly.
Problems
21. a.;
b.,no. of protons=
23., no. of electrons=
25.
27.
29.
31.

5.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8398933. a.;
b.
35.
37.
39.;
41.
43. a.;
b. Under normal conditions, no it should not occur.
45., iron
47. a., gold;
b.
49.
51.
53.
55. a.;
b.;
c.;
d. It is converted into heat.
57.
59.
61. a.
b.
63.
65.

5.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8398967. a.;
b.
Additional Problems
69.
71. a.;
b.
73.
75.
77.;
b.
79.
Challenge Problems
81.
83. a.;
b.;
c. 1.25
85.
87. a.;
b.
89. a.;
b.
91. a.;
b. #electrons
c.;
d.
93.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.A: Current and Resistance (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.A.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839899.10: Current and Resistance (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

5.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839805.E: Heat and Heat Transfer Methods (Exercise)
Conceptual Questions
20.1: Current
1. Can a wire carry a current and still be neutral—that is, hav e a total charge of zero? Explain.
2. Car batteries are rated in ampere-hours (A⋅h). To what physical quantity do ampere-hours correspon d (voltage, charge,..
.), and what relationship do ampere-hours have to energy c ontent?
3. If two different wires having identical cross-sectiona l areas carry the same current, will the drift velocity be higher or
lower in the better conductor? Explain in terms of t he equation, by considering how the density of charge carriers
relates to whether or not a material is a good conductor.
4. Why are two conducting paths from a voltage source to an electrical device needed to operate the device?
5. In cars, one battery terminal is connected to the m etal body. How does this allow a single wire to supply cu rrent to
electrical devices rather than two wires?
6. Why isn’t a bird sitting on a high-voltage power li ne electrocuted? Contrast this with the situation in wh ich a large bird
hits two wires simultaneously with its wings.
20.2: Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits
7. The drop across a resistor means that there is a chan ge in potential or voltage across the resistor. Is t here any change in
current as it passes through a resistor? Explain.
8. How is the drop in a resistor similar to the pressure drop in a fluid flowing through a pipe?
20.3: Resistance and Resistivity
9. In which of the three semiconducting materials liste d in Table do impurities supply free charges? (Hint: Examine the range
of resistivity for each and determine whether the pure semiconductor has the higher or lower conductivity.)
10. Does the resistance of an object depend on the path current takes through it? Consider, for example, a rectangular bar—is
its resistance the same along its length as across its width? (See Figure.)
Does current taking two different paths through the same o bject encounter different resistance?
11. If aluminum and copper wires of the same length have the same resistance, which has the larger diameter? Why?
12. Explain why for the temperature variation of the re sistance of an object is not as accurate as
, which gives the temperature variation of resistivity ρ siz e 12{ρ} {}.
20.4: Electric Power and Energy
13. Why do incandescent lightbulbs grow dim late in thei r lives, particularly just before their filaments break?
14. The power dissipated in a resistor is given by, whic h means power decreases if resistance increases. Yet t his
power is also given by, which means power increases if res istance increases. Explain why there is no contradictio n
here.

5.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8398020.5: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
15. Give an example of a use of AC power other than in the household. Similarly, give an example of a use of DC power
other than that supplied by batteries.
16. Why do voltage, current, and power go through zero 120 time s per second for 60-Hz AC electricity?
17. You are riding in a train, gazing into the distanc e through its window. As close objects streak by, you n otice that the
nearby fluorescent lights make dashed streaks. Explain.
20.6: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
18. Using an ohmmeter, a student measures the resistance be tween various points on his body. He finds that the re sistance
between two points on the same finger is about the sam e as the resistance between two points on opposite ha nds—both are
several hundred thousand ohms. Furthermore, the resis tance decreases when more skin is brought into contac t with the
probes of the ohmmeter. Finally, there is a dramatic drop in resistance (to a few thousand ohms) when the sk in is wet.
Explain these observations and their implications regard ing skin and internal resistance of the human body.
19. What are the two major hazards of electricity?
20. Why isn’t a short circuit a shock hazard?
21. What determines the severity of a shock? Can you say th at a certain voltage is hazardous without further informat ion?
22. An electrified needle is used to burn off warts, with th e circuit being completed by having the patient sit on a large butt
plate. Why is this plate large?
23. Some surgery is performed with high-voltage electric ity passing from a metal scalpel through the tissue be ing cut.
Considering the nature of electric fields at the sur face of conductors, why would you expect most of the current to flow from
the sharp edge of the scalpel? Do you think high- or low-freq uency AC is used?
24. Some devices often used in bathrooms, such as hairdry ers, often have safety messages saying “Do not use when the
bathtub or basin is full of water.” Why is this so?
25. We are often advised to not flick electric switches with wet hands, dry your hand first. We are also advised to never throw
water on an electric fire. Why is this so?
26. Before working on a power transmission line, linemen wi ll touch the line with the back of the hand as a fina l check that
the voltage is zero. Why the back of the hand?
27. Why is the resistance of wet skin so much smaller than dry, and why do blood and other bodily fluids have l ow
resistances?
28. Could a person on intravenous infusion (an IV) be micros hock sensitive?
29. In view of the small currents that cause shock hazards and the larger currents that circuit breakers and f uses interrupt,
how do they play a role in preventing shock hazards?
20.7: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
30. Note that in Figure, both the concentration gradient and the Coulomb force tend to move ions into the cell. What
prevents this?
31. Define depolarization, repolarization, and the action pot ential.
32. Explain the properties of myelinated nerves in terms of the insulating properties of myelin.
Problems & Exercises
20.1: Current
33. What is the current in milliamperes produced by the solar cells of a pocket calculator through which 4.00 C of charge
passes in 4.00 h?

5.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980Solution
0.278 mA
34. A total of 600 C of charge passes through a flashlight in 0.500 h. What is the average current?
35. What is the current when a typical static charge of move s from your finger to a metal doorknob in?
Solution
0.250 A
36. Find the current when 2.00 nC jumps between your comb and h air over a time interval.
37. A large lightning bolt had a 20,000-A current and moved 30. 0 C of charge. What was its duration?
Solution
1.50ms
38. The 200-A current through a spark plug moves 0.300 mC of charge. How long does the spark last?
39. (a) A defibrillator sends a 6.00-A current through th e chest of a patient by applying a 10,000-V potential as in the figure
below. What is the resistance of the path? (b) The d efibrillator paddles make contact with the patient t hrough a conducting
gel that greatly reduces the path resistance. Discuss the difficulties that would ensue if a larger voltage we re used to produce
the same current through the patient, but with the p ath having perhaps 50 times the resistance. (Hint: The current must be
about the same, so a higher voltage would imply greate r power. Use this equation for power:.)
The capacitor in a defibrillation unit drives a current thr ough the heart of a patient.
Solution
(a)
(b) If a 50 times larger resistance existed, keepin g the current about the same, the power would be increa sed by a factor
of about 50 (based on the equation), causing much mor e energy to be transferred to the skin, which could
cause serious burns. The gel used reduces the resistance, and therefore reduces the power transferred to the skin.
40. During open-heart surgery, a defibrillator can be u sed to bring a patient out of cardiac arrest. The re sistance of the path is
and a 10.0-mA current is needed. What voltage should be applied?
41. (a) A defibrillator passes 12.0 A of current through the torso of a person for 0.0100 s. How much charge moves?
(b) How many electrons pass through the wires connected to th e patient? (See figure two problems earlier.)
Solution
(a) 0.120 C
(b)
42. A clock battery wears out after moving 10,000 C of charge through the clock at a rate of 0.500 mA.
(a) How long did the clock run?
(b) How many electrons per second flowed?

5.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8398043. The batteries of a submerged non-nuclear submarine supply 1000 A at full speed ahead. How long does it ta ke to move
Avogadro’s number () of electrons at this rate?
Solution
96.3 s
44. Electron guns are used in X-ray tubes. The electrons are accelerated through a relatively large voltage and directed onto a
metal target, producing X-rays.
(a) How many electrons per second strike the target if the current is 0.500 mA?
(b) What charge strikes the target in 0.750 s?
45. A large cyclotron directs a beam of nuclei onto a tar get with a beam current of 0.250 mA.
(a) How many nuclei per second is this?
(b) How long does it take for 1.00 C to strike the target?
(c) How long before 1.00 mol of nuclei strike the target?
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c)
46. Repeat the above example on Example, but for a wire made of silver and given there is one free electron per silv er atom.
47. Using the results of the above example on Example, fi nd the drift velocity in a copper wire of twice the d iameter and
carrying 20.0 A.
Solution
48. A 14-gauge copper wire has a diameter of 1.628 mm. Wh at magnitude current flows when the drift velocity is 1.00
mm/s? (See above example on Example for useful informati on.)
49. SPEAR, a storage ring about 72.0 m in diameter at the St anford Linear Accelerator (closed in 2009), has a 20.0- A
circulating beam of electrons that are moving at nearly th e speed of light. (See Figure.) How many electrons are in the be am?
Electrons circulating in the storage ring called SPEAR con stitute a 20.0-A current. Because they travel close to the speed of
light, each electron completes many orbits in each second.
Solution
20.2: Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits
50. What current flows through the bulb of a 3.00-V flashlight wh en its hot resistance is?
Solution
0.833 A
51. Calculate the effective resistance of a pocket calculat or that has a 1.35-V battery and through which 0.200 mA fl ows.

5.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8398052. What is the effective resistance of a car’s starter motor when 150 A flows through it as the car battery applies 11.0 V to
the motor?
Solution
53. How many volts are supplied to operate an indicator l ight on a DVD player that has a resistance of, given t hat 25.0
mA passes through it?
54. (a) Find the voltage drop in an extension cord having a resistance and through which 5.00 A is flowing.
(b) A cheaper cord utilizes thinner wire and has a res istance of. What is the voltage drop in it when 5.00 A
flows?
(c) Why is the voltage to whatever appliance is being used reduced by this amount? What is the effect on the
appliance?
Solution
(a) 0.300 V
(b) 1.50 V
(c) The voltage supplied to whatever appliance is be ing used is reduced because the total voltage drop f rom the wall to
the final output of the appliance is fixed. Thus, if t he voltage drop across the extension cord is large, th e voltage drop
across the appliance is significantly decreased, so t he power output by the appliance can be significantly decreased,
reducing the ability of the appliance to work properly.
55. A power transmission line is hung from metal towers wi th glass insulators having a resistance of. What
current flows through the insulator if the voltage is 200 k V? (Some high-voltage lines are DC.)
20.3: Resistance and Resistivity
56. What is the resistance of a 20.0-m-long piece of 12-gaug e copper wire having a 2.053-mm diameter?
Solution
0.104 Ω
57. The diameter of 0-gauge copper wire is 8.252 mm. Find the resistance of a 1.00-km length of such wire used for power
transmission.
58. If the 0.100-mm diameter tungsten filament in a lig ht bulb is to have a resistance of at, how long sho uld it
be?
Solution
59. Find the ratio of the diameter of aluminum to coppe r wire, if they have the same resistance per unit leng th (as they might
in household wiring).
60. What current flows through a 2.54-cm-diameter rod of pure silicon that is 20.0 cm long, when is applied to
it? (Such a rod may be used to make nuclear-particle dete ctors, for example.)
Solution
61. (a) To what temperature must you raise a copper wire, originally at, to double its resistance, neglecting any
changes in dimensions?
(b) Does this happen in household wiring under ordinary circu mstances?
62. A resistor made of Nichrome wire is used in an applic ation where its resistance cannot change more than 1.0 0% from its
value at. Over what temperature range can it be used?

5.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980Solution
to
63. Of what material is a resistor made if its resistance is 4 0.0% greater at than at?
64. An electronic device designed to operate at any temp erature in the range from to contains pure carbon
resistors. By what factor does their resistance increas e over this range?
Solution
1.03
65. (a) Of what material is a wire made, if it is 25.0 m long with a 0.100 mm diameter and has a resistance of at
(b) What is its resistance at?
66. Assuming a constant temperature coefficient of resi stivity, what is the maximum percent decrease in the r esistance of a
constantan wire starting at?
Solution
0.06%
67. A wire is drawn through a die, stretching it to four times i ts original length. By what factor does its resistance inc rease?
68. A copper wire has a resistance of at, and an iron wi re has a resistance of at the same temperature. At
what temperature are their resistance equal?
Solution
69. (a) Digital medical thermometers determine temperat ure by measuring the resistance of a semiconductor d evice called a
thermistor (which has) when it is at the same tempera ture as the patient. What is a patient’s temperature if the
thermistor’s resistance at that temperature is 82.0% of i ts value at (normal body temperature)?
(b) The negative value for α size 12{α} {} may not be maintained for very low temperatures. Discuss why and whether
this is the case here. (Hint: Resistance can’t become negat ive.)
70. Integrated Concepts
(a) Redo Exercise taking into account the thermal ex pansion of the tungsten filament. You may assume a thermal
expansion coefficient of.
(b) By what percentage does your answer differ from that i n the example?
Solution
(a) (total)
(b) 3.0% decrease
71. Unreasonable Results
(a) To what temperature must you raise a resistor made o f constantan to double its resistance, assuming a con stant
temperature coefficient of resistivity?
(b) To cut it in half?
(c) What is unreasonable about these results? (d) Which assumptions are unreasonable, or which premises are
inconsistent?
20.4: Electric Power and Energy
72. What is the power of a lightning bolt having a current o f?
Solution

5.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8398073. What power is supplied to the starter motor of a large truck that draws 250 A of current from a 24.0-V battery h ookup?
74. A charge of 4.00 C of charge passes through a pocket calculator’s solar cells in 4.00 h. What is the po wer output, given
the calculator’s voltage output is 3.00 V? (See Figure.)
The strip of solar cells just above the keys of this calculator c onvert light to electricity to supply its energy needs. (credit:
Evan-Amos, Wikimedia Commons)
75. How many watts does a flashlight that has pass through it in 0.5 00 h use if its voltage is 3.00 V?
76. Find the power dissipated in each of these extension cor ds:
(a) an extension cord having a resistance and through which 5.00 A is flowing;
(b) a cheaper cord utilizing thinner wire and with a resis tance of
Solution
(a) 1.50 W
(b) 7.50 W
77. Verify that the units of a volt-ampere are watts, as im plied by the equation.
78. Show that the units, as implied by the equation.
Solution
79. Show that the units, as implied by the equation.
80. Verify the energy unit equivalence that.
Solution
81. Electrons in an X-ray tube are accelerated through and directed toward a target to produce X-rays. Calcul ate
the power of the electron beam in this tube if it has a curr ent of 15.0 mA.
82. An electric water heater consumes 5.00 kW for 2.00 h per day. What is the cost of running it for one year if electricity
costs? See Figure.

5.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980
On-demand electric hot water heater. Heat is supplied to water o nly when needed. (credit: aviddavid, Flickr)
Solution
$438/y
83. With a 1200-W toaster, how much electrical energy is needed to make a slice of toast (cooking time = 1 minute)? At
, how much does this cost?
84. What would be the maximum cost of a CFL such that the total cost (investment plus operating) would be the s ame for
both CFL and incandescent 60-W bulbs? Assume the cost o f the incandescent bulb is 25 cents and that electr icity costs
. Calculate the cost for 1000 hours, as in the cost effe ctiveness of CFL example.
Solution
$6.25
85. Some makes of older cars have 6.00-V electrical systems.
(a) What is the hot resistance of a 30.0-W headlight in such a car?
(b) What current flows through it?
86. Alkaline batteries have the advantage of putting ou t constant voltage until very nearly the end of the ir life. How long will
an alkaline battery rated at and 1.58 V keep a 1.00-W fla shlight bulb burning?
Solution
1.58 h
87. A cauterizer, used to stop bleeding in surgery, puts out 2.00 mA at 15.0 kV.
(a) What is its power output?
(b) What is the resistance of the path?
88. The average television is said to be on 6 hours per day. Estimate the yearly cost of electricity to opera te 100 million TVs,
assuming their power consumption averages 150 W and the c ost of electricity averages.
Solution
$3.94 billion/year
89. An old lightbulb draws only 50.0 W, rather than its or iginal 60.0 W, due to evaporative thinning of its fi lament. By what
factor is its diameter reduced, assuming uniform thinn ing along its length? Neglect any effects caused by te mperature
differences.
90. 00-gauge copper wire has a diameter of 9.266 mm. Calcu late the power loss in a kilometer of such wire when it carries
Solution
25.5 W
91. Integrated Concepts

5.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980Cold vaporizers pass a current through water, evapora ting it with only a small increase in temperature. One s uch home
device is rated at 3.50 A and utilizes 120 V AC with 95.0 % efficiency.
(a) What is the vaporization rate in grams per minute?
(b) How much water must you put into the vaporizer for 8.0 0 h of overnight operation? (See Figure.)
This cold vaporizer passes current directly through water, vap orizing it directly with relatively little temperature increase.
92. Integrated Concepts
(a) What energy is dissipated by a lightning bolt ha ving a 20,000-A current, a voltage of, and a length of
1.00 ms?
(b) What mass of tree sap could be raised from to i ts boiling point and then evaporated by this energy, assuming
sap has the same thermal characteristics as water?
Solution
(a)
(b) 769 kg
93. Integrated Concepts
What current must be produced by a 12.0-V battery-op erated bottle warmer in order to heat 75.0 g of glass, 250 g of
baby formula, and of aluminum from to in 5.00 min?
94. Integrated Concepts
How much time is needed for a surgical cauterizer to raise the temperature of 1.00 g of tissue from to and
then boil away 0.500 g of water, if it puts out 2.00 mA at 1 5.0 kV? Ignore heat transfer to the surroundings.
Solution
45.0 s
95. Integrated Concepts
Hydroelectric generators (see Figure) at Hoover Dam produce a maximum current of at 250 kV.
(a) What is the power output?
(b) The water that powers the generators enters and le aves the system at low speed (thus its kinetic energy does
not change) but loses 160 m in altitude. How many cubi c meters per second are needed, assuming 85.0%
efficiency?

5.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980
Hydroelectric generators at the Hoover dam. (credit: Jon Sulli van)
96. Integrated Concepts
Assuming 95.0% efficiency for the conversion of electr ical power by the motor, what current must the 12.0-V b atteries
of a 750-kg electric car be able to supply:
(a) To accelerate from rest to 25.0 m/s in 1.00 min?
(b) To climb a -high hill in 2.00 min at a constant 25.0-m/s speed while exerting of
force to overcome air resistance and friction?
(c) To travel at a constant 25.0-m/s speed, exerting a force to overcome air resistance and friction?
See Figure.
This REVAi, an electric car, gets recharged on a street in London. (credit: Frank Hebbert)
Solution
(a) 343 A
(b)
(c)
97. Integrated Concepts
A light-rail commuter train draws 630 A of 650-V DC electr icity when accelerating.
(a) What is its power consumption rate in kilowatts?
(b) How long does it take to reach 20.0 m/s starting fro m rest if its loaded mass is, assuming 95.0%
efficiency and constant power?
(c) Find its average acceleration.
(d) Discuss how the acceleration you found for the lig ht-rail train compares to what might be typical for a n
automobile.
98. Integrated Concepts
(a) An aluminum power transmission line has a resistance of. What is its mass per kilometer?

5.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980(b) What is the mass per kilometer of a copper line having the same resistance? A lower resistance would short en the
heating time. Discuss the practical limits to speeding the heating by lowering the resistance.
Solution
(a)
(b)
99. Integrated Concepts
(a) An immersion heater utilizing 120 V can raise th e temperature of a -g aluminum cup containing 350 g of
water from to in 2.00 min. Find its resistance, assuming i t is constant during the process.
(b) A lower resistance would shorten the heating time. Discuss the practical limits to speeding the heatin g by lowering
the resistance.
100. Integrated Concepts
(a) What is the cost of heating a hot tub containin g 1500 kg of water from to, assuming 75.0% efficienc y
to account for heat transfer to the surroundings? The co st of electricity is.
(b) What current was used by the 220-V AC electric heater, if this took 4.00 h?
101. Unreasonable Results
(a) What current is needed to transmit of power at 480 V?
(b) What power is dissipated by the transmission lines if they have a resistance?
(c) What is unreasonable about this result?
(d) Which assumptions are unreasonable, or which premis es are inconsistent?
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c) The transmission lines dissipate more power than they are supposed to transmit.
(d) A voltage of 480 V is unreasonably low for a tran smission voltage. Long-distance transmission lines are kept at
much higher voltages (often hundreds of kilovolts) to redu ce power losses.
102. Unreasonable Results
(a) What current is needed to transmit of power at 10.0 kV?
(b) Find the resistance of 1.00 km of wire that would cause a 0.0100% power loss.
(c) What is the diameter of a 1.00-km-long copper wire havi ng this resistance?
(d) What is unreasonable about these results?
(e) Which assumptions are unreasonable, or which premis es are inconsistent?
103. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider an electric immersion heater used to heat a cup of water to make tea. Construct a problem in which you
calculate the needed resistance of the heater so th at it increases the temperature of the water and cup in a reasonable
amount of time. Also calculate the cost of the elect rical energy used in your process. Among the things to be
considered are the voltage used, the masses and heat c apacities involved, heat losses, and the time over which the
heating takes place. Your instructor may wish for you t o consider a thermal safety switch (perhaps bimetallic) that will
halt the process before damaging temperatures are reac hed in the immersion unit.
20.5: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
104. (a) What is the hot resistance of a 25-W light bulb tha t runs on 120-V AC?
(b) If the bulb’s operating temperature is, what is its re sistance at `?

5.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980105. Certain heavy industrial equipment uses AC power that has a p eak voltage of 679 V. What is the rms voltage?
Solution
480 V
106. A certain circuit breaker trips when the rms current is 15. 0 A. What is the corresponding peak current?
107. Military aircraft use 400-Hz AC power, because it is possi ble to design lighter-weight equipment at this higher
frequency. What is the time for one complete cycle of th is power?
Solution
2.50 ms
108. A North American tourist takes his 25.0-W, 120-V AC ra zor to Europe, finds a special adapter, and plugs it in to 240 V
AC. Assuming constant resistance, what power does the razor consume as it is ruined?
109. In this problem, you will verify statements made at th e end of the power losses for Example. (a) What current is needed
to transmit 100 MW of power at a voltage of 25.0 kV? (b) Find the power loss in a 1.00 -Ω size 12{1 "." "00"- %OM EGA }
{} transmission line. (c) What percent loss does this re present?
Solution
(a) 4.00 kA
(b) 16.0 MW
(c) 16.0%
110. A small office-building air conditioner operates on 408 -V AC and consumes 50.0 kW.
(a) What is its effective resistance?
(b) What is the cost of running the air conditioner during a hot summer month when it is on 8.00 h per d ay for 30 days
and electricity costs?
111. What is the peak power consumption of a 120-V AC microwave ov en that draws 10.0 A?
Solution
2.40 kW
112. What is the peak current through a 500-W room heater th at operates on 120-V AC power?
113. Two different electrical devices have the same power consumption, but one is meant to be operated on 120-V AC and
the other on 240-V AC.
(a) What is the ratio of their resistances?
(b) What is the ratio of their currents?
(c) Assuming its resistance is unaffected, by what facto r will the power increase if a 120-V AC device is conn ected to
240-V AC?
Solution
(a) 4.0
(b) 0.50
(c) 4.0
114. Nichrome wire is used in some radiative heaters.
(a) Find the resistance needed if the average power output is to be 1.00 kW utilizing 120-V AC.
(b) What length of Nichrome wire, having a cross-secti onal area of, is needed if the operating temperatu re is
(c) What power will it draw when first switched on?
115. Find the time after when the instantaneous voltage o f 60-Hz AC first reaches the following values:

5.E.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980(a)
(b)
(c) 0.
Solution
(a) 1.39 ms
(b) 4.17 ms
(c) 8.33 ms
116. (a) At what two times in the first period following does the instantaneous voltage in 60-Hz AC equal?
(b)?
20.6: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
117. (a) How much power is dissipated in a short circuit of 240- V AC through a resistance of?
(b) What current flows?
Solution
(a) 230 kW
(b) 960 A
118. What voltage is involved in a 1.44-kW short circuit thr ough a resistance?
119. Find the current through a person and identify the likel y effect on her if she touches a 120-V AC source
(a) if she is standing on a rubber mat and offers a total resi stance of;
(b) if she is standing barefoot on wet grass and has a resist ance of only.
Solution
(a) 0.400 mA, no effect
(b) 26.7 mA, muscular contraction for duration of the sho ck (can't let go)
120. While taking a bath, a person touches the metal case of a radio. The path through the person to the drai npipe and ground
has a resistance of. What is the smallest voltage on the case of the radio that could cause ventricular fibrillati on?
121. Foolishly trying to fish a burning piece of bread fro m a toaster with a metal butter knife, a man comes i nto contact with
120-V AC. He does not even feel it since, luckily, he is wearing rubber-soled shoes. What is the minimum resista nce of the
path the current follows through the person?
Solution
122. (a) During surgery, a current as small as applied di rectly to the heart may cause ventricular fibrillat ion. If the
resistance of the exposed heart is, what is the smallest vo ltage that poses this danger?
(b) Does your answer imply that special electrical safety prec autions are needed?
123. (a) What is the resistance of a 220-V AC short circuit t hat generates a peak power of 96.8 kW?
(b) What would the average power be if the voltage was 120 V AC?
Solution
(a)
(b) 14.4 kW
124. A heart defibrillator passes 10.0 A through a patient’s tors o for 5.00 ms in an attempt to restore normal beating.
(a) How much charge passed?
(b) What voltage was applied if 500 J of energy was dissip ated?

5.E.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83980(c) What was the path’s resistance?
(d) Find the temperature increase caused in the 8.00 kg o f affected tissue.
125. Integrated Concepts
A short circuit in a 120-V appliance cord has a resi stance. Calculate the temperature rise of the 2.00 g of
surrounding materials, assuming their specific heat c apacity is and that it takes 0.0500 s for a circuit
breaker to interrupt the current. Is this likely to be da maging?
Solution
Temperature increases. It is very likely to be damaging.
126. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a person working in an environment where ele ctric currents might pass through her body. Construc t a
problem in which you calculate the resistance of insul ation needed to protect the person from harm. Among t he things
to be considered are the voltage to which the person might be exposed, likely body resistance (dry, wet, …), and
acceptable currents (safe but sensed, safe and unfelt, …).
20.7: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
127. Integrated Concepts
Use the ECG in Figure to determine the heart rate in beats per minute assuming a constant time between beats.
Solution
80 beats/minute
128. Integrated Concepts
(a) Referring to Figure, find the time systolic pressure l ags behind the middle of the QRS complex.
(b) Discuss the reasons for the time lag.
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State University of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univer sity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
5.E: Heat and Heat Transfer Methods (Exercise) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
20: Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law (Exercises) has no license indicated. Original source:
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and -computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applicat ions-spring-2009.

5.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839905.S: Summary

5.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83990Key Terms
ampere (amp) SI unit for current;
circuit complete path that an electrical current travels alo ng
conventional currentcurrent that flows through a circuit from the positiv e terminal of a
battery through the circuit to the negative termina l of the battery
critical temperature temperature at which a material reaches superconducti vity
current density flow of charge through a cross-sectional area divided by the area
diodenonohmic circuit device that allows current flow in o nly one
direction
drift velocityvelocity of a charge as it moves nearly randomly thro ugh a
conductor, experiencing multiple collisions, averaged over a length
of a conductor, whose magnitude is the length of cond uctor
traveled divided by the time it takes for the charge s to travel the
length
electrical conductivity measure of a material’s ability to conduct or transmit electricity
electrical current rate at which charge flows,
electrical power time rate of change of energy in an electric circui t
Josephson junctionjunction of two pieces of superconducting material sepa rated by a
thin layer of insulating material, which can carry a supercurrent
Meissner effectphenomenon that occurs in a superconducting material where all
magnetic fields are expelled
nonohmic type of a material for which Ohm’s law is not valid
ohm () unit of electrical resistance,
ohmictype of a material for which Ohm’s law is valid, that is, the voltage
drop across the device is equal to the current times th e resistance
Ohm’s lawempirical relation stating that the current I is prop ortional to the
potential difference V; it is often written as, where R is the
resistance
resistanceelectric property that impedes current; for ohmic ma terials, it is the
ratio of voltage to current,
resistivityintrinsic property of a material, independent of its shape or size,
directly proportional to the resistance, denoted by
schematicgraphical representation of a circuit using standardiz ed symbols
for components and solid lines for the wire connecting the
components
SQUID(Superconducting Quantum Interference Device) device that is a
very sensitive magnetometer, used to measure extremely subtle
magnetic fields
superconductivityphenomenon that occurs in some materials where the resist ance
goes to exactly zero and all magnetic fields are expe lled, which
occurs dramatically at some low critical temperature

5.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83990Key Equations
Average electrical current
Definition of an ampere
Electrical current
Drift velocity
Current density
Resistivity
Common expression of Ohm’s law
Resistivity as a function of temperature
Definition of resistance
Resistance of a cylinder of material
Temperature dependence of resistance
Electric power
Power dissipated by a resistor
Summary
Electrical Current
The average electrical current is the rate at which cha rge flows, given by, where is the amount of charge
passing through an area in time.
The instantaneous electrical current, or simply the curr ent I, is the rate at which charge flows. Taking the limit a s the change in
time approaches zero, we have, where is the time deriva tive of the charge.
The direction of conventional current is taken as the dir ection in which positive charge moves. In a simple direct-cur rent (DC)
circuit, this will be from the positive terminal of the batte ry to the negative terminal.
The SI unit for current is the ampere, or simply the amp (A), where.
Current consists of the flow of free charges, such as electro ns, protons, and ions.
Model of Conduction in Metals
The current through a conductor depends mainly on the mot ion of free electrons.
When an electrical field is applied to a conductor, the fr ee electrons in a conductor do not move through a conduct or at a
constant speed and direction; instead, the motion is alm ost random due to collisions with atoms and other free el ectrons.
Even though the electrons move in a nearly random fas hion, when an electrical field is applied to the conducto r, the overall
velocity of the electrons can be defined in terms of a dri ft velocity.
The current density is a vector quantity defined as the cu rrent through an infinitesimal area divided by the area.
The current can be found from the current density,.
An incandescent light bulb is a filament of wire enclosed in a glass bulb that is partially evacuated. Current runs thro ugh the
filament, where the electrical energy is converted to li ght and heat.
Resistivity and Resistance
Resistance has units of ohms (), related to volts and amp eres by.
The resistance R of a cylinder of length L and cross-sectional area A is, where is the resistivi ty of the material.
Values of in Table 9.1 show that materials fall into thr ee groups—conductors, semiconductors, and insulators.

5.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83990Temperature affects resistivity; for relatively small t emperature changes, resistivity is, where is the
original resistivity and is the temperature coeffici ent of resistivity.
The resistance R of an object also varies with temperature:, where is the o riginal resistance, and R is the
resistance after the temperature change.
Ohm's Law
Ohm’s law is an empirical relationship for current, volt age, and resistance for some common types of circuit ele ments,
including resistors. It does not apply to other device s, such as diodes.
One statement of Ohm’s law gives the relationship among current I, voltage V, and resistance R in a simple circuit as.
Another statement of Ohm’s law, on a microscopic level, is.
Electrical Energy and Power
Electric power is the rate at which electric energy is supp lied to a circuit or consumed by a load.
Power dissipated by a resistor depends on the square of the cu rrent through the resistor and is equal to.
The SI unit for electric power is the watt and the SI unit fo r electric energy is the joule. Another common unit for electric
energy, used by power companies, is the kilowatt-hour (kW ⋅· h).
The total energy used over a time interval can be found b y.
Superconductors
Superconductivity is a phenomenon that occurs in some mate rials when cooled to very low critical temperatures, result ing in a
resistance of exactly zero and the expulsion of all magnet ic fields.
Materials that are normally good conductors (such as coppe r, gold, and silver) do not experience superconductivit y.
Superconductivity was first observed in mercury by Heike Kamerl ingh Onnes in 1911. In 1986, Dr. Ching Wu Chu of Houston
University fabricated a brittle, ceramic compound with a critical temperature close to the temperature of liquid nitrogen.
Superconductivity can be used in the manufacture of super conducting magnets for use in MRIs and high-speed, levitat ed trains.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 5.S: Summary is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
9.8: Current and Resistance (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: Resistive Networks
In the preceding few chapters, we discussed electric components, including capacitors, resistors, and diodes. In this chapter, we use
these electric components in circuits. A circuit is a collection of electrical components connected to accomplish a specific task. The
second section of this chapter covers the analysis of series and parallel circuits that consist of resi stors. Later in this chapter, we
introduce the basic equations and techniques to anal yze any circuit, including those that are not reducib le through simplifying
parallel and series elements. But first, we need to unders tand how to power a circuit.
6.1: Electromotive Force
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
6.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
6.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
6.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
6.6: RC Circuits
6.7: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments
6.7.1: Prelude to Circuits and DC Instruments
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters
6.7.6: Null Measurements
6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors
6.7.E: Circuits and DC Instruments (Exercise)
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
6.9: Practice
6.S: Summary
This page titled 6: Resistive Networks is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839926.1: Electromotive Force
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
Describe the electromotive force (emf) and the interna l resistance of a battery
Explain the basic operation of a battery
If you forget to turn off your car lights, they slowl y dim as the battery runs down. Why don’t they sudden ly blink off when the
battery’s energy is gone? Their gradual dimming impl ies that the battery output voltage decreases as the b attery is depleted. The
reason for the decrease in output voltage for deplet ed batteries is that all voltage sources have two fund amental parts—a source of
electrical energy and an internal resistance. In this sectio n, we examine the energy source and the internal resistance.
Introduction to Electromotive Force
V oltage has many sources, a few of which are shown in Fi gure. All such devices create a potential difference and can supply
current if connected to a circuit. A special type of potential difference is known as electromotive force (emf). The emf is not a
force at all, but the term ‘electromotive force’ is u sed for historical reasons. It was coined by Alessandro V olta in the 1800s, when
he invented the first battery, also known as the voltaic pile. Because the electromotive force is not a force, it is common to refer to
these sources simply as sources of emf (pronounced as the let ters “ee-em-eff”), instead of sources of electromotive forc e.
Figure: A variety of voltage sources. (a) The Brazos W ind Farm in Fluvanna, Texas; (b) the Krasnoyarsk Dam in Russia; (c) a
solar farm; (d) a group of nickel metal hydride batt eries. The voltage output of each device depends on i ts construction and load.
The voltage output equals emf only if there is no loa d. (credit a: modification of work by “Leaflet”/Wik imedia Commons; credit b:
modification of work by Alex Polezhaev; credit c: m odification of work by US Department of Energy; cred it d: modification of
work by Tiaa Monto)
If the electromotive force is not a force at all, t hen what is the emf and what is a source of emf? To a nswer these questions, consider
a simple circuit of a 12-V lamp attached to a 12-V b attery, as shown in Figure. The battery can be modeled as a two-terminalLearning Objectives

6.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83992device that keeps one terminal at a higher electric potential than the second terminal. The higher elect ric potential is sometimes
called the positive terminal and is labeled with a pl us sign. The lower-potential terminal is sometimes cal led the negative terminal
and labeled with a minus sign. This is the source of the emf.
Figure: A source of emf maintains one terminal at a h igher electric potential than the other terminal, a cting as a source of
current in a circuit.
When the emf source is not connected to the lamp, th ere is no net flow of charge within the emf source. Onc e the battery is
connected to the lamp, charges flow from one terminal of the battery, through the lamp (causing the lamp t o light), and back to the
other terminal of the battery. If we consider positiv e (conventional) current flow, positive charges leav e the positive terminal, travel
through the lamp, and enter the negative terminal.
Positive current flow is useful for most of the circui t analysis in this chapter, but in metallic wires and re sistors, electrons contribute
the most to current, flowing in the opposite directio n of positive current flow. Therefore, it is more rea listic to consider the
movement of electrons for the analysis of the circu it in Figure. The electrons leave the negative term inal, travel through the
lamp, and return to the positive terminal. In order fo r the emf source to maintain the potential differen ce between the two terminals,
negative charges (electrons) must be moved from the positive terminal to the negative terminal. The emf source acts as a charge
pump, moving negative charges from the positive term inal to the negative terminal to maintain the poten tial difference. This
increases the potential energy of the charges and, there fore, the electric potential of the charges.
The force on the negative charge from the electric field is in the opposite direction of the electric field, as shown in Figure. In
order for the negative charges to be moved to the n egative terminal, work must be done on the negative c harges. This requires
energy, which comes from chemical reactions in the b attery. The potential is kept high on the positive te rminal and low on the
negative terminal to maintain the potential differe nce between the two terminals. The emf is equal to the work done on the charge
per unit charge when there is no current flowing. Sin ce the unit for work is the joule and the unit for c harge is the
coulomb, the unit for emf is the volt.
The terminal voltage of a battery is voltage measured across the termin als of the battery when there is no load connected
to the terminal. An ideal battery is an emf source th at maintains a constant terminal voltage, independen t of the current between the
two terminals. An ideal battery has no internal resis tance, and the terminal voltage is equal to the emf of the battery. In the next
section, we will show that a real battery does have int ernal resistance and the terminal voltage is always less than the emf of the
battery.
The Origin of Battery Potential
The combination of chemicals and the makeup of the t erminals in a battery determine its emf. The lead acid battery used in cars
and other vehicles is one of the most common combina tions of chemicals. Figure shows a single cell (one of si x) of this
battery. The cathode (positive) terminal of the cell is connected to a lead oxide plate, whereas the anod e (negative) terminal is
connected to a lead plate. Both plates are immersed in sulfuric acid, the electrolyte for the system.

6.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83992
Figure: Chemical reactions in a lead-acid cell separa te charge, sending negative charge to the anode, whi ch is connected to the
lead plates. The lead oxide plates are connected to t he positive or cathode terminal of the cell. Sulfuric acid conducts the charge, as
well as participates in the chemical reaction.
Knowing a little about how the chemicals in a lead-acid battery interact helps in understanding the potenti al created by the battery.
Figure shows the result of a single chemical reaction. Two electrons are placed on the anode, making it negative, provided
that the cathode supplies two electrons. This leaves the cathode posi tively charged, because it has lost two electrons. In short, a
separation of charge has been driven by a chemical react ion.
Note that the reaction does not take place unless th ere is a complete circuit to allow two electrons to be supplied to the cathode.
Under many circumstances, these electrons come from the anode, flow through a resistance, and return to th e cathode. Note also
that since the chemical reactions involve substance s with resistance, it is not possible to create the emf without an internal
resistance.
Figure: In a lead-acid battery, two electrons are fo rced onto the anode of a cell, and two electrons are removed from the
cathode of the cell. The chemical reaction in a lea d-acid battery places two electrons on the anode and removes two from the
cathode. It requires a closed circuit to proceed, sinc e the two electrons must be supplied to the cathode.
Internal Resistance and Terminal Voltage
The amount of resistance to the flow of current withi n the voltage source is called the internal resistance. The internal resistance r
of a battery can behave in complex ways. It generally increases as a battery is depleted, due to the oxidat ion of the plates or the
reduction of the acidity of the electrolyte. However, internal resistance may also depend on the magnitu de and direction of the
current through a voltage source, its temperature, an d even its history. The internal resistance of recha rgeable nickel-cadmium cells,
for example, depends on how many times and how deeply they have been depleted. A simple model for a batt ery consists of an
idealized emf source and an internal resistance r (Figure).

6.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83992
Figure: A battery can be modeled as an idealized emf with an internal resistance (r). The terminal voltage of the battery is
Suppose an external resistor, known as the load resistance R, is connected to a voltage source such as a battery, as in Figure.
The figure shows a model of a battery with an emf, a n internal resistance r, and a load resistor R connected across its terminals.
Using conventional current flow, positive charges leave the positive terminal of the battery, travel through the resistor, and return to
the negative terminal of the battery. The terminal v oltage of the battery depends on the emf, the intern al resistance, and the current,
and is equal to
For a given emf and internal resistance, the terminal voltage decreases as the current increases due to the potential drop Ir of the
internal resistance.
Figure: Schematic of a voltage source and its load resi stor R. Since the internal resistance r is in series with the load, it can
significantly affect the terminal voltage and the cu rrent delivered to the load.
A graph of the potential difference across each elem ent the circuit is shown in Figure. A current I runs through the circuit, and
the potential drop across the internal resistor is equ al to Ir. The terminal voltage is equal to, which is equal to the potential
drop across the load resistor. As with potential energy, it is the change in voltage that is important. When the term
“voltage” is used, we assume that it is actually the change in the potential, or. However, is often omitted for con venience.Note

6.1.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83992
Figure: A graph of the voltage through the circuit of a battery and a load resistance. The electric pote ntial increases the emf of
the battery due to the chemical reactions doing work on the charges. There is a decrease in the electric p otential in the battery due
to the internal resistance. The potential decreases due to the internal resistance, making the terminal vol tage of the battery
equal to. The voltage then decreases by (IR). The current is equal to.
The current through the load resistor is. We see fro m this expression that the smaller the internal resi stance r, the greater
the current the voltage source supplies to its load R. As batteries are depleted, r increases. If r becomes a significant fraction of the
load resistance, then the current is significantly reduced, as the following example illustrates.
A given battery has a 12.00-V emf and an internal r esistance of. (a) Calculate its terminal voltage wh en connected to a
load. (b) What is the terminal voltage when connecte d to a load? (c) What power does the load
dissipate? (d) If the internal resistance grows to, find the current, terminal voltage, and power dissipat ed by a
load.
Strategy
The analysis above gave an expression for current wh en internal resistance is taken into account. Once th e current is found, the
terminal voltage can be calculated by using the equa tion. Once current is found, we can also find the powe r
dissipated by the resistor.
Solution
1. Entering the given values for the emf, load resistanc e, and internal resistance into the expression above yield s
Enter the known values into the equation to get the termin al voltage:
The terminal voltage here is only slightly lower than the emf, implying that the current drawn by this light load is n ot
significant.
2. Similarly, with, the current is
The terminal voltage is now
The terminal voltage exhibits a more significant reduc tion compared with emf, implying is a heavy load for th is
battery. A “heavy load” signifies a larger draw of current f rom the source but not a larger resistance.
3. The power dissipated by the load can be found using the f ormula. Entering the known values givesExample: Analyzing a Circuit with a Battery and a Load

6.1.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83992Note that this power can also be obtained using the expressio n or, where V is the terminal voltage (10.0 V in this
case).
4. Here, the internal resistance has increased, perhaps due to the depletion of the battery, to the point where it is as great as the
load resistance. As before, we first find the current by ente ring the known values into the expression, yielding
Now the terminal voltage is
and the power dissipated by the load is
We see that the increased internal resistance has signi ficantly decreased the terminal voltage, current, and p ower delivered
to a load.
Significance
The internal resistance of a battery can increase f or many reasons. For example, the internal resistance of a rechargeable battery
increases as the number of times the battery is rec harged increases. The increased internal resistance m ay have two effects on
the battery. First, the terminal voltage will decrease. Second, the battery may overheat due to the increased power dissipated by
the internal resistance.
If you place a wire directly across the two terminal o f a battery, effectively shorting out the terminals, th e battery will begin to
get hot. Why do you suppose this happens?
Solution
If a wire is connected across the terminals, the load resistance is close to zero, or at least considerably l ess than the internal
resistance of the battery. Since the internal resistan ce is small, the current through the circuit will be large,
. The large current causes a high power to be dissipa ted by the internal resistance. The power is dissip ated as
heat.
Battery Testers
Battery testers, such as those in Figure, use small load resistors to intentionally draw current to determi ne whether the terminal
potential drops below an acceptable level. Although i t is difficult to measure the internal resistance of a battery, battery testers can
provide a measurement of the internal resistance of the battery. If internal resistance is high, the batte ry is weak, as evidenced by its
low terminal voltage.Exercise

6.1.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83992
Figure: Battery testers measure terminal voltage under a load to determine the condition of a battery. (a) A US Navy
electronics technician uses a battery tester to test lar ge batteries aboard the aircraft carrier USS Nimitz. The battery tester she uses
has a small resistance that can dissipate large amounts of power. (b) The small device shown is used on small batt eries and has a
digital display to indicate the acceptability of the terminal voltage. (credit a: modification of work by Jason A. Johnston; credit b:
modification of work by Keith Williamson)
Some batteries can be recharged by passing a current through them in the direction opposite to the curre nt they supply to an
appliance. This is done routinely in cars and in batte ries for small electrical appliances and electronic devices (Figure). The
voltage output of the battery charger must be great er than the emf of the battery to reverse the curren t through it. This causes the
terminal voltage of the battery to be greater than the em f, since and I is now negative.
Figure: A car battery charger reverses the normal dir ection of current through a battery, reversing its ch emical reaction and
replenishing its chemical potential.
It is important to understand the consequences of t he internal resistance of emf sources, such as batter ies and solar cells, but often,
the analysis of circuits is done with the terminal v oltage of the battery, as we have done in the previo us sections. The terminal
voltage is referred to as simply as V, dropping the subscript “terminal.” This is because the internal resistance of the battery is
difficult to measure directly and can change over time.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.1: Electromotive Force is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.2: Electromotive Force by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-2.

6.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839936.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
Define the term equivalent resistance
Calculate the equivalent resistance of resistors connected in series
Calculate the equivalent resistance of resistors connected in parallel
In Current and Resistance, we described the term ‘resistance’ and explained t he basic design of a resistor. Basically, a resistor limits
the flow of charge in a circuit and is an ohmic devi ce where. Most circuits have more than one resistor. I f several resistors
are connected together and connected to a battery, t he current supplied by the battery depends on the equivalent resistance of the
circuit.
The equivalent resistance of a combination of resistor s depends on both their individual values and how the y are connected. The
simplest combinations of resistors are series and parall el connections (Figure). In a series circuit, the output current of the
first resistor flows into the input of the second re sistor; therefore, the current is the same in each res istor. In a parallel circuit, all of
the resistor leads on one side of the resistors are co nnected together and all the leads on the other sid e are connected together. In the
case of a parallel configuration, each resistor has the same potential drop across it, and the currents thr ough each resistor may be
different, depending on the resistor. The sum of the ind ividual currents equals the current that flows into the p arallel connections.
Figure: (a) For a series connection of resistors, the cur rent is the same in each resistor. (b) For a parallel c onnection of
resistors, the voltage is the same across each resistor.
Resistors in Series
Resistors are said to be in series whenever the curre nt flows through the resistors sequentially. Consider Figure, which shows
three resistors in series with an applied voltage equal to. Since there is only one path for the charges to flow through, the current
is the same through each resistor. The equivalent re sistance of a set of resistors in a series connecti on is equal to the algebraic sum
of the individual resistances.Learning Objectives

6.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993
Figure: (a) Three resistors connected in series to a vol tage source. (b) The original circuit is reduced to a n equivalent
resistance and a voltage source.
In Figure, the current coming from the voltage sour ce flows through each resistor, so the current throug h each resistor is the
same. The current through the circuit depends on the voltage supplied by the voltage source and the resi stance of the resistors. For
each resistor, a potential drop occurs that is equal to the loss of electric potential energy as a curre nt travels through each resistor.
According to Ohm’s law, the potential drop across a resistor when a current flows through it is calculated using the equation
, where is the current in amps () and is the resista nce in ohms. Since energy is conserved, and the volt age is equal to
the potential energy per charge, the sum of the vol tage applied to the circuit by the source and the p otential drops across the
individual resistors around a loop should be equal to zero:
This equation is often referred to as Kirchhoff’s loo p law, which we will look at in more detail later in th is chapter. For Figure,
the sum of the potential drop of each resistor and the voltage supplied by the voltage source should equal z ero:
Solving for
Since the current through each component is the same, the equality can be simplified to an equivalent resi stance (), which is just
the sum of the resistances of the individual resistors.
Any number of resistors can be connected in series. If resi stors are connected in series, the equivalent resistance is
One result of components connected in a series circui t is that if something happens to one component, it a ffects all the other
components. For example, if several lamps are connected i n series and one bulb burns out, all the other lamps go dark.Equivalent Resistance in Series Circuits

6.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993A battery with a terminal voltage of 9 V is connecte d to a circuit consisting of four and one resistors all in series
(Figure). Assume the battery has negligible internal resi stance.
a. Calculate the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
b. Calculate the current through each resistor.
c. Calculate the potential drop across each resistor.
d. Determine the total power dissipated by the resistors and the power supplied by the battery.
Figure: A simple series circuit with five resistors.
Strategy
In a series circuit, the equivalent resistance is the algebraic sum of the resistances. The current throu gh the circuit can be found
from Ohm’s law and is equal to the voltage divided by the equivalent resistance. The potential drop across each resistor can be
found using Ohm’s law. The power dissipated by each resi stor can be found using, and the total power dissipa ted by
the resistors is equal to the sum of the power dissip ated by each resistor. The power supplied by the batt ery can be found using
Solution
1. The equivalent resistance is the algebraic sum of th e resistances (Equation):
2. The current through the circuit is the same for each resi stor in a series circuit and is equal to the applied voltage div ided by
the equivalent resistance:
Note that the sum of the potential drops across each resist or is equal to the voltage supplied by the battery.
3. The power dissipated by a resistor is equal to, and the p ower supplied by the battery is equal to.
Significance
There are several reasons why we would use multiple resis tors instead of just one resistor with a resistance equal to the
equivalent resistance of the circuit. Perhaps a resist or of the required size is not available, or we need to dissipate the heat
generated, or we want to minimize the cost of resisto rs. Each resistor may cost a few cents to a few dollars, but when
multiplied by thousands of units, the cost saving may be app reciable.Example: Equivalent Resistance, Current, and Power in a Series Circuit

6.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993Some strings of miniature holiday lights are made to short out when a bulb burns out. The device that causes the short is called
a shunt, which allows current to flow around the open c ircuit. A “short” is like putting a piece of wire acr oss the component.
The bulbs are usually grouped in series of nine bul bs. If too many bulbs burn out, the shunts eventually open. What causes
this?
Answer
The equivalent resistance of nine bulbs connected in series is 9 R. The current is. If one bulb burns out, the
equivalent resistance is 8 R, and the voltage does not change, but the current i ncreases. As more bulbs burn out,
the current becomes even higher. Eventually, the curren t becomes too high, burning out the shunt.
Let’s briefly summarize the major features of resistors in series:
1. Series resistances add together to get the equivalent resistance (Equation):
2. The same current flows through each resistor in serie s.
3. Individual resistors in series do not get the total sou rce voltage, but divide it. The total potential drop acros s a series
configuration of resistors is equal to the sum of the po tential drops across each resistor.
Resistors in Parallel
Figure shows resistors in parallel, wired to a voltag e source. Resistors are in parallel when one end of all the resistors are
connected by a continuous wire of negligible resista nce and the other end of all the resistors are also connected to one another
through a continuous wire of negligible resistance. T he potential drop across each resistor is the same. Cu rrent through each
resistor can be found using Ohm’s law, where the volt age is constant across each resistor. For example, an au tomobile’s
headlights, radio, and other systems are wired in parall el, so that each subsystem utilizes the full voltage o f the source and can
operate completely independently. The same is true of th e wiring in your house or any building.
Figure: Two resistors connected in parallel to a volta ge source. (b) The original circuit is reduced to an equivalent resistance
and a voltage source.
The current flowing from the voltage source in Figure depends on the voltage supplied by the voltage sou rce and the
equivalent resistance of the circuit. In this case, t he current flows from the voltage source and enters a junction, or node, where the
circuit splits flowing through resistors and. As the cha rges flow from the battery, some go through resistor and some flow
through resistor. The sum of the currents flowing int o a junction must be equal to the sum of the curren ts flowing out of the
junction:Exercise

6.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993This equation is referred to as Kirchhoff’s junction rule and will be discussed in detail in the next section. In Figure, the
junction rule gives. There are two loops in this circ uit, which leads to the equations and. Note the
voltage across the resistors in parallel are the same () and the current is additive:
Solving for the
Generalizing to any number of resistors, the equiva lent resistance of a parallel connection is related to the individual
resistances by
This relationship results in an equivalent resistance that is less than the smallest of the individual resi stances. When resistors are
connected in parallel, more current flows from the so urce than would flow for any of them individually, so the total resistance is
lower.
Three resistors,, and, are connected in parallel. The parallel connection is attached to a
voltage source.
a. What is the equivalent resistance?
b. Find the current supplied by the source to the paralle l circuit.
c. Calculate the currents in each resistor and show that th ese add together to equal the current output of the sour ce.
d. Calculate the power dissipated by each resistor.
e. Find the power output of the source and show that it equal s the total power dissipated by the resistors.
Strategy
(a) The total resistance for a parallel combination o f resistors is found using Equation. (Note that in these calculations,
each intermediate answer is shown with an extra digit.)
(b) The current supplied by the source can be found fr om Ohm’s law, substituting for the total resistance.
(c) The individual currents are easily calculated f rom Ohm’s law, since each resistor gets the full voltag e. The total
current is the sum of the individual currents:
(d) The power dissipated by each resistor can be foun d using any of the equations relating power to curren t, voltage, and
resistance, since all three are known. Let us use, since each resistor gets full voltage.
(e) The total power can also be calculated in several ways, use.
SolutionEquivalent Resistance in Parallel Circuits
Example: Analysis of a parallel circuit

6.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839931. The total resistance for a parallel combination of r esistors is found using Equation. Entering known values g ives
The total resistance with the correct number of signifi cant digits is. As predicted, is less than the smallest
individual resistance.
2. The total current can be found from Ohm’s law, substitu ting for the total resistance. This gives
Current I for each device is much larger than for the same devices conn ected in series (see the previous example). A circuit
with parallel connections has a smaller total resistance th an the resistors connected in series.
3. The individual currents are easily calculated from Ohm’ s law, since each resistor gets the full voltage. Thus,
Similarly,
and
The total current is the sum of the individual currents:
4. The power dissipated by each resistor can be found using any of the equations relating power to current, voltage, and
resistance, since all three are known. Let us use, since each resistor gets full voltage. Thus,
Similarly,
and
5. The total power can also be calculated in several ways. Choo sing and entering the total current yields
Significance
Total power dissipated by the resistors is also 18.00 W:
Notice that the total power dissipated by the resistors eq uals the power supplied by the source.

6.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993Consider the same potential difference applied to the same three resistors connected in series. Would th e
equivalent resistance of the series circuit be high er, lower, or equal to the three resistor in parallel? Would the current through
the series circuit be higher, lower, or equal to the cu rrent provided by the same voltage applied to the p arallel circuit? How
would the power dissipated by the resistor in series compa re to the power dissipated by the resistors in parallel?
Solution
The equivalent of the series circuit would be, which is higher than the equivalent
resistance of the parallel circuit. The equivalent resistor of any number of resistors is always higher than the
equivalent resistance of the same resistors connected i n parallel. The current through for the series circ uit would be
, which is lower than the sum of the currents through each resistor in the parallel circuit,. This is
not surprising since the equivalent resistance of the series circuit is higher. The current through a serie s connection of any
number of resistors will always be lower than the curr ent into a parallel connection of the same resistor s, since the
equivalent resistance of the series circuit will be hig her than the parallel circuit. The power dissipated b y the resistors in
series would be, which is lower than the power dissipated in th e parallel circuit.
How would you use a river and two waterfalls to model a parallel configuration of two resistors? How does this an alogy break
down?
Solution
A river, flowing horizontally at a constant rate, spli ts in two and flows over two waterfalls. The water molec ules are
analogous to the electrons in the parallel circuits. The number of water molecules that flow in the river a nd falls must be
equal to the number of molecules that flow over each waterfall, just like sum of the current through each resistor must be
equal to the current flowing into the parallel circu it. The water molecules in the river have energy due to their motion and
height. The potential energy of the water molecules i n the river is constant due to their equal heights. Thi s is analogous to
the constant change in voltage across a parallel circui t. V oltage is the potential energy across each resistor.
The analogy quickly breaks down when considering the en ergy. In the waterfall, the potential energy is conver ted into
kinetic energy of the water molecules. In the case of electrons flowing through a resistor, the potential dr op is converted
into heat and light, not into the kinetic energy of the e lectrons.
Let us summarize the major features of resistors in paral lel:
1. Equivalent resistance is found from Equation and is s maller than any individual resistance in the combinati on.
2. The potential drop across each resistor in parallel is the same.
3. Parallel resistors do not each get the total current; th ey divide it. The current entering a parallel combinatio n of resistors is equal
to the sum of the current through each resistor in parall el.
In this chapter, we introduced the equivalent resista nce of resistors connect in series and resistors connec ted in parallel. You may
recall from the Section on Capacitance, we introduced the equivalent capacitance of capaci tors connected in series and parallel.
Circuits often contain both capacitors and resistor s. Table summarizes the equations used for the equ ivalent resistance and
equivalent capacitance for series and parallel connectio ns.
Table: Summary for Equivalent Resistance and Capacita nce in Series and Parallel CombinationsExercise
Exercise

6.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993Series combination Parallel combination
Equivalent capacitance
Equivalent resistance
Combinations of Series and Parallel
More complex connections of resistors are often just com binations of series and parallel connections. Such com binations are
common, especially when wire resistance is considered. In that case, wire resistance is in series with other resistances that are in
parallel.
Combinations of series and parallel can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance using the technique i llustrated in Figure.
Various parts can be identified as either series or p arallel connections, reduced to their equivalent resi stances, and then further
reduced until a single equivalent resistance is lef t. The process is more time consuming than difficult. Here, we note the equivalent
resistance as.
Figure: (a) The original circuit of four resistors. (b) Step 1: The resistors and are in series and the equi valent resistance
is (c) Step 2: The reduced circuit shows resistors and are in parallel, with an equivalent resistance of.
(d) Step 3: The reduced circuit shows that and are i n series with an equivalent resistance of which is the
equivalent resistance. (e) The reduced circuit with a voltage source of with an equivalent resistance of.
This results in a current of from the voltage source.

6.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993Notice that resistors and are in series. They can be combined into a single equivalent resistance. One me thod of keeping
track of the process is to include the resistors as subscr ipts. Here the equivalent resistance of and is
The circuit now reduces to three resistors, shown in Fig ure. Redrawing, we now see that resistors and consti tute a
parallel circuit. Those two resistors can be reduced to an e quivalent resistance:
This step of the process reduces the circuit to two r esistors, shown in in Figure. Here, the circuit reduc es to two resistors,
which in this case are in series. These two resistors can be reduced to an equivalent resistance, which is the equivalent resistance of
the circuit:
The main goal of this circuit analysis is reached, and the c ircuit is now reduced to a single resistor and single vo ltage source.
Now we can analyze the circuit. The current provided b y the voltage source is. This current runs through
resistor and is designated as. The potential drop acr oss can be found using Ohm’s law:
Looking at Figure, this leaves to be dropped across the parallel combination of and. The current
through can be found using Ohm’s law:
The resistors and are in series so the currents and are equal to
Using Ohm’s law, we can find the potential drop across t he last two resistors. The potential drops are and
. The final analysis is to look at the power supplied b y the voltage source and the power dissipated by the resistors.
The power dissipated by the resistors is
The total energy is constant in any process. Therefore, the power supplied by the voltage source is
Analyzing the power supplied to the circuit and the p ower dissipated by the resistors is a good check for t he validity of the analysis;
they should be equal.
Figure shows resistors wired in a combination of series a nd parallel. We can consider to be the resistance of wires
leading to and.
a. Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
b. What is the potential drop across resistor?
c. Find the current through resistor.Example: Combining Series and parallel circuits

6.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993d. What power is dissipated by?
Figure: These three resistors are connected to a voltag e source so that and are in parallel with one anoth er and that
combination is in series with.
Strategy
(a) To find the equivalent resistance, first find th e equivalent resistance of the parallel connection of and. Then use this
result to find the equivalent resistance of the series connection with.
(b) The current through can be found using Ohm’s law and the voltage applied. The current through is equa l to the
current from the battery. The potential drop across the resistor (which represents the resistance in th e connecting wires)
can be found using Ohm’s law.
(c) The current through can be found using Ohm’s law. The voltage across can be found using.
(d) Using Ohm’s law, the power dissipated by the resistor can also be found using.
Solution
1. To find the equivalent resistance of the circuit, noti ce that the parallel connection of and is in series wit h, so the
equivalent resistance is
The total resistance of this combination is intermedi ate between the pure series and pure parallel values (and,
respectively).
2. The current through is equal to the current supplie d by the battery:
The voltage across is
The voltage applied to and is less than the voltage sup plied by the battery by an amount. When wire resistance i s
large, it can significantly affect the operation of th e devices represented by and.
3. To find the current through, we must first find the vol tage applied to it. The voltage across the two resistors in parallel is
the same:
Now we can find the current through resistance using Ohm’s law:

6.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993The current is less than the 2.00 A that flowed through wh en it was connected in parallel to the battery in the previous
parallel circuit example.
4. The power dissipated by is given by
Significance
The analysis of complex circuits can often be simpl ified by reducing the circuit to a voltage source an d an equivalent
resistance. Even if the entire circuit cannot be red uced to a single voltage source and a single equivale nt resistance, portions of
the circuit may be reduced, greatly simplifying the an alysis.
Consider the electrical circuits in your home. Give a t least two examples of circuits that must use a comb ination of series and
parallel circuits to operate efficiently.
Solution
All the overhead lighting circuits are in parallel and connected to the main supply line, so when one bulb burns out, all the
overhead lighting does not go dark. Each overhead li ght will have at least one switch in series with the lig ht, so you can
turn it on and off.
A refrigerator has a compressor and a light that goe s on when the door opens. There is usually only one cord for the
refrigerator to plug into the wall. The circuit conta ining the compressor and the circuit containing the lighting circuit are in
parallel, but there is a switch in series with the lig ht. A thermostat controls a switch that is in series wit h the compressor to
control the temperature of the refrigerator.
Practical Implications
One implication of this last example is that resista nce in wires reduces the current and power delivered t o a resistor. If wire
resistance is relatively large, as in a worn (or a ve ry long) extension cord, then this loss can be signi ficant. If a large current is
drawn, the IR drop in the wires can also be significant and may become appar ent from the heat generated in the cord.
For example, when you are rummaging in the refrigerator and the motor comes on, the refrigerator light dims momentarily.
Similarly, you can see the passenger compartment ligh t dim when you start the engine of your car (althoug h this may be due to
resistance inside the battery itself).
What is happening in these high-current situations i s illustrated in Figure. The device represented by ha s a very low
resistance, so when it is switched on, a large current fl ows. This increased current causes a larger IR drop in the wires represented
by, reducing the voltage across the light bulb (which is), which then dims noticeably.Exercise

6.2.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993
Figure: Why do lights dim when a large appliance is sw itched on? The answer is that the large current the a ppliance motor
draws causes a significant IR drop in the wires and reduces the voltage across the l ight.
1. Draw a clear circuit diagram, labeling all resistors and voltage sources. This step includes a list of the known value s for the
problem, since they are labeled in your circuit diagram.
2. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful.
3. Determine whether resistors are in series, parallel, o r a combination of both series and parallel. Examine the circuit diagram
to make this assessment. Resistors are in series if the same current must pass sequentially through them.
4. Use the appropriate list of major features for series or p arallel connections to solve for the unknowns. There is one list for
series and another for parallel.
5. Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consis tent.
Two resistors connected in series are connected to two resistors that are connected in parallel. The s eriesparallel combination is connected to a battery. Each resistor has a resistance of 10.00 Ohms. The wires connec ting the resistors
and battery have negligible resistance. A current o f 2.00 Amps runs through resistor. What is the voltage supplied by the
voltage source?
Strategy
Use the steps in the preceding problem-solving strategy to find the solution for this example.
SolutionProblem-Solving Strategy: Series and Parallel Resistors
Example: Combining Series and Parallel circuits

6.2.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83993
Figure: To find the unknown voltage, we must first fi nd the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
1. Draw a clear circuit diagram (Figure).
2. The unknown is the voltage of the battery. In order to fi nd the voltage supplied by the battery, the equivalent resistance
must be found.
3. In this circuit, we already know that the resistors an d are in series and the resistors and are in parallel. The
equivalent resistance of the parallel configuration of the resistors and is in series with the series configuration of
resistors and.
4. The voltage supplied by the battery can be found by m ultiplying the current from the battery and the equiv alent resistance
of the circuit. The current from the battery is equal t o the current through and is equal to 2.00 A. We need t o find the
equivalent resistance by reducing the circuit. To reduc e the circuit, first consider the two resistors in parall el. The equivalent
resistance is
This parallel combination is in series with the other two resistors, so the equivalent resistance of the circuit is
. The voltage supplied by the battery is therefore.
5. One way to check the consistency of your results is to cal culate the power supplied by the battery and the power dis sipated
by the resistors. The power supplied by the battery is.
Since they are in series, the current through equals the current through. Since, the current through ea ch will be
1.00 Amps. The power dissipated by the resistors is equal t o the sum of the power dissipated by each resistor:
Since the power dissipated by the resistors equals the power supplied by the battery, our solution seems consistent.
Significance
If a problem has a combination of series and parallel, as in this example, it can be reduced in steps by us ing the preceding
problem-solving strategy and by considering individ ual groups of series or parallel connections. When finding for a
parallel connection, the reciprocal must be taken wi th care. In addition, units and numerical results must be reasonable.
Equivalent series resistance should be greater, wherea s equivalent parallel resistance should be smaller, fo r example. Power
should be greater for the same devices in parallel compar ed with series, and so on.
This page titled 6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.3: Resistors in Series and Parallel by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

6.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839946.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
State Kirchhoff’s junction rule
State Kirchhoff’s loop rule
Analyze complex circuits using Kirchhoff’s rules
We have just seen that some circuits may be analyze d by reducing a circuit to a single voltage source a nd an equivalent resistance.
Many complex circuits cannot be analyzed with the ser ies-parallel techniques developed in the preceding sections. In this section,
we elaborate on the use of Kirchhoff’s rules to analyze more complex circuits. For example, the circuit in Fi gure is known as a
multi-loop circuit, which consists of junctions. A junction, also known a s a node, is a connection of three or more wires. In t his
circuit, the previous methods cannot be used, because not all the resistors are in clear series or paralle l configurations that can be
reduced. Give it a try. The resistors and are in seri es and can be reduced to an equivalent resistance. T he same is true of
resistors and. But what do you do then?
Even though this circuit cannot be analyzed using th e methods already learned, two circuit analysis rules c an be used to analyze
any circuit, simple or complex. The rules are known as Kirchhoff’s rules, after their inventor Gustav Kirchhoff (1824–1887).
Figure: This circuit cannot be reduced to a combinat ion of series and parallel connections. However, we ca n use Kirchhoff’s
rules to analyze it.
Kirchhoff’s first rule—the junction rule. The sum of a ll currents entering a junction must equal the sum of all cu rrents
leaving the junction:
Kirchhoff’s second rule—the loop rule. The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any closed circuit path (loop)
must be zero:
We now provide explanations of these two rules, follo wed by problem-solving hints for applying them and a worked example that
uses them.
Kirchhoff’s First Rule
Kirchhoff’s first rule (the junction rule) applies to the charge entering and leaving a junc tion (Figure). As stated earlier, a
junction, or node, is a connection of three or more wires. Current is the flow of charge, and charge is co nserved; thus, whatever
charge flows into the junction must flow out.Learning Objectives
Kirchhoff’s Rules

6.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994
Figure: Charge must be conserved, so the sum of current s into a junction must be equal to the sum of currents out of the
junction.
Although it is an over-simplification, an analogy can be made with water pipes connected in a plumbing junc tion. If the wires in
Figure were replaced by water pipes, and the water was assumed to be incompressible, the volume of water flo wing into the
junction must equal the volume of water flowing out of the j unction.
Kirchhoff’s Second Rule
Kirchhoff’s second rule (the loop rule) applies to potential differences. The loop rule i s stated in terms of potential V rather than
potential energy, but the two are related since. In a closed loop, whatever energy is supplied by a vol tage source, the energy
must be transferred into other forms by the devices in the loop, since there are no other ways in which en ergy can be transferred
into or out of the circuit. Kirchhoff’s loop rule sta tes that the algebraic sum of potential differences, i ncluding voltage supplied by
the voltage sources and resistive elements, in any l oop must be equal to zero. For example, consider a si mple loop with no
junctions, as in Figure.
Figure: A simple loop with no junctions. Kirchhoff’s l oop rule states that the algebraic sum of the voltage differences is equal
to zero.
The circuit consists of a voltage source and three ex ternal load resistors. The labels a, b, c, and d serve as references, and have no
other significance. The usefulness of these labels wil l become apparent soon. The loop is designated as Loo p abcda, and the labels
help keep track of the voltage differences as we tra vel around the circuit. Start at point a and travel to point b. The voltage of the
voltage source is added to the equation and the poten tial drop of the resistor is subtracted. From point b to c, the potential drop
across is subtracted. From c to d, the potential drop across is subtracted. From points d to a, nothing is done because there
are no components.
Figure shows a graph of the voltage as we travel aroun d the loop. V oltage increases as we cross the battery, wh ereas voltage
decreases as we travel across a resistor. The potential drop, or change in the electric potential, is equal to t he current through the
resistor times the resistance of the resistor. Since the wires have negligible resistance, the voltage remains constant as we cross the
wires connecting the components.

6.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994
Figure: A voltage graph as we travel around the circ uit. The voltage increases as we cross the battery and d ecreases as we
cross each resistor. Since the resistance of the wire is qu ite small, we assume that the voltage remains constant a s we cross the
wires connecting the components.
Then Kirchhoff’s loop rule states
The loop equation can be used to find the current throu gh the loop:
This loop could have been analyzed using the previous methods, but we will demonstrate the power of Kirchhoff’s method in the
next section.
Applying Kirchhoff’s Rules
By applying Kirchhoff’s rules, we generate a set of li near equations that allow us to find the unknown valu es in circuits. These may
be currents, voltages, or resistances. Each time a rule is applied, it produces an equation. If there are as many independent equations
as unknowns, then the problem can be solved.
Using Kirchhoff’s method of analysis requires several step s, as listed in the following procedure.
1. Label points in the circuit diagram using lowercase lette rs a, b, c, …. These labels simply help with orientation.
2. Locate the junctions in the circuit. The junctions are points where three or more wires connect. Label each junc tion with the
currents and directions into and out of it. Make sure a t least one current points into the junction and at least on e current
points out of the junction.
3. Choose the loops in the circuit. Every component mus t be contained in at least one loop, but a component may be c ontained
in more than one loop.
4. Apply the junction rule. Again, some junctions should not be included in the analysis. You need only use enough no des to
include every current.
5. Apply the loop rule. Use the map in Figure.Problem-Solving Strategy: Kirchhoff’s Rules

6.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994
Figure: Each of these resistors and voltage sources is tra versed from a to b. (a) When moving across a resistor in the same
direction as the current flow, subtract the potential drop. (b) When moving across a resistor in the opposite direction as the current
flow, add the potential drop. (c) When moving across a voltage source from the negative terminal to the p ositive terminal, add the
potential drop. (d) When moving across a voltage sourc e from the positive terminal to the negative termina l, subtract the potential
drop.
Let’s examine some steps in this procedure more closel y. When locating the junctions in the circuit, do no t be concerned about the
direction of the currents. If the direction of curren t flow is not obvious, choosing any direction is sufficie nt as long as at least one
current points into the junction and at least one cu rrent points out of the junction. If the arrow is in the opposite direction of the
conventional current flow, the result for the current in question will be negative but the answer will still be corr ect.
The number of nodes depends on the circuit. Each curre nt should be included in a node and thus included i n at least one junction
equation. Do not include nodes that are not linearly indep endent, meaning nodes that contain the same information.
Consider Figure. There are two junctions in this circ uit: Junction b and Junction e. Points a, c, d, and f are not junctions,
because a junction must have three or more connectio ns. The equation for Junction b is, and the equation for Junction e
is. These are equivalent equations, so it is necessary to keep only one of them.
Figure: At first glance, this circuit contains two jun ctions, Junction b and Junction e, but only one should be considered
because their junction equations are equivalent.
When choosing the loops in the circuit, you need en ough loops so that each component is covered once, with out repeating loops.
Figure shows four choices for loops to solve a sample c ircuit; choices (a), (b), and (c) have a sufficient am ount of loops to
solve the circuit completely. Option (d) reflects more loops than necessary to solve the circuit.

6.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994
Figure: Panels (a)–(c) are sufficient for the analysis of the circuit. In each case, the two loops shown cont ain all the circuit
elements necessary to solve the circuit completely. Pane l (d) shows three loops used, which is more than necessary. Any two loops
in the system will contain all information needed to solve the circuit. Adding the third loop provides red undant information.
Consider the circuit in Figure. Let us analyze this circuit to find the current through each resistor. Fi rst, label the circuit as
shown in part (b).
Figure: (a) A multi-loop circuit. (b) Label the cir cuit to help with orientation.
Next, determine the junctions. In this circuit, points b and e each have three wires connected, making them junctio ns. Start to apply
Kirchhoff’s junction rule by drawing arrows represent ing the currents and labeling each arrow, as shown i n Figure
. Junction b shows that and Junction e shows that. Since Junction e gives the same information of
Junction b, it can be disregarded. This circuit has three unknowns, so we need three linearly independent equations to analyze it.

6.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994
Figure: (a) This circuit has two junctions, labeled b and e, but only node b is used in the analysis. (b) Lab eled arrows represent
the currents into and out of the junctions.
Next we need to choose the loops. In Figure, Loop abefa includes the voltage source and resistors and. The loop
starts at point a, then travels through points b, e, and f, and then back to point a. The second loop, Loop ebcde, starts at point e and
includes resistors and, and the voltage source.
Figure: Choose the loops in the circuit.
Now we can apply Kirchhoff’s loop rule, using the map in Figure. Starting at point a and moving to point b, the resistor is
crossed in the same direction as the current flow, so the potential drop is subtracted. Moving from point b to point e, the
resistor is crossed in the same direction as the cu rrent flow so the potential drop is subtracted. Movi ng from point e to
point f, the voltage source is crossed from the negative t erminal to the positive terminal, so is added. The re are no
components between points f and a. The sum of the voltage differences must equal zero:
Finally, we check loop ebcde. We start at point e and move to point b, crossing in the opposite direction as the current f low.
The potential drop is added. Next, we cross and in the same direction as the current flow and subtrac t the potential
drops and. Note that the current is the same throu gh resistors and,because they are connected in seri es. Finally, the
voltage source is crossed from the positive terminal to the negative terminal, and the voltage source i s subtracted. The sum of
these voltage differences equals zero and yields the l oop equation
We now have three equations, which we can solve for the thre e unknowns.
To solve the three equations for the three unknown c urrents, start by eliminating current. First add Equat ion times to
Equation. The result is Equation:

6.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994Next, subtract Equation from Equation. The result is Eq uation:
We can solve Equations and for current. Adding seve n times Equation and three times Equation results
in, or. Using Equation results in. Finally, Equati on yields.
One way to check that the solutions are consistent is to check the power supplied by the voltage sources and the power dissipated
by the resistors:
Note that the solution for the current is negative. This is the correct answer, but suggests that the arr ow originally drawn in the
junction analysis is the direction opposite of conve ntional current flow. The power supplied by the seco nd voltage source is 58 W
and not −58 W.
Find the currents flowing in the circuit in Figure.
Figure: This circuit is combination of series and paral lel configurations of resistors and voltage sources. This circuit
cannot be analyzed using the techniques discussed in Electromotive Force but can be analyzed using Kirchhoff’s rules.
Strategy
This circuit is sufficiently complex that the currents cannot be found using Ohm’s law and the series-paral lel techniques—it is
necessary to use Kirchhoff’s rules. Currents have been labeled, and in the figure, and assumptions have been made
about their directions. Locations on the diagram hav e been labeled with letters a through h. In the solution, we apply the
junction and loop rules, seeking three independent equati ons to allow us to solve for the three unknown currents.
Solution
Applying the junction and loop rules yields the follo wing three equations. We have three unknowns, so three equations are
required.Example: Calculating Current by Using Kirchhoff’s Rules

6.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994Simplify the equations by placing the unknowns on one side o f the equations.
Simplify the equations. The first loop equation can be simplified by dividing both sides by 3.00. The sec ond loop equation can
be simplified by dividing both sides by 6.00.
The results are
Significance
A method to check the calculations is to compute the power dissipated by the resistors and the power suppl ied by the voltage
sources:
The power supplied equals the power dissipated by the resist ors.
In considering the following schematic and the power su pplied and consumed by a circuit, will a voltage sourc e always provide
power to the circuit, or can a voltage source consume power?
AnswerExercise

6.3.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994The circuit can be analyzed using Kirchhoff’s loop ru le. The first voltage source supplies power:. The
second voltage source consumes power:
Find the current flowing in the circuit in Figure.
Figure: This circuit consists of three resistors and two b atteries connected in series. Note that the batteries a re connected
with opposite polarities.
Strategy
This circuit can be analyzed using Kirchhoff’s rules. T here is only one loop and no nodes. Choose the direc tion of current flow.
For this example, we will use the clockwise direction f rom point a to point b. Consider Loop abcda and use Figure to
write the loop equation. Note that according to Figure, b attery will be added and battery will be subtracted.
Solution
Applying the junction rule yields the following three equ ations. We have one unknown, so one equation is required:
Simplify the equations by placing the unknowns on one side o f the equations. Use the values given in the figure.
Significance
The power dissipated or consumed by the circuit equal s the power supplied to the circuit, but notice that the current in the
battery is flowing through the battery from the positive terminal to the negative terminal and consumes power.
The power supplied equals the power dissipated by the resist ors and consumed by the battery.Example: Calculating Current by Using Kirchhoff’s Rules

6.3.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994When using Kirchhoff’s laws, you need to decide which loops to use and the direction of current flow through each loop. In
analyzing the circuit in Example, the direction of current flow was chosen to be clockwise, from point a to point b. How
would the results change if the direction of the current was chosen to be counterclockwise, from point b to point a?
Answer
The current calculated would be equal to instead of. The sum of the power dissipated and the power
consumed would still equal the power supplied.
Multiple Voltage Sources
Many devices require more than one battery. Multiple v oltage sources, such as batteries, can be connected in series configurations,
parallel configurations, or a combination of the two.
In series, the positive terminal of one battery is con nected to the negative terminal of another battery. Any number of voltage
sources, including batteries, can be connected in se ries. Two batteries connected in series are shown in Fig ure. Using
Kirchhoff’s loop rule for the circuit in part (b) gives th e result
Figure: (a) Two batteries connected in series with a l oad resistor. (b) The circuit diagram of the two batt eries and the load
resistor, with each battery modeled as an idealized em f source and an internal resistance.
When voltage sources are in series, their internal re sistances can be added together and their emfs can be added together to get the
total values. Series connections of voltage sources a re common—for example, in flashlights, toys, and othe r appliances. Usually,
the cells are in series in order to produce a larger total e mf. In Figure, the terminal voltage is
Note that the same current I is found in each battery because they are connected in series. The disadvantage of series connections
of cells is that their internal resistances are additive.
Batteries are connected in series to increase the vol tage supplied to the circuit. For instance, an LED flash light may have two AAA
cell batteries, each with a terminal voltage of 1.5 V, to provide 3.0 V to the flashlight.
Any number of batteries can be connected in series. For N batteries in series, the terminal voltage is equal toExercise

6.3.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994where the equivalent resistance is
When a load is placed across voltage sources in series, as in Figure, we can find the current:
As expected, the internal resistances increase the equivalen t resistance.
Figure: Two batteries connect in series to an LED bulb, as found in a flashlight.
V oltage sources, such as batteries, can also be connecte d in parallel. Figure shows two batteries with identical emfs in
parallel and connected to a load resistance. When the batteries are connect in parallel, the positive termi nals are connected together
and the negative terminals are connected together, a nd the load resistance is connected to the positive an d negative terminals.
Normally, voltage sources in parallel have identical e mfs. In this simple case, since the voltage sources ar e in parallel, the total emf
is the same as the individual emfs of each battery.
Figure: (a) Two batteries connect in parallel to a l oad resistor. (b) The circuit diagram shows the shows bat tery as an emf
source and an internal resistor. The two emf sources hav e identical emfs (each labeled by) connected in par allel that produce the
same emf.
Consider the Kirchhoff analysis of the circuit in Figure. There are two loops and a node at point b and.Note

6.3.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83994Node b:.
Loop abcfa:.
Loop fcdef:
Solving for the current through the load resistor resu lts in, where. The terminal voltage is equal to th e
potential drop across the load resistor.
The parallel connection reduces the internal resistan ce and thus can produce a larger current.
Any number of batteries can be connected in parallel. For N batteries in parallel, the terminal voltage is equal to
where the equivalent resistance is
As an example, some diesel trucks use two 12-V batterie s in parallel; they produce a total emf of 12 V but can deliver the larger
current needed to start a diesel engine.
In summary, the terminal voltage of batteries in ser ies is equal to the sum of the individual emfs minu s the sum of the internal
resistances times the current. When batteries are con nected in parallel, they usually have equal emfs an d the terminal voltage is
equal to the emf minus the equivalent internal resi stance times the current, where the equivalent interna l resistance is smaller than
the individual internal resistances. Batteries are connected in series to increase the terminal voltag e to the load. Batteries are
connected in parallel to increase the current to the l oad.
Solar Cell Arrays
Another example dealing with multiple voltage sources is that of combinations of solar cells - wired in both series and parallel
combinations to yield a desired voltage and current. Photovoltaic generation, which is the conversion of sunlight directly into
electricity, is based upon the photoelectric effect. The photoelectric effect is beyond the scope of thi s chapter and is covered in
Photons and Matter Waves, but in general, photons hitting the surface of a solar cel l create an electric current in the cell.
Most solar cells are made from pure silicon. Most singl e cells have a voltage output of about 0.5 V, while t he current output is a
function of the amount of sunlight falling on the ce ll (the incident solar radiation known as the insolat ion). Under bright noon
sunlight, a current per unit area of about of cell surfa ce area is produced by typical single-crystal cells.
Individual solar cells are connected electrically i n modules to meet electrical energy needs. They can be wired together in series or
in parallel - connected like the batteries discussed earlier. A solar-cell array or module usually consist s of between 36 and 72 cells,
with a power output of 50 W to 140 W.
Solar cells, like batteries, provide a direct current (dc) voltage. Current from a dc voltage source is un idirectional. Most household
appliances need an alternating current (ac) voltage.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.3: Kirchhoff's Rules is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Note

6.3.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8399410.4: Kirchhoff's Rules by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me2.

6.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839956.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
List the basic concepts involved in house wiring
Define the terms thermal hazard and shock hazard
Describe the effects of electrical shock on human phys iology and their relationship to the amount of current t hrough the
body
Explain the function of fuses and circuit breakers
Electricity presents two known hazards: thermal and sho ck. A thermal hazard is one in which an excessive electric current causes
undesired thermal effects, such as starting a fire in the wall of a house. A shock hazard occurs when an electric current passes
through a person. Shocks range in severity from painful, but otherwise harmless, to heart-stopping lethality. In this section, we
consider these hazards and the various factors affec ting them in a quantitative manner. We also examine systems and devices for
preventing electrical hazards.
Thermal Hazards
Electric power causes undesired heating effects whenev er electric energy is converted into thermal energy at a rate faster than it can
be safely dissipated. A classic example of this is the short circuit, a low-resistance path between terminals of a voltage source. An
example of a short circuit is shown in Figure. A toas ter is plugged into a common household electrical out let. Insulation on
wires leading to an appliance has worn through, allowi ng the two wires to come into contact, or “short.” As a result, thermal energy
can quickly raise the temperature of surrounding materi als, melting the insulation and perhaps causing a fire.
The circuit diagram shows a symbol that consists of a si ne wave enclosed in a circle. This symbol represents an alternating current
(ac) voltage source. In an ac voltage source, the vol tage oscillates between a positive and negative maxim um amplitude. Up to now,
we have been considering direct current (dc) voltage sources, but many of the same concepts are applicable to ac circuits.
Figure: A short circuit is an undesired low-resistance p ath across a voltage source. (a) Worn insulation on the wires of a toaster
allow them to come into contact with a low resistance r. Since, thermal power is created so rapidly that th e cord melts or
burns. (b) A schematic of the short circuit.
Another serious thermal hazard occurs when wires supply ing power to an appliance are overloaded. Electrical wires and appliances
are often rated for the maximum current they can sa fely handle. The term “overloaded” refers to a condi tion where the current
exceeds the rated maximum current. As current flows th rough a wire, the power dissipated in the supply wires i s, where
is the resistance of the wires and I is the current flowing through the wires. If either I or is too large, the wires overheat.
Fuses and circuit breakers are used to limit excessive curren ts.
Shock Hazards
Electric shock is the physiological reaction or inj ury caused by an external electric current passing t hrough the body. The effect of
an electric shock can be negative or positive. When a current with a magnitude above 300 mA passes throug h the heart, death may
occur. Most electrical shock fatalities occur because a current causes ventricular fibrillation, a massiv ely irregular and often fatal,Learning Objectives

6.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83995beating of the heart. On the other hand, a heart attack victim, whose heart is in fibrillation, can be saved by an electric shock from a
defibrillator.
The effects of an undesirable electric shock can va ry in severity: a slight sensation at the point of c ontact, pain, loss of voluntary
muscle control, difficulty breathing, heart fibrilla tion, and possibly death. The loss of voluntary musc le control can cause the victim
to not be able to let go of the source of the current.
The major factors upon which the severity of the effects of electrical shock depend are
1. The amount of current I
2. The path taken by the current
3. The duration of the shock
4. The frequency f of the current for dc)
Our bodies are relatively good electric conductors du e to the body’s water content. A dangerous condition occurs when the body is
in contact with a voltage source and “ground.” The te rm “ground” refers to a large sink or source of elec trons, for example, the
earth (thus, the name). When there is a direct path to ground, large currents will pass through the part s of the body with the lowest
resistance and a direct path to ground. A safety prec aution used by many professions is the wearing of in sulated shoes. Insulated
shoes prohibit a pathway to ground for electrons thr ough the feet by providing a large resistance. Whenev er working with highpower tools, or any electric circuit, ensure that you d o not provide a pathway for current flow (especially a cross the heart). A
common safety precaution is to work with one hand, reducing the possibility of providing a current path through t he heart.
Very small currents pass harmlessly and unfelt throug h the body. This happens to you regularly without yo ur knowledge. The
threshold of sensation is only 1 mA and, although unple asant, shocks are apparently harmless for currents less than 5 mA. A great
number of safety rules take the 5-mA value for the maximum allowed shock. At 5–30 mA and above, the curr ent can stimulate
sustained muscular contractions, much as regular nerve impulses do (Figure). Very large currents (above 300 mA) cause the
heart and diaphragm of the lung to contract for the duration of the shock. Both the heart and respiratio n stop. Both often return to
normal following the shock.
Figure: An electric current can cause muscular contra ctions with varying effects. (a) The victim is “thrown ” backward by
involuntary muscle contractions that extend the legs a nd torso. (b) The victim can’t let go of the wire th at is stimulating all the
muscles in the hand. Those that close the fingers are str onger than those that open them.
Current is the major factor determining shock severi ty. A larger voltage is more hazardous, but since, the severity of the
shock depends on the combination of voltage and resi stance. For example, a person with dry skin has a resista nce of about.
If he comes into contact with 120-V ac, a current
passes harmlessly through him. The same person soaking wet may have a resistance of and the same 120 V will produce a
current of 12 mA—above the “can’t let go” threshold and p otentially dangerous.

6.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83995Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
Figure shows the schematic for a simple ac circuit wi th no safety features. This is not how power is distribut ed in practice.
Modern household and industrial wiring requires the three-wire system, shown schematically in part (b), which has several s afety
features, with live, neutral, and ground wires. First is the familiar circuit breaker (or fuse) to prevent ther mal overload. Second is a
protective case around the appliance, such as a toaste r or refrigerator. The case’s safety feature is that it prevents a person from
touching exposed wires and coming into electrical contact with the circuit, helping prevent shocks.
Figure: (a) Schematic of a simple ac circuit with a voltage source and a single appliance represented by t he resistance R.
There are no safety features in this circuit. (b) The three-wire system connects the neutral wire to ground at the voltage source and
user location, forcing it to be at zero volts and supp lying an alternative return path for the current th rough ground. Also grounded to
zero volts is the case of the appliance. A circuit bre aker or fuse protects against thermal overload and is i n series on the active
(live/hot) wire.
There are three connections to ground shown in. Reca ll that a ground connection is a low-resistance path directly to ground.
The two ground connections on the neutral wire force i t to be at zero volts relative to ground, giving the wire its name. This wire is
therefore safe to touch even if its insulation, usu ally white, is missing. The neutral wire is the return path for the current to follow to
complete the circuit. Furthermore, the two ground conn ections supply an alternative path through ground (a good conductor) to
complete the circuit. The ground connection closest t o the power source could be at the generating plant, wh ereas the other is at the
user’s location. The third ground is to the case of the appliance, through the green ground wire, forci ng the case, too, to be at zero
volts. The live or hot wire (hereafter referred to as “live/hot”) supplies voltage and current to operate the appliance. Figure
shows a more pictorial version of how the three-wire system is connected through a three-prong plug to an appliance.
Figure: The standard three-prong plug can only be in serted in one way, to ensure proper function of the t hree-wire system.

6.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83995Insulating plastic is color-coded to identify live/ hot, neutral, and ground wires, but these codes vary aro und the world. It is essential
to determine the color code in your region. Striped coati ngs are sometimes used for the benefit of those who are co lorblind.
Grounding the case solves more than one problem. The simplest problem is worn insulation on the live/hot wi re that allows it to
contact the case, as shown in Figure. Lacking a ground connection, a severe shock is possible. This is parti cularly dangerous
in the kitchen, where a good connection to ground is available through water on the floor or a water fauc et. With the ground
connection intact, the circuit breaker will trip, forci ng repair of the appliance.
Figure: Worn insulation allows the live/hot wire to c ome into direct contact with the metal case of this a ppliance. (a) The
ground connection being broken, the person is severely shocked. The appliance may operate normally in this situation. (b) With a
proper ground, the circuit breaker trips, forcing re pair of the appliance.
A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) is a safety device found in updated kitchen and bathroom wiring that works based on
electromagnetic induction. GFCIs compare the currents i n the live/hot and neutral wires. When live/hot and ne utral currents are not
equal, it is almost always because current in the neutr al is less than in the live/hot wire. Then some of the current, called a leakage
current, is returning to the voltage source by a path other than through the neutral wire. It is assumed th at this path presents a
hazard. GFCIs are usually set to interrupt the circuit i f the leakage current is greater than 5 mA, the accep ted maximum harmless
shock. Even if the leakage current goes safely to gr ound through an intact ground wire, the GFCI will trip, forcing repair of the
leakage.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.7: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

6.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839966.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
Describe how to connect a voltmeter in a circuit to mea sure voltage
Describe how to connect an ammeter in a circuit to meas ure current
Describe the use of an ohmmeter
Ohm’s law and Kirchhoff’s method are useful to analyze and design electrical circuits, providing you with t he voltages across, the
current through, and the resistance of the component s that compose the circuit. To measure these parameter s require instruments,
and these instruments are described in this section.
DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
Whereas voltmeter s measure voltage, ammeter s measure current. Some of the meters in automobile dash boards, digital cameras,
cell phones, and tuner-amplifiers are actually volt meters or ammeters (Figure). The internal constructi on of the simplest of
these meters and how they are connected to the system t hey monitor give further insight into applications o f series and parallel
connections.
Figure: The fuel and temperature gauges (far right a nd far left, respectively) in this 1996 V olkswagen are voltmeters that
register the voltage output of “sender” units. These un its are proportional to the amount of gasoline in the tank and to the engine
temperature. (credit: Christian Giersing)
Measuring Current with an Ammeter
To measure the current through a device or componen t, the ammeter is placed in series with the device or component. A series
connection is used because objects in series have th e same current passing through them. (See Figure, wher e the ammeter is
represented by the symbol A.)Learning Objectives

6.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83996
Figure: (a) When an ammeter is used to measure the cur rent through two resistors connected in series to a batt ery, a single
ammeter is placed in series with the two resistors because the current is the same through the two resistors in ser ies. (b) When two
resistors are connected in parallel with a battery, th ree meters, or three separate ammeter readings, are ne cessary to measure the
current from the battery and through each resistor. T he ammeter is connected in series with the component i n question.
Ammeters need to have a very low resistance, a fractio n of a milliohm. If the resistance is not negligibl e, placing the ammeter in
the circuit would change the equivalent resistance o f the circuit and modify the current that is being measured. Since the current in
the circuit travels through the meter, ammeters norma lly contain a fuse to protect the meter from damage from currents which are
too high.
Measuring Voltage with a Voltmeter
A voltmeter is connected in parallel with whatever de vice it is measuring. A parallel connection is used b ecause objects in parallel
experience the same potential difference. (See Figure, wher e the voltmeter is represented by the symbol V.)
Figure: To measure potential differences in this series circuit, the voltmeter (V) is placed in parallel wit h the voltage source or
either of the resistors. Note that terminal voltage is measured between the positive terminal and the negati ve terminal of the battery
or voltage source. It is not possible to connect a volt meter directly across the emf without including the i nternal resistance r of the
battery.
Since voltmeters are connected in parallel, the voltm eter must have a very large resistance. Digital voltme ters convert the analog
voltage into a digital value to display on a digita l readout (Figure). Inexpensive voltmeters have resi stances on the order of
, whereas high-precision voltmeters have resistances on the order of. The value of the resistance may vary,
depending on which scale is used on the meter.

6.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83996
Figure: (a) An analog voltmeter uses a galvanometer t o measure the voltage. (b) Digital meters use an analo g-to-digital
converter to measure the voltage. (credit a and cred it b: Joseph J. Trout)
Analog and Digital Meters
You may encounter two types of meters in the physics l ab: analog and digital. The term ‘analog’ refers to signals or information
represented by a continuously variable physical quant ity, such as voltage or current. An analog meter uses a galvanometer, which is
essentially a coil of wire with a small resistance, in a magnetic field, with a pointer attached that poin ts to a scale. Current flows
through the coil, causing the coil to rotate. To use the galvanometer as an ammeter, a small resistance is placed in parallel with the
coil. For a voltmeter, a large resistance is placed i n series with the coil. A digital meter uses a compon ent called an analog-to-digital
(A to D) converter and expresses the current or voltag e as a series of the digits 0 and 1, which are used to run a digital display. Most
analog meters have been replaced by digital meters.
Digital meters are able to detect smaller currents tha n analog meters employing galvanometers. How does this e xplain their
ability to measure voltage and current more accurately than analog meters?
[Hide Solution]
Since digital meters require less current than analo g meters, they alter the circuit less than analog me ters. Their resistance as a
voltmeter can be far greater than an analog meter, and their resistance as an ammeter can be far less tha n an analog meter. Consult
Figure and Figure and their discussion in the text
In this virtual lab simulation, you may construct circuits with resistor s, voltage sources, ammeters and voltmeters to test y our
knowledge of circuit design.Check Your Understanding
Note

6.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83996Ohmmeters
An ohmmeter is an instrument used to measure the res istance of a component or device. The operation of t he ohmmeter is based on
Ohm’s law. Traditional ohmmeters contained an intern al voltage source (such as a battery) that would be c onnected across the
component to be tested, producing a current through the component. A galvanometer was then used to measu re the current and the
resistance was deduced using Ohm’s law. Modern digital meters use a constant current source to pass curren t through the
component, and the voltage difference across the comp onent is measured. In either case, the resistance is m easured using Ohm’s
law where the voltage is known and the current is measured, or the current is known and the voltage is measured.
The component of interest should be isolated from the circuit; otherwise, you will be measuring the equiva lent resistance of the
circuit. An ohmmeter should never be connected to a “ live” circuit, one with a voltage source connected to it and current running
through it. Doing so can damage the meter.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

6.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839976.6: RC Circuits
By the end of the section, you will be able to:
Describe the charging process of a capacitor
Describe the discharging process of a capacitor
List some applications of RC circuits
When you use a flash camera, it takes a few seconds t o charge the capacitor that powers the flash. The ligh t flash discharges the
capacitor in a tiny fraction of a second. Why does ch arging take longer than discharging? This question a nd several other
phenomena that involve charging and discharging capacito rs are discussed in this module.
Circuits with Resistance and Capacitance
An RC circuit is a circuit containing resistance and capacitance. As presented in Capacitance, the capacitor is an electrical
component that stores electric charge, storing energy in a n electric field.
Figure shows a simple RC circuit that employs a dc (direct current) voltage source, a resistor, a capacitor, and a twoposition switch. The circuit allows the capacitor to b e charged or discharged, depending on the position o f the switch. When the
switch is moved to position \(A\), the capacitor charges, resulting in the circuit in Figure. When the switch is moved to
position B, the capacitor discharges through the resistor.
Figure: (a) An RC circuit with a two-pole switch that can be used to c harge and discharge a capacitor. (b) When the switch is
moved to position A, the circuit reduces to a simple series connection of the voltage source, the resistor, the capacitor, and t he
switch. (c) When the switch is moved to position B, the circuit reduces to a simple series connection of the resistor, the capacitor,
and the switch. The voltage source is removed from the circuit.
Charging a Capacitor
We can use Kirchhoff’s loop rule to understand the ch arging of the capacitor. This results in the equatio n. This
equation can be used to model the charge as a funct ion of time as the capacitor charges. Capacitance is defined as, so the
voltage across the capacitor is. Using Ohm’s law, the potential drop across the resistor is, and the curre nt is
defined as.
This differential equation can be integrated to find an eq uation for the charge on the capacitor as a function of tim e.Learning Objectives

6.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83997Let, then. The result is
Simplifying results in an equation for the charge on the ch arging capacitor as a function of time:
A graph of the charge on the capacitor versus time is shown in Figure. First note that as time approache s infinity, the
exponential goes to zero, so the charge approaches t he maximum charge and has units of coulombs. The u nits of RC are
seconds, units of time. This quantity is known as the time constant:
At time, the charge equal to of the maximum charge. Notice that the time rate
change of the charge is the slope at a point of the charge versus time plot. The slope of the graph is la rge at time and
approaches zero as time increases.
As the charge on the capacitor increases, the current through the resistor decreases, as shown in Figure. T he current through
the resistor can be found by taking the time derivative o f the charge.
At time, the current through the resistor is. As tim e approaches infinity, the current approaches zero. At time,
the current through the resistor is.

6.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83997
Figure: (a) Charge on the capacitor versus time as the capacitor charges. (b) Current through the resistor v ersus time. (c)
V oltage difference across the capacitor. (d) V oltage difference across the resistor.
Figures and Figure show the voltage differences acro ss the capacitor and the resistor, respectively. As the charge on the
capacitor increases, the current decreases, as does the vo ltage difference across the resistor. The voltage
difference across the capacitor increases as.
Discharging a Capacitor
When the switch in Figure is moved to position B, the circuit reduces to the circuit in part (c), a nd the charged capacitor is
allowed to discharge through the resistor. A graph of t he charge on the capacitor as a function of time is shown in Figure.
Using Kirchhoff’s loop rule to analyze the circuit as the capacitor discharges results in the equation, which simplifies
to. Using the definition of current and integrating the loop equation yields an equation for the charge on the
capacitor as a function of time:
Here, Q is the initial charge on the capacitor and is the time constant of the circuit. As shown in the graph, the charge
decreases exponentially from the initial charge, approa ching zero as time approaches infinity.
The current as a function of time can be found by taki ng the time derivative of the charge:
The negative sign shows that the current flows in the op posite direction of the current found when the capac itor is charging. Figure
shows an example of a plot of charge versus time and current versus time. A plot of the voltage difference across the
capacitor and the voltage difference across the resist or as a function of time are shown in Figures and. Note that the
magnitudes of the charge, current, and voltage all decrea se exponentially, approaching zero as time increases.

6.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83997
Figure: (a) Charge on the capacitor versus time as the capacitor discharges. (b) Current through the resistor versus time. (c)
V oltage difference across the capacitor. (d) V oltage difference across the resistor.
Now we can explain why the flash camera mentioned at the beginning of this section takes so much longer to charge than
discharge: The resistance while charging is signific antly greater than while discharging. The internal r esistance of the battery
accounts for most of the resistance while charging. As t he battery ages, the increasing internal resistance makes the charging
process even slower.
One application of an RC circuit is the relaxation oscillator, as shown below. The relaxation oscillator consists of a voltage
source, a resistor, a capacitor, and a neon lamp. The neon lamp acts like an open circuit (infinite resist ance) until the potential
difference across the neon lamp reaches a specific voltage. At that voltage, the lamp acts like a short ci rcuit (zero resistance),
and the capacitor discharges through the neon lamp a nd produces light. In the relaxation oscillator shown, the voltage source
charges the capacitor until the voltage across the capacitor is 80 V. When this happens, the neon in th e lamp breaks down and
allows the capacitor to discharge through the lamp, pr oducing a bright flash. After the capacitor fully disc harges through the
neon lamp, it begins to charge again, and the proce ss repeats. Assuming that the time it takes the capacito r to discharge is
negligible, what is the time interval between flashes?
StrategyExample: The Relaxation Oscillator

6.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83997The time period can be found from considering the equ ation. where
Solution
The neon lamp flashes when the voltage across the cap acitor reaches 80 V. The RC time constant is equal to
. We can solve the voltage equation for the time it ta kes the capacitor to reach 80 V:
Significance
One application of the relaxation oscillator is for c ontrolling indicator lights that flash at a frequenc y determined by the values
for R and C. In this example, the neon lamp will flash every 8.1 3 seconds, a frequency of. The
relaxation oscillator has many other practical uses. It is often used in electronic circuits, where the n eon lamp is replaced by a
transistor or a device known as a tunnel diode. The de scription of the transistor and tunnel diode is bey ond the scope of this
chapter, but you can think of them as voltage contro lled switches. They are normally open switches, but when t he right voltage
is applied, the switch closes and conducts. The “switch” can be used to turn on another circuit, turn on a l ight, or run a small
motor. A relaxation oscillator can be used to make the tur n signals of your car blink or your cell phone to vibrate.
RC circuits have many applications. They can be used effectively as timers for applications such as interm ittent windshield wipers,
pace makers, and strobe lights. Some models of intermit tent windshield wipers use a variable resistor to adju st the interval between
sweeps of the wiper. Increasing the resistance increas es the RC time constant, which increases the time between the operation of
the wipers.
Another application is the pacemaker. The heart rate is normally controlled by electrica l signals, which cause the muscles of the
heart to contract and pump blood. When the heart rh ythm is abnormal (the heartbeat is too high or too low), pace makers can be
used to correct this abnormality. Pacemakers have sensor s that detect body motion and breathing to increase the heart rate during
physical activities, thus meeting the increased need for blood and oxygen, and an RC timing circuit can be used to control the time
between voltage signals to the heart.
Looking ahead to the study of ac circuits (Alternating-Current Circuits), ac voltages vary as sine functions with specific
frequencies. Periodic variations in voltage, or electri c signals, are often recorded by scientists. These v oltage signals could come
from music recorded by a microphone or atmospheric data collected by radar. Occasionally, these signals ca n contain unwanted
frequencies known as “noise.” RC filters can be used to filter out the unwanted freque ncies.
In the study of electronics, a popular device known as a 555 timer provides timed voltage pulses. The time between pulses is
controlled by an RC circuit. These are just a few of the countless application s of RC circuits.
A relaxation oscillator is used to control a pair o f windshield wipers. The relaxation oscillator consists of a 10.00-mF capacitor
and a variable resistor known as a rheostat. A knob c onnected to the variable resistor allows the resistance to be
adjusted from to. The output of the capacitor is u sed to control a voltage-controlled switch. The switch i s
normally open, but when the output voltage reaches 10.00 V, the switch closes, energizing an electric motor and discharging
the capacitor. The motor causes the windshield wipers to sweep once across the windshield and the capacitor begins to charge
again. To what resistance should the rheostat be adjusted fo r the period of the wiper blades be 10.00 seconds?Example: Intermittent Windshield Wipers

6.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83997
Strategy
The resistance considers the equation, where. The capacitance, output voltage, and voltage of the
battery are given. We need to solve this equation for th e resistance.
Solution
The output voltage will be 10.00 V and the voltage of the battery is 12.00 V. The capacitance is given as 10.00 mF. Solving for
the resistance yields
Significance
Increasing the resistance increases the time delay between operations of the windshield wipers. When the re sistance is zero, the
windshield wipers run continuously. At the maximum resistanc e, the period of the operation of the wipers is:
The RC circuit has thousands of uses and is a very important circuit to study. Not only can it be used to time ci rcuits, it can also be
used to filter out unwanted frequencies in a circuit and used in power supplies, like the one for your comp uter, to help turn ac
voltage to dc voltage.
This page titled 6.6: RC Circuits is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
10.6: RC Circuits by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

6.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83979SECTION OVERVIEW
6.7: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments
This collection of modules takes the topic of electri c circuits a step beyond simple circuits. When the circ uit is purely resistive,
everything in this module applies to both DC and AC. Ma tters become more complex when capacitance is involv ed. We do
consider what happens when capacitors are connected t o DC voltage sources, but the interaction of capacit ors and other
nonresistive devices with AC is left for a later chapt er. Finally, a number of important DC instruments, su ch as meters that measure
voltage and current, are covered in this chapter.
6.7.1: Prelude to Circuits and DC Instruments
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal Voltage
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
6.7.5: DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
6.7.6: Null Measurements
6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors
6.7.E: Circuits and DC Instruments (Exercise)
This page titled 6.7: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.7.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839716.7.1: Prelude to Circuits and DC Instruments
Electric circuits are commonplace. Some are simple, s uch as those in flashlights. Others, such as those us ed in supercomputers, are
extremely complex.
Figure: Electric circuits in a computer allow large amounts of data to be quickly and accurately analyze d.. (credit: Airman
1st Class Mike Meares, United States Air Force)
This collection of modules takes the topic of electri c circuits a step beyond simple circuits. When the circ uit is purely resistive,
everything in this module applies to both DC and AC. Ma tters become more complex when capacitance is involv ed. We do
consider what happens when capacitors are connected t o DC voltage sources, but the interaction of capacit ors and other
nonresistive devices with AC is left for a later chapt er. Finally, a number of important DC instruments, su ch as meters that measure
voltage and current, are covered in this chapter.
This page titled 6.7.1: Prelude to Circuits and DC Instruments is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.0: Prelude to Circuits and DC Instruments by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

6.7.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839726.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Draw a circuit with resistors in parallel and in series.
Calculate the voltage drop of a current across a resist or using Ohm’s law.
Contrast the way total resistance is calculated for resisto rs in series and in parallel.
Explain why total resistance of a parallel circuit is les s than the smallest resistance of any of the resistors in that circuit.
Calculate total resistance of a circuit that contains a mixture of resistors connected in series and in paral lel.
sMost circuits have more than one component, called a resistor that limits the flow of charge in the circuit. A mea sure of this limit
on charge flow is called resistance. The simplest combinations of resistors are the serie s and parallel connections illustrated in
Figure. The total resistance of a combination of re sistors depends on both their individual values and ho w they are
connected.
Figure: (a) A series connection of resistors. (b) A para llel connection of resistors.
Resistors in Series
When are resistors in series? Resistors are in series whenever the flow of charge, called the current, must flow through devices
sequentially. For example, if current flows through a pe rson holding a screwdriver and into the Earth, then i n Figure (a)
could be the resistance of the screwdriver’s shaft, the resistance of its handle, the person’s body resi stance, and the
resistance of her shoes.
Figure shows resistors in series connected to a voltage source. It seems reasonable that the total resistanc e is the sum of the
individual resistances, considering that the curren t has to pass through each resistor in sequence. (Thi s fact would be an advantage
to a person wishing to avoid an electrical shock, who could reduce the current by wearing high-resistance ru bber-soled shoes. It
could be a disadvantage if one of the resistances we re a faulty high-resistance cord to an appliance th at would reduce the operating
current.)
Figure: Three resistors connected in series to a battery (left) and the equivalent single or series resistance (right).
To verify that resistances in series do indeed add, let us consider the loss of electrical power, called a voltage drop, in each resistor
in Figure.
According to Ohm’s law, the voltage drop,, across a resistor when a curren t flows through it is calculated using the equation
, where equals the current in amps (A) and is the res istance in ohms. Another way to think of this is that is the
voltage necessary to make a current flow through a resis tance.Learning Objectives

6.7.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972
So the voltage drop across is, that across, and th at across is. The sum of these voltages equals
the voltage output of the source; that is,
This equation is based on the conservation of energy and conservation of charge. Electrical potential ene rgy can be described by the
equation, where is the electric charge and is the voltage. Thus the energy supplied by the source is, wh ile that
dissipated by the resistors is
The derivations of the expressions for series and pa rallel resistance are based on the laws of conservat ion of energy and
conservation of charge, which state that total charge and total energy are constant in any process. Thes e two laws are directly
involved in all electrical phenomena and will be inv oked repeatedly to explain both specific effects and the general behavior of
electricity.
These energies must be equal, because there is no othe r source and no other destination for energy in the c ircuit. Thus,
. The charge cancels, yielding, as stated. (Note th at the same amount of charge passes through the
battery and each resistor in a given amount of time, since there is no capacitance to store charge, there is no place for charge to
leak, and charge is conserved.)
Now substituting the values for the individual voltages give s
Note that for the equivalent single series resistance, we hav e
This implies that the total or equivalent series resistance of three resistors is.
This logic is valid in general for any number of resistors in se ries; thus, the total resistance of a series connection i s
as proposed. Since all of the current must pass thro ugh each resistor, it experiences the resistance of each, and resistances in series
simply add up.
Suppose the voltage output of the battery in Figure i s, and the resistances are,, and
. (a) What is the total resistance? (b) Find the cur rent. (c) Calculate the voltage drop in each resist or, and show these
add to equal the voltage output of the source. (d) Ca lculate the power dissipated by each resistor. (e) Find the power output of
the source, and show that it equals the total power diss ipated by the resistors.
Strategy and Solution for (a)
The total resistance is simply the sum of the individual resistances, as given by this equation:
Strategy and Solution for (b)
The current is found using Ohm’s law,. Entering the value of the applied voltage and the total resista nce yields the
current for the circuit:CONNECTIONS: CONSERVATION LAWS
Example: Calculating Resistance, Current, Voltage Drop, and Power Dissipation: Analysis of a SeriesCircuit

6.7.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972Strategy and Solution for (c)
The voltage—or drop—in a resistor is given by Ohm’s law. Entering the current and the value of the first resistance yields
Similarly,
and
Discussion for (c)
The three drops add to, as predicted:
Strategy and Solution for (d)
The easiest way to calculate power in watts (W) dissipat ed by a resistor in a DC circuit is to use Joule’s law,, where
is electric power. In this case, each resistor has the same full current flowing through it. By substituting Ohm’s law into
Joule’s law, we get the power dissipated by the first resisto r as
Similarly,
and
Discussion for (d)
Power can also be calculated using either or, where is the voltage drop across the resistor (not the ful l
voltage of the source). The same values will be obtained.
Strategy and Solution for (e)
The easiest way to calculate power output of the source i s to use, where is the source voltage. This gives
Discussion for (e)
Note, coincidentally, that the total power dissipated by the resistors is also 7.20 W, the same as the power put out by the source.
That is,
Power is energy per unit time (watts), and so conservati on of energy requires the power output of the source to be equal to the
total power dissipated by the resistors.
1. Series resistances add:
2. The same current flows through each resistor in seri es.
3. Individual resistors in series do not get the total sou rce voltage, but divide it.MAJOR FEATURES OF RESISTORS IN SERIES

6.7.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972Resistors in Parallel
Figure shows resistors in parallel, wired to a voltage source. Resistors are in parallel when each resistor is connected
directly to the voltage source by connecting wires h aving negligible resistance. Each resistor thus has t he full voltage of the source
applied to it.
Each resistor draws the same current it would if it al one were connected to the voltage source (provided t he voltage source is not
overloaded). For example, an automobile’s headlights, r adio, and so on, are wired in parallel, so that they uti lize the full voltage of
the source and can operate completely independently. T he same is true in your house, or any building. (See Figure (b).)
Figure: (a) Three resistors connected in parallel to a battery and the equivalent single or parallel resista nce. (b) Electrical
power setup in a house. (credit: Dmitry G, Wikimedia Commons)
To find an expression for the equivalent parallel re sistance, let us consider the currents that flow an d how they are related to
resistance. Since each resistor in the circuit has th e full voltage, the currents flowing through the indi vidual resistors are,
, and. Conservation of charge implies that the total cu rrent produced by the source is the sum of these current s:
Substituting the expressions for the individual currents gives
Note that Ohm’s law for the equivalent single resistance giv es
The terms inside the parentheses in the last two equa tions must be equal. Generalizing to any number of re sistors, the total
resistance of a parallel connection is related to the individual resistances by
This relationship results in a total resistance that is less than the smallest of the individual resistan ces. (This is seen in the next
example.) When resistors are connected in parallel, more current flows from the source than would flow fo r any of them
individually, and so the total resistance is lower.

6.7.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972Let the voltage output of the battery and resistanc es in the parallel connection in Figure be the same as the previously
considered series connection:, and. (a) What is the total resistance? (b) Find the
total current. (c) Calculate the currents in each re sistor, and show these add to equal the total current output of the source. (d)
Calculate the power dissipated by each resistor. (e) Fi nd the power output of the source, and show that it eq uals the total power
dissipated by the resistors.
Strategy and Solution for (a)
The total resistance for a parallel combination of res istors is found using the equation below. Entering known val ues gives
Thus,
(Note that in these calculations, each intermediate answe r is shown with an extra digit.)
We must invert this to find the total resistance. This yi elds
The total resistance with the correct number of signifi cant digits is.
Discussion for (a)
is, as predicted, less than the smallest individual resist ance.
Strategy and Solution for (b)
The total current can be found from Ohm’s law, substituti ng for the total resistance. This gives
Discussion for (b)
Current for each device is much larger than for th e same devices connected in series (see the previous ex ample). A circuit
with parallel connections has a smaller total resistance tha n the resistors connected in series.
Strategy and Solution for (c)
The individual currents are easily calculated from Ohm’s la w, since each resistor gets the full voltage. Thus,
Similarly,
and
Discussion for (c)
The total current is the sum of the individual currents:Example: Calculating Resistance, Current, Power Dissipation, and Power Output: Analysis of a ParallelCircuit

6.7.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972This is consistent with conservation of charge.
Strategy and Solution for (d)
The power dissipated by each resistor can be found u sing any of the equations relating power to current, voltage, and
resistance, since all three are known. Let us use, since each resistor gets full voltage. Thus,
Similarly,
and
Discussion for (d)
The power dissipated by each resistor is considerably hi gher in parallel than when connected in series to the same voltage
source.
Strategy and Solution for (e)
The total power can also be calculated in several ways. Choosi ng, and entering the total current, yields
Discussion for (e)
Total power dissipated by the resistors is also 179 W:
This is consistent with the law of conservation of energy.
Overall Discussion
Note that both the currents and powers in parallel connectio ns are greater than for the same devices in series.
1. Parallel resistance is found from, and it is smaller than any individual resistance in the
combination.
2. Each resistor in parallel has the same full voltage of the source applied to it. (Power distribution systems most o ften use
parallel connections to supply the myriad devices serve d with the same voltage and to allow them to operate
independently.)
3. Parallel resistors do not each get the total current; th ey divide it.
Combinations of Series and Parallel
More complex connections of resistors are sometimes just combinations of series and parallel. These are commo nly encountered,
especially when wire resistance is considered. In that cas e, wire resistance is in series with other resistances that are in parallel.
Combinations of series and parallel can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance using the technique i llustrated in Figure.
Various parts are identified as either series or paral lel, reduced to their equivalents, and further reduc ed until a single resistance is
left. The process is more time consuming than difficult.MAJOR FEATURES OF RESISTORS IN PARALLEL

6.7.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972
Figure: This combination of seven resistors has both serie s and parallel parts. Each is identified and reduced t o an equivalent
resistance, and these are further reduced until a singl e equivalent resistance is reached.
The simplest combination of series and parallel resist ance, shown in Figure, is also the most instructive, si nce it is found in
many applications. For example, could be the resista nce of wires from a car battery to its electrical de vices, which are in
parallel. and could be the starter motor and a passe nger compartment light. We have previously assumed t hat wire resistance
is negligible, but, when it is not, it has important effect s, as the next example indicates.
Figure shows the resistors from the previous two examples wired in a different way—a combination of series and
parallel. We can consider to be the resistance of wire s leading to and. (a) Find the total resistance. (b) What is the
drop in? (c) Find the current through. (d) What power is dissipated by?
Figure. These three resistors are connected to a voltag e source so that and are in parallel with one anoth er and that
combination is in series with.
Strategy and Solution for (a)
To find the total resistance, we note that and are in parallel and their combination is in series with. Thus the total
(equivalent) resistance of this combination is
First, we find using the equation for resistors in para llel and entering known values:
Inverting givesExample: Calculating Resistance, Drop, Current, and Power Dissipation: Combining Series andParallel Circuits

6.7.2.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972So the total resistance is
Discussion for (a)
The total resistance of this combination is interme diate between the pure series and pure parallel valu es (and,
respectively) found for the same resistors in the two pre vious examples.
Strategy and Solution for (b)
To find the drop in, we note that the full current flows thr ough. Thus, its drop is
We must find before we can calculate. The total curre nt is found using Ohm’s law for the circuit. That is,
Entering this into the expression above, we get
Discussion for (b)
The voltage applied to and is less than the total v oltage by an amount. When wire resistance is large, it can
significantly affect the operation of the devices represen ted by and.
Strategy and Solution for (c)
To find the current through, we must first find the voltage applied to it. We call this voltage, beca use it is applied to a
parallel combination of resistors. The voltage applied t o both and is reduced by the amount, and so it is
Now the current through resistance is found using Ohm’s law:
Discussion for (c)
The current is less than the 2.00 A that flowed throug h when it was connected in parallel to the battery i n the previous
parallel circuit example.
Strategy and Solution for (d)
The power dissipated by is given by
Discussion for (d)
The power is less than the 24.0 W this resistor dissipated when connected in parallel to the 12.0-V source.
Practical Implications
One implication of this last example is that resista nce in wires reduces the current and power delivered t o a resistor. If wire
resistance is relatively large, as in a worn (or a ve ry long) extension cord, then this loss can be signi ficant. If a large current is
drawn, the drop in the wires can also be significant.
For example, when you are rummaging in the refrigerato r and the motor comes on, the refrigerator light dims momentarily.
Similarly, you can see the passenger compartment ligh t dim when you start the engine of your car (althoug h this may be due to
resistance inside the battery itself).

6.7.2.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972What is happening in these high-current situations i s illustrated in Figure. The device represented by has a very low
resistance, and so when it is switched on, a large curren t flows. This increased current causes a larger drop i n the wires
represented by reducing the voltage across the light bu lb (which is), which then dims noticeably.
Figure: Why do lights dim when a large appliance is sw itched on? The answer is that the large current the a ppliance motor
draws causes a significant drop in the wires and reduce s the voltage across the light.
Can any arbitrary combination of resistors be broke n down into series and parallel combinations? See if y ou can draw a circuit
diagram of resistors that cannot be broken down into combinat ions of series and parallel.
Answer
No, there are many ways to connect resistors that are not combinations of series and parallel, including lo ops and junctions.
In such cases Kirchhoff’s rules, to be introduced in Kirchhof f’s Rules, will allow you to analyze the circuit.
1. Draw a clear circuit diagram, labeling all resistors and voltage sources. This step includes a list of the knowns for th e
problem, since they are labeled in your circuit diagram.
2. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful.
3. Determine whether resistors are in series, parallel, o r a combination of both series and parallel. Examine the circuit diagram
to make this assessment. Resistors are in series if the same current must pass sequentially through them.
4. Use the appropriate list of major features for series or p arallel connections to solve for the unknowns. There is one list for
series and another for parallel. If your problem has a combi nation of series and parallel, reduce it in steps by conside ring
individual groups of series or parallel connections, as don e in this module and the examples. Special note: When fin ding
, the reciprocal must be taken with care.Exercise
Problem Solving Strategies For Series and Parallel Resistors

6.7.2.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839725. Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consis tent. Units and numerical results must be reasonable. T otal
series resistance should be greater, whereas total parall el resistance should be smaller, for example. Power shou ld be greater
for the same devices in parallel compared with series, and so on.
Summary
The total resistance of an electrical circuit with re sistors wired in a series is the sum of the individual resista nces:
Each resistor in a series circuit has the same amount o f current flowing through it.
The voltage drop, or power dissipation, across each indiv idual resistor in a series is different, and their combin ed total adds up
to the power source input.
The total resistance of an electrical circuit with re sistors wired in parallel is less than the lowest resistance o f any of the
components and can be determined using the formula:
Each resistor in a parallel circuit has the same full volt age of the source applied to it.
The current flowing through each resistor in a parallel c ircuit is different, depending on the resistance.
If a more complex connection of resistors is a combinatio n of series and parallel, it can be reduced to a single eq uivalent
resistance by identifying its various parts as series or p arallel, reducing each to its equivalent, and continui ng until a single
resistance is eventually reached.
Glossary
series
a sequence of resistors or other components wired into a cir cuit one after the other
resistor
a component that provides resistance to the current flowin g through an electrical circuit
resistance
causing a loss of electrical power in a circuit
Ohm’s law
the relationship between current, voltage, and resistanc e within an electrical circuit: V=IR
voltage
the electrical potential energy per unit charge; electr ic pressure created by a power source, such as a battery
voltage drop
the loss of electrical power as a current travels through a resistor, wire or other component
current
the flow of charge through an electric circuit past a giv en point of measurement
Joule’s law
tthe relationship between potential electrical power, volt age, and resistance in an electrical circuit, given by:
parallel
the wiring of resistors or other components in an elect rical circuit such that each component receives an equal voltage from the
power source; often pictured in a ladder-shaped diagram, with ea ch component on a rung of the ladder
This page titled 6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.1: Resistors in Series and Parallel by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

6.7.2.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83972

6.7.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839736.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal Voltage
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Compare and contrast the voltage and the electromagnet ic force of an electric power source.
Describe what happens to the terminal voltage, current, a nd power delivered to a load as internal resistance of the voltage
source increases (due to aging of batteries, for examp le).
Explain why it is beneficial to use more than one voltage s ource connected in parallel.
When you forget to turn off your car lights, they slo wly dim as the battery runs down. Why don’t they simpl y blink off when the
battery’s energy is gone? Their gradual dimming implies that battery output voltage decreases as the battery is depleted.
Furthermore, if you connect an excessive number of 12- V lights in parallel to a car battery, they will be dim even when the battery
is fresh and even if the wires to the lights have ve ry low resistance. This implies that the battery’s out put voltage is reduced by the
overload.
The reason for the decrease in output voltage for d epleted or overloaded batteries is that all voltage sources have two fundamental
parts—a source of electrical energy and an internal resistance. Let us examine both.
Electromotive Force
You can think of many different types of voltage so urces. Batteries themselves come in many varieties. Th ere are many types of
mechanical/electrical generators, driven by many diff erent energy sources, ranging from nuclear to wind. Sola r cells create voltages
directly from light, while thermoelectric devices creat e voltage from temperature differences.
A few voltage sources are shown in Figure. All such dev ices create a potential difference and can supply current if
connected to a resistance. On the small scale, the pot ential difference creates an electric field that exe rts force on charges, causing
current. We thus use the name electromotive force, abbreviated emf.
Emf is not a force at all; it is a special type of potential difference. To be precise, the electromotiv e force (emf) is the potential
difference of a source when no current is flowing. Units of e mf are volts.
Figure: A variety of voltage sources (clockwise from t op left): the Brazos Wind Farm in Fluvanna, Texas (cre dit: Leaflet,
Wikimedia Commons); the Krasnoyarsk Dam in Russia (credi t: Alex Polezhaev); a solar farm (credit: U.S. Departm ent of Energy);
and a group of nickel metal hydride batteries (credi t: Tiaa Monto). The voltage output of each depends o n its construction and load,
and equals emf only if there is no load.
Electromotive force is directly related to the sourc e of potential difference, such as the particular co mbination of chemicals in a
battery. However, emf differs from the voltage output o f the device when current flows. The voltage across the terminals of a
battery, for example, is less than the emf when the b attery supplies current, and it declines further as t he battery is depleted or
loaded down. However, if the device’s output voltage c an be measured without drawing current, then output v oltage will equal emf
(even for a very depleted battery).Learning Objectives

6.7.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83973Internal Resistance
As noted before, a 12-V truck battery is physically lar ger, contains more charge and energy, and can deliver a larger current than a
12-V motorcycle battery. Both are lead-acid batterie s with identical emf, but, because of its size, the tru ck battery has a smaller
internal resistance. Internal resistance is the inherent resistance to the flow of current within the source itself.
Figure is a schematic representation of the two funda mental parts of any voltage source. The emf (represent ed by a script E
in the figure) and internal resistance are in serie s. The smaller the internal resistance for a given emf, the more current and the
more power the source can supply.
Figure: Any voltage source (in this case, a carbon-zin c dry cell) has an emf related to its source of potent ial difference, and
an internal resistance related to its construction. (N ote that the script E stands for emf.). Also shown are t he output terminals
across which the terminal voltage is measured. Since, terminal voltage equals emf only if there is no curr ent
flowing.
The internal resistance can behave in complex ways. As noted, increases as a battery is depleted. But inte rnal resistance may
also depend on the magnitude and direction of the cu rrent through a voltage source, its temperature, and e ven its history. The
internal resistance of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells, for example, depends on how many times and how d eeply they have been
depleted.
Various types of batteries are available, with emfs determined by the combination of chemicals involved. We can view this as a
molecular reaction (what much of chemistry is about) that se parates charge.
The lead-acid battery used in cars and other vehicle s is one of the most common types. A single cell (one of six) of this battery
is seen in Figure. The cathode (positive) terminal of the cell is connected to a lead oxide plate, whil e the anode
(negative) terminal is connected to a lead plate. Both plates are immersed in sulfuric acid, the electrolyte for t he system.
Figure: Artist’s conception of a lead-acid cell. Chem ical reactions in a lead-acid cell separate charge, se nding negative
charge to the anode, which is connected to the lead plates. The lead oxide plates are connected to the po sitive or cathode
terminal of the cell. Sulfuric acid conducts the cha rge as well as participating in the chemical reaction.
The details of the chemical reaction are left to the reader to pursue in a chemistry text, but their resul ts at the molecular level
help explain the potential created by the battery. Fi gure shows the result of a single chemical reaction. Two electrons are
placed on the anode, making it negative, provided th at the cathode supplied two electrons. This leaves the cathode positively
charged, because it has lost two electrons. In short, a separati on of charge has been driven by a chemical reaction.
Note that the reaction will not take place unless ther e is a complete circuit to allow two electrons to be supplied to the cathode.
Under many circumstances, these electrons come from th e anode, flow through a resistance, and return to the cathode. Note
also that since the chemical reactions involve substa nces with resistance, it is not possible to create the emf without an internal
resistance.THINGS GREAT AND SMALL: THE SUBMICROSCOPIC ORIGIN OF BATTERY POTENTIAL

6.7.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83973
Figure: Artist’s conception of two electrons being for ced onto the anode of a cell and two electrons being removed from
the cathode of the cell. The chemical reaction in a lead-acid battery places two electrons on the anode and removes two from
the cathode. It requires a closed circuit to proceed, since the two electrons must be supplied to the cathod e.
Why are the chemicals able to produce a unique pote ntial difference? Quantum mechanical descriptions of molecules, which take
into account the types of atoms and numbers of elec trons in them, are able to predict the energy states they can have and the
energies of reactions between them.
In the case of a lead-acid battery, an energy of 2 eV is given to each electron sent to the anode. V oltag e is defined as the electrical
potential energy divided by charge:. An electron vo lt is the energy given to a single electron by a vo ltage of 1 V. So the
voltage here is 2 V, since 2 eV is given to each el ectron. It is the energy produced in each molecular r eaction that produces the
voltage. A different reaction produces a different ener gy and, hence, a different voltage.
Terminal Voltage
The voltage output of a device is measured across its terminals and, thus, is called its terminal voltage. Terminal voltage is given
by
where is the internal resistance and is the current f lowing at the time of the measurement.
is positive if current flows away from the positive te rminal, as shown in Figure. You can see that the large r the current, the
smaller the terminal voltage. And it is likewise true that the larger the internal resistance, the smaller the t erminal voltage.
Suppose a load resistance is connected to a voltage source, as in Figure. Since the resistances are in se ries, the total
resistance in the circuit is. Thus the current is given b y Ohm’s law to be
Figure:Schematic of a voltage source and its load. S ince the internal resistance is in series with the load, it can
significantly affect the terminal voltage and curren t delivered to the load. (Note that the script E stan ds for emf.)
We see from this expression that the smaller the inte rnal resistance, the greater the current the voltage source supplies to its load
. As batteries are depleted, increases. If becomes a significant fraction of the load resistance, then t he current is significantly
reduced, as the following example illustrates.
A certain battery has a 12.0-V emf and an internal resistance of. (a) Calculate its terminal voltage when connected to a
load. (b) What is the terminal voltage when connected to a load? (c) What power does the load dissipate?
(d) If the internal resistance grows to find the curren t, terminal voltage, and power dissipated by a load.
StrategyExample: Calculating Terminal Voltage, Power Dissipation, Current, and Resistance: Terminal Voltage
and Load

6.7.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83973The analysis above gave an expression for current wh en internal resistance is taken into account. Once th e current is found, the
terminal voltage can be calculated using the equati on. Once current is found, the power dissipated by a r esistor
can also be found.
Solution for (a)
Entering the given values for the emf, load resistance, and internal resistance into the expression above yields
Enter the known values into the equation to get the termi nal voltage:
Discussion for (a)
The terminal voltage here is only slightly lower than the emf, implying that is a light load for this particular ba ttery.
Solution for (b)
Similarly, with, the current is
The terminal voltage is now
Discussion for (b)
This terminal voltage exhibits a more significant re duction compared with emf, implying is a heavy load for this
battery.
Solution for (c)
The power dissipated by the load can be found using the for mula. Entering the known values gives
Discussion for (c)
Note that this power can also be obtained using the expressio ns or, where is the terminal voltage (10.0 V in this case).
Solution for (d)
Here the internal resistance has increased, perhaps du e to the depletion of the battery, to the point where it is as great as the
load resistance. As before, we first find the current by ente ring the known values into the expression, yielding
Now the terminal voltage is
and the power dissipated by the load is
Discussion for (d)

6.7.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83973We see that the increased internal resistance has s ignificantly decreased terminal voltage, current, and power delivered to a
load.
Battery testers, such as those in Figure, use small lo ad resistors to intentionally draw current to determine whether the
terminal voltage drops below an acceptable level. The y really test the internal resistance of the battery. If internal resistance is high,
the battery is weak, as evidenced by its low terminal volt age.
Figure: These two battery testers measure terminal volt age under a load to determine the condition of a ba ttery. The large
device is being used by a U.S. Navy electronics technic ian to test large batteries aboard the aircraft carri er USS Nimitz and has a
small resistance that can dissipate large amounts of powe r. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Photographer’s Mate A irman Jason A.
Johnston) The small device is used on small batteries and has a digital display to indicate the acceptability o f their terminal voltage.
(credit: Keith Williamson)
Some batteries can be recharged by passing a current through them in the direction opposite to the curre nt they supply to a
resistance. This is done routinely in cars and batte ries for small electrical appliances and electronic d evices, and is represented
pictorially in Figure. The voltage output of the ba ttery charger must be greater than the emf of the b attery to reverse current
through it. This will cause the terminal voltage of the b attery to be greater than the emf, since, and is now ne gative.
Figure: A car battery charger reverses the normal dir ection of current through a battery, reversing its ch emical reaction and
replenishing its chemical potential.
Multiple Voltage Sources
There are two voltage sources when a battery charger i s used. V oltage sources connected in series are relati vely simple. When
voltage sources are in series, their internal resistan ces add and their emfs add algebraically. (See Figure.) Series connections
of voltage sources are common—for example, in flashli ghts, toys, and other appliances. Usually, the cells are in series in order to
produce a larger total emf.
But if the cells oppose one another, such as when one is put into an appliance backward, the total emf is l ess, since it is the
algebraic sum of the individual emfs.
A battery is a multiple connection of voltaic cells, as shown in Figure. The disadvantage of series connecti ons of cells is that
their internal resistances add. One of the authors o nce owned a 1957 MGA that had two 6-V batteries in serie s, rather than a single
12-V battery. This arrangement produced a large inte rnal resistance that caused him many problems in starti ng the engine.

6.7.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83973
Figure: A series connection of two voltage sources. The emfs (each labeled with a script E) and internal resi stances add,
giving a total emf of and a total internal resistanc e of.
Figure: Batteries are multiple connections of individ ual cells, as shown in this modern rendition of an old print. Single cells,
such as AA or C cells, are commonly called batteries, a lthough this is technically incorrect.
If the series connection of two voltage sources is made into a comp lete circuit with the emfs in opposition, then a cur rent of
magnitude flows. See Figure, for example, which shows a ci rcuit exactly analogous to the battery charger
discussed above. If two voltage sources in series with e mfs in the same sense are connected to a load, as i n Figure,
then flows.
Figure: These two voltage sources are connected in seri es with their emfs in opposition. Current flows in the direction of
the greater emf and is limited to by the sum of the internal resistances. (Note that each emf is represented by script E
in the figure.) A battery charger connected to a ba ttery is an example of such a connection. The charger must have a larger emf than
the battery to reverse current through it.
Figure: This schematic represents a flashlight with two cells (voltage sources) and a single bulb (load resistanc e) in series.
The current that flows is. (Note that each emf is rep resented by script E in the figure.)
Find a flashlight that uses several batteries and find new and old batteries. Based on the discussions in this module, predict the
brightness of the flashlight when different combinati ons of batteries are used. Do your predictions match wh at you observe?
Now place new batteries in the flashlight and leave th e flashlight switched on for several hours. Is the fl ashlight still quite
bright? Do the same with the old batteries. Is the flas hlight as bright when left on for the same length of time with old and new
batteries? What does this say for the case when you are limi ted in the number of available new batteries?
Figure shows two voltage sources with identical emfs in parallel and connected to a load resistance. In thi s simple case, the
total emf is the same as the individual emfs. But the t otal internal resistance is reduced, since the inte rnal resistances are in parallel.TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: FLASHLIGHT BATTERIES

6.7.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83973The parallel connection thus can produce a larger curren t.
Here flows through the load, and is less than those of the individual batteries. For example, some diesel-power ed
cars use two 12-V batteries in parallel; they produce a total emf of 12 V but can deliver the larger curr ent needed to start a diesel
engine.
Figure: Two voltage sources with identical emfs (each labeled by script E) connected in parallel produce t he same emf but
have a smaller total internal resistance than the indi vidual sources. Parallel combinations are often used to deliver more current.
Here flows through the load.
Animals as Electrical Detectors
A number of animals both produce and detect electric al signals. Fish, sharks, platypuses, and echidnas (spiny an teaters) all detect
electric fields generated by nerve activity in prey. Electric eels produce their own emf through biolog ical cells (electric organs)
called electroplaques, which are arranged in both serie s and parallel as a set of batteries.
Electroplaques are flat, disk-like cells; those of the electric eel have a voltage of 0.15 V across each o ne. These cells are usually
located toward the head or tail of the animal, althou gh in the case of the electric eel, they are found a long the entire body. The
electroplaques in the South American eel are arranged in 140 rows, with each row stretching horizontally alo ng the body and
containing 5,000 electroplaques. This can yield an emf of approximately 600 V, and a current of 1 A—deadly.
The mechanism for detection of external electric fiel ds is similar to that for producing nerve signals in the cell through
depolarization and repolarization—the movement of i ons across the cell membrane. Within the fish, weak el ectric fields in the
water produce a current in a gel-filled canal that r uns from the skin to sensing cells, producing a nerve signal. The Australian
platypus, one of the very few mammals that lay eggs, can detect fi elds of 30, while sharks have been found to be able to sense a
field in their snouts as small as 100 (Figure). Elect ric eels use their own electric fields produced by t he electroplaques
to stun their prey or enemies.
Figure: Sand tiger sharks (Carcharias taurus), like thi s one at the Minnesota Zoo, use electroreceptors in the ir snouts to
locate prey. (credit: Jim Winstead, Flickr)
Solar Cell Arrays
Another example dealing with multiple voltage sources is that of combinations of solar cells—wired in both s eries and parallel
combinations to yield a desired voltage and current. Photovoltaic generation (PV), the conversion of sunlig ht directly into
electricity, is based upon the photoelectric effect, in which photons hitting the surface of a solar cell create an electric current in the
cell.

6.7.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83973Most solar cells are made from pure silicon—either as s ingle-crystal silicon, or as a thin film of silicon d eposited upon a glass or
metal backing. Most single cells have a voltage outpu t of about 0.5 V, while the current output is a funct ion of the amount of
sunlight upon the cell (the incident solar radiatio n—the insolation). Under bright noon sunlight, a curren t of about of
cell surface area is produced by typical single-crysta l cells.
Individual solar cells are connected electrically i n modules to meet electrical-energy needs. They can be wired together in series or
in parallel—connected like the batteries discussed earlier. A solar-cell array or module usually consist s of between 36 and 72 cells,
with a power output of 50 W to 140 W.
The output of the solar cells is direct current. For m ost uses in a home, AC is required, so a device called a n inverter must be used
to convert the DC to AC. Any extra output can then be passed on to the outside electrical grid for sale to the utilit y.
One can assemble a “virtual” solar cell array by using playing cards, or business or index cards, to represent a solar cell.
Combinations of these cards in series and/or parallel can model the required array output. Assume each car d has an output of
0.5 V and a current (under bright light) of 2 A. Using your cards, how would you arrange them to produce an output of 6 A at 3
V (18 W)?
Suppose you were told that you needed only 18 W (but n o required voltage). Would you need more cards to m ake this
arrangement?
Summary
All voltage sources have two fundamental parts—a source of e lectrical energy that has a characteristic electromotiv e force
(emf), and an internal resistance.
The emf is the potential difference of a source when no c urrent is flowing.
The numerical value of the emf depends on the source of potential difference.
The internal resistance of a voltage source affects the output voltage when a current flows.
The voltage output of a device is called its terminal v oltage and is given by, where is the electric curren t and
is positive when flowing away from the positive terminal of the voltage source.
When multiple voltage sources are in series, their inte rnal resistances add and their emfs add algebraically.
Solar cells can be wired in series or parallel to provide increased voltage or current, respectively.
Glossary
electromotive force (emf)
the potential difference of a source of electricity whe n no current is flowing; measured in volts
internal resistance
the amount of resistance within the voltage source
potential difference
the difference in electric potential between two points i n an electric circuit, measured in volts
terminal voltage
the voltage measured across the terminals of a source o f potential difference
This page titled 6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.2: Electromotive Force - Terminal Voltage by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: VIRTUAL SOLAR CELLS

6.7.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839746.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Analyze a complex circuit using Kirchhoff’s rules, using th e conventions for determining the correct signs of various terms.
Many complex circuits, such as the one in Figure, can not be analyzed with the series-parallel techniques d eveloped in
Resistors in Series and Parallel and Electromotive Force: Terminal V oltage. There are, however, two circuit analysis rules that can
be used to analyze any circuit, simple or complex. T hese rules are special cases of the laws of conservatio n of charge and
conservation of energy. The rules are known as Kirchhoff ’s rules, after their inventor Gustav Kirchhoff (1824–188 7).
Figure: This circuit cannot be reduced to a combinat ion of series and parallel connections. Kirchhoff’s rul es, special
applications of the laws of conservation of charge and energy, can be used to analyze it. (Note: The script E in the figure represents
electromotive force, emf.)
Kirchhoff’ s first rule—the junction rule: The sum of all currents entering a junction must equal th e sum of all currents
leaving the junction.
Kirchhoff’ s second rule—the loop rule: The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any cl osed circuit path (loop)
must be zero.
Explanations of the two rules will now be given, followe d by problem-solving hints for applying Kirchhoff’s rul es, and a worked
example that uses them.
Kirchhoff’s First Rule (The Junction Rule)
Kirchhoff’s first rule (the junction rule) is an app lication of the conservation of charge to a junctio n; it is illustrated in Figure
. Current is the flow of charge, and charge is conserve d; thus, whatever charge flows into the junction must f low out.
Kirchhoff’s first rule requires that (Figure). Equati ons like this can and will be used to analyze circuits a nd to
solve circuit problems.Learning Objectives
Definition: Kirchhoff's Rules

6.7.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83974
Figure: The junction rule. The diagram shows an examp le of Kirchhoff’s first rule where the sum of the curr ents into a
junction equals the sum of the currents out of a junct ion. In this case, the current going into the junctio n splits and comes out as two
currents, so that. Here must be 11 A, since is 7 A an d is 4A.
Kirchhoff’s Second Rule (The Loop Rule)
Kirchhoff’s second rule (the loop rule) is an applica tion of conservation of energy. The loop rule is sta ted in terms of potential,
rather than potential energy, but the two are relate d since. Recall that emf is the potential differenc e of a source when
no current is flowing. In a closed loop, whatever ener gy is supplied by emf must be transferred into other forms by devices in the
loop, since there are no other ways in which energy ca n be transferred into or out of the circuit. Figure illustrates the changes
in potential in a simple series circuit loop.
Kirchhoff’s second rule requires. Rearranged, this is, which means the emf equals
the sum of the (voltage) drops in the loop.
Figure: The loop rule. An example of Kirchhoff’s seco nd rule where the sum of the changes in potential aro und a closed
loop must be zero. (a) In this standard schematic of a simple series circuit, the emf supplies 18 V, which is re duced to zero by the
resistances, with 1 V across the internal resistance, and 12 V and 5 V across the two load resistances, for a tota l of 18 V. (b) This
perspective view represents the potential as something l ike a roller coaster, where charge is raised in potent ial by the emf and
lowered by the resistances. (Note that the script E stan ds for emf.)

6.7.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83974Applying Kirchhoff’s Rules
By applying Kirchhoff’s rules, we generate equations tha t allow us to find the unknowns in circuits. The unkno wns may be
currents, emfs, or resistances. Each time a rule is a pplied, an equation is produced. If there are as many independent equations as
unknowns, then the problem can be solved. There are two decisions you must make when applying Kirchhoff’s rul es. These
decisions determine the signs of various quantities in th e equations you obtain from applying the rules.
When applying Kirchhoff’s first rule, the junction rule, you must label the current in each branch and decide in wh at direction it
is going. For example, in Figure, Figure, and Figure, currents are labeled and, and arrows indicate their directions.
There is no risk here, for if you choose the wrong directio n, the current will be of the correct magnitude but negat ive.
When applying Kirchhoff’s second rule, the loop rule, yo u must identify a closed loop and decide in which direction to go
around it, clockwise or counterclockwise. For example, in Figure the loop was traversed in the same direction as the current
(clockwise). Again, there is no risk; going around the circu it in the opposite direction reverses the sign of every term in the
equation, which is like multiplying both sides of the equat ion by -1.
Figure and the following points will help you get the plus or minus signs right when applying the loop ru le. Note that the
resistors and emfs are traversed by going from a to b. In many circuits, it will be necessary to construc t more than one loop. In
traversing each loop, one needs to be consistent for th e sign of the change in potential (Example).
Figure: Each of these resistors and voltage sources is tra versed from a to b. The potential changes are shown be neath each
element and are explained in the text. (Note that t he script E stands for emf.)
When a resistor is traversed in the same direction as t he current, the change in potential is. (See Figure.)
When a resistor is traversed in the direction opposite to the current, the change in potential is. (See Figure.)
When an emf is traversed from - to + (the same direction it moves positive charge), the change in potential is +emf. (See
Figure.)
When an emf is traversed from + to - (opposite to the dire ction it moves positive charge), the change in potentia l is -emf. (See
Figure.)
Find the currents flowing in the circuit in Figure.Example: Calculating Current: Using Kirchhoff’s Rules

6.7.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83974
Figure, but the resistances and emfs are specified. (Each emf is denoted by script E.) The currents in each bra nch are labeled
and assumed to move in the directions shown. This exampl e uses Kirchhoff’s rules to find the currents.
Strategy
This circuit is sufficiently complex that the currents cannot be found using Ohm’s law and the series-paral lel techniques—it is
necessary to use Kirchhoff’s rules. Currents have been la beled and
in the figure and assumptions have been made about their directions. Locations on the diagram have been labeled with letters a
through h. In the solution we will apply the junction and loop rules, seeking three independent equations to allow us to solve
for the three unknown currents.
Solution
We begin by applying Kirchhoff’s first or junction rul e at point a. This gives
since flows into the junction, while and flow out. App lying the junction rule at e produces exactly the s ame equation, so
that no new information is obtained. This is a single eq uation with three unknowns—three independent equation s are needed,
and so the loop rule must be applied.
Now we consider the loop abcdea. Going from a to b, we tra verse in the same (assumed) direction of the current, and so
the change in potential is. Then going from b to c, we go from - to +, so that the change in potential is.
Traversing the internal resistance from c to d gives. Completing the loop by going from d to a again t raverses a
resistor in the same direction as its current, giving a chan ge in potential of.
The loop rule states that the changes in potential su m to zero. Thus,
Note that the signs are reversed compared with the ot her loop, because elements are traversed in the opposi te direction. With
values entered, this becomes
These three equations are sufficient to solve for the thr ee unknown currents. First, solve the second equation for.
Now solve the third equation for:
Substituting these two new equations into the first one allows us to find a value for

6.7.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83974Combining terms gives
Substituting this value for back into the fourth equatio n gives
The minus sign means flows in the direction opposite to th at assumed in Figure.
Finally, substituting the value for into the fifth equati on gives
Discussion
Just as a check, we note that indeed. The results coul d also have been checked by entering all of the val ues into the
equation for the abcdefgha loop.
Make certain there is a clear circuit diagram on which you can label all known and unknown resistances, emfs, and
currents. If a current is unknown, you must assign it a dire ction. This is necessary for determining the signs of poten tial
changes. If you assign the direction incorrectly, the cu rrent will be found to have a negative value—no harm don e.
Apply the junction rule to any junction in the circuit. Eac h time the junction rule is applied, you should get an equa tion with
a current that does not appear in a previous application —if not, then the equation is redundant.
Apply the loop rule to as many loops as needed to solve for the unknowns in the problem. (There must be as many
independent equations as unknowns.) To apply the loop rule, you must choose a direction to go around the loop. Then
carefully and consistently determine the signs of the p otential changes for each element using the four bullet ed points
discussed above in conjunction with Figure.
Solve the simultaneous equations for the unknowns. This may involve many algebraic steps, requiring careful ch ecking and
rechecking.
Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consiste nt. The numbers should be of the correct order of magnitude,
neither exceedingly large nor vanishingly small. The s igns should be reasonable—for example, no resistance should be
negative. Check to see that the values obtained satisfy the various equations obtained from applying the rules. Th e currents
should satisfy the junction rule, for example.
The material in this section is correct in theory. We s hould be able to verify it by making measurements o f current and voltage. In
fact, some of the devices used to make such measureme nts are straightforward applications of the principles covered so far and are
explored in the next modules. As we shall see, a very basic, even profound, fact results—making a measureme nt alters the quantity
being measured.
Can Kirchhoff’s rules be applied to simple series and parallel circuits or are they restricted for use in more complicated circuits
that are not combinations of series and parallel?
Answer
Kirchhoff's rules can be applied to any circuit since they are applications to circuits of two conservati on laws. Conservation
laws are the most broadly applicable principles in p hysics. It is usually mathematically simpler to use the rules for series
and parallel in simpler circuits so we emphasize Kirchho ff’s rules for use in more complicated situations. Bu t the rules forProblem-Solving Strategies for Kirchhoff’s Rules
Exercise

6.7.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83974series and parallel can be derived from Kirchhoff’s ru les. Moreover, Kirchhoff’s rules can be expanded to dev ices other
than resistors and emfs, such as capacitors, and are one of th e basic analysis devices in circuit analysis.
Summary
Kirchhoff’s rules can be used to analyze any circuit, simp le or complex.
Kirchhoff’s first rule—the junction rule: The sum of al l currents entering a junction must equal the sum of all cu rrents leaving
the junction.
Kirchhoff’s second rule—the loop rule: The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any closed circuit path (lo op) must be
zero.
The two rules are based, respectively, on the laws of conserv ation of charge and energy.
When calculating potential and current using Kirchhof f’s rules, a set of conventions must be followed for determinin g the
correct signs of various terms.
The simpler series and parallel rules are special cases of Kirchhoff’s rules.
Glossary
Kirchhoff’s rules
a set of two rules, based on conservation of charge and en ergy, governing current and changes in potential in an el ectric circuit
junction rule
Kirchhoff’s first rule, which applies the conservation of charge to a junction; current is the flow of charge; thus, wh atever
charge flows into the junction must flow out; the rule can b e stated
loop rule
Kirchhoff’s second rule, which states that in a closed loop, whatever energy is supplied by emf must be transferred int o other
forms by devices in the loop, since there are no other ways i n which energy can be transferred into or out of the circuit. Thus,
the emf equals the sum of the (voltage) drops in the lo op and can be stated:
conservation laws
require that energy and charge be conserved in a system
This page titled 6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

6.7.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839756.7.5: DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain why a voltmeter must be connected in parallel wit h the circuit.
Draw a diagram showing an ammeter correctly connected in a circuit.
Describe how a galvanometer can be used as either a vo ltmeter or an ammeter.
Find the resistance that must be placed in series with a galva nometer to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a give n
reading.
Explain why measuring the voltage or current in a circuit c an never be exact.
Voltmeters measure voltage, whereas ammeters measure current. Some of the meters in automobile das hboards, digital cameras,
cell phones, and tuner-amplifiers are voltmeters or ammeters. (See Figure.) The internal construction of the simplest of these meters
and how they are connected to the system they monitor give f urther insight into applications of series and parallel c onnections.
Figure: The fuel and temperature gauges (far right a nd far left, respectively) in this 1996 V olkswagen are voltmeters that
register the voltage output of “sender” units, which a re hopefully proportional to the amount of gasoline in the tank and the engine
temperature. (credit: Christian Giersing)
V oltmeters are connected in parallel with whatever dev ice’s voltage is to be measured. A parallel connectio n is used because objects
in parallel experience the same potential difference. (See Figure, where the voltmeter is represented by the symbol V.)
Ammeters are connected in series with whatever device’s current is to be measured. A series connection is used b ecause objects in
series have the same current passing through them. (See Figure, where the ammeter is represented by the symbol A.)Learning Objectives

6.7.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83975
Figure: (a) To measure potential differences in this se ries circuit, the voltmeter (V) is placed in parallel with the voltage
source or either of the resistors. Note that terminal v oltage is measured between points a and b. It is not po ssible to connect the
voltmeter directly across the emf without including i ts internal resistance (b) A digital voltmeter in use. (credit: Messtechniker,
Wikimedia Commons)

6.7.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83975
Figure: An ammeter (A) is placed in series to measure c urrent. All of the current in this circuit flows thro ugh the meter. The
ammeter would have the same reading if located betwe en points d and e or between points f and a as it does in the position shown.
(Note that the script capital E stands for emf, and st ands for the internal resistance of the source of poten tial difference.)
Analog Meters: Galvanometers
Analog meters have a needle that swivels to point at numbers on a sc ale, as opposed to digital meters, which have numerical
readouts similar to a hand-held calculator. The hea rt of most analog meters is a device called a galva nometer, denoted by G.
Current flow through a galvanometer,, produces a pr oportional needle deflection. (This deflection is du e to the force of a
magnetic field upon a current-carrying wire.)
The two crucial characteristics of a given galvanome ter are its resistance and current sensitivity. Current sensitivity is the current
that gives a full-scale deflection of the galvanometer’s needle, the maximum current th at the instrument can measure. For example,
a galvanometer with a current sensitivity of has a m aximum deflection of its needle when flows through it, reads halfscale when flows through it, and so on.
If such a galvanometer has a resistance, then a vol tage of only produces a full-scale
reading. By connecting resistors to this galvanometer in different ways, you can use it as either a voltmete r or ammeter that can
measure a broad range of voltages or currents.
Galvanometer as Voltmeter
Figure shows how a galvanometer can be used as a voltmeter b y connecting it in series with a large resistance,. The value of the
resistance is determined by the maximum voltage to be measured. Suppose you want 10 V to produce a full-s cale deflection of a
voltmeter containing a galvanometer with a sensitivi ty. Then 10 V applied to the meter must produce a cu rrent of
. The total resistance must be
(is so large that the galvanometer resistance,, i s nearly negligible.) Note that 5 V applied to this vo ltmeter produces a half-scale
deflection by producing a current through the meter, and so the voltmeter’s reading is proportional to voltag e as desired.
This voltmeter would not be useful for voltages less th an about half a volt, because the meter deflection would be small and
difficult to read accurately. For other voltage rang es, other resistances are placed in series with the galvanometer. Many meters
have a choice of scales. That choice involves switching an a ppropriate resistance into series with the galvanomete r.

6.7.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83975
Figure: A large resistance placed in series with a gal vanometer G produces a voltmeter, the full-scale defl ection of which
depends on the choice of. The larger the voltage to be measured, the larger must be. (Note that represe nts the internal
resistance of the galvanometer.)
Galvanometer as Ammeter
The same galvanometer can also be made into an ammet er by placing it in parallel with a small resistance, often called the shunt
resistance, as shown in Figure. Since the shunt resistance is small, most of the curr ent passes through it, allowing an ammeter to
measure currents much greater than those producing a ful l-scale deflection of the galvanometer.
Suppose, for example, an ammeter is needed that gives a full-scale deflection for 1.0 A, and contains the same galvanometer
with its sensitivity. Since and are in parallel, the volta ge across them is the same.
These drops are so that. Solving for, and noting that is and is 0.999950 A, we have
Figure: A small shunt resistance placed in parallel wi th a galvanometer G produces an ammeter, the full-sca le deflection of
which depends on the choice of. The larger the curr ent to be measured, the smaller must be. Most of the c urrent () flowing
through the meter is shunted through to protect the galvanometer. (Note that represents the internal resi stance of the
galvanometer.) Ammeters may also have multiple scales f or greater flexibility in application. The various sc ales are achieved by
switching various shunt resistances in parallel with the galvanometer—the greater the maximum current to be measured, the
smaller the shunt resistance must be.
Taking Measurements Alters the Circuit
When you use a voltmeter or ammeter, you are connecti ng another resistor to an existing circuit and, thu s, altering the circuit.
Ideally, voltmeters and ammeters do not appreciably a ffect the circuit, but it is instructive to examine the circumstances under
which they do or do not interfere.
First, consider the voltmeter, which is always placed in parallel with the device being measured. Very little current flows through
the voltmeter if its resistance is a few orders of magni tude greater than the device, and so the circuit is not appreciably affected.
(See Figure (a).) (A large resistance in parallel with a small on e has a combined resistance essentially equal to th e small one.) If,
however, the voltmeter’s resistance is comparable to tha t of the device being measured, then the two in paral lel have a smaller

6.7.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83975resistance, appreciably affecting the circuit. (See Figure (b).) The voltage across the device is not the same as when the voltmeter is
out of the circuit.
Figure: (a) A voltmeter having a resistance much larg er than the device () with which it is in parallel p roduces
a parallel resistance essentially the same as the device and does not appreciably affect the circuit being me asured. (b) Here the
voltmeter has the same resistance as the device (), so th at the parallel resistance is half of what it is when t he
voltmeter is not connected. This is an example of a sig nificant alteration of the circuit and is to be avoi ded.
An ammeter is placed in series in the branch of the c ircuit being measured, so that its resistance adds to that branch. Normally, the
ammeter’s resistance is very small compared with the r esistances of the devices in the circuit, and so the ext ra resistance is
negligible. (See Figure (a).) However, if very small load resistances are invol ved, or if the ammeter is not as low in resistance as it
should be, then the total series resistance is signi ficantly greater, and the current in the branch bei ng measured is reduced. (See
Figure (b).)
A practical problem can occur if the ammeter is con nected incorrectly. If it was put in parallel with the resistor to measure the
current in it, you could possibly damage the meter; the low resistance of the ammeter would allow most of the current in the circuit
to go through the galvanometer, and this current would be larger since the effective resistance is smaller.
Figure: (a) An ammeter normally has such a small resista nce that the total series resistance in the branch bein g measured is
not appreciably increased. The circuit is essentially u naltered compared with when the ammeter is absent. (b) Here the ammeter’s
resistance is the same as that of the branch, so that the total resistance is doubled and the current is half wh at it is without the
ammeter. This significant alteration of the circuit i s to be avoided.
One solution to the problem of voltmeters and ammete rs interfering with the circuits being measured is to use galvanometers with
greater sensitivity. This allows construction of volt meters with greater resistance and ammeters with smal ler resistance than when
less sensitive galvanometers are used.

6.7.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83975There are practical limits to galvanometer sensitiv ity, but it is possible to get analog meters that ma ke measurements accurate to a
few percent. Note that the inaccuracy comes from altering the circuit, not from a fault in the meter.
CONNECTIONS: LIMITS TO KNOWLEDGE
Making a measurement alters the system being measured in a manner that produces uncertainty in the measure ment. For
macroscopic systems, such as the circuits discussed i n this module, the alteration can usually be made ne gligibly small, but it
cannot be eliminated entirely. For submicroscopic sys tems, such as atoms, nuclei, and smaller particles, measurement alters the
system in a manner that cannot be made arbitrarily s mall. This actually limits knowledge of the system—eve n limiting what nature
can know about itself. We shall see profound implicati ons of this when the Heisenberg uncertainty principle is discussed in the
modules on quantum mechanics.
There is another measurement technique based on drawi ng no current at all and, hence, not altering the ci rcuit at all. These are
called null measurements and are the topic of Null Measurements. Digital meters that employ solid-state electronics a nd null
measurements can attain accuracies of one part in.
Digital meters are able to detect smaller currents tha n analog meters employing galvanometers. How does this e xplain their
ability to measure voltage and current more accurately than analog meters?
Answer
Since digital meters require less current than analog meters, they alter the circuit less than analog met ers. Their resistance
as a voltmeter can be far greater than an analog me ter, and their resistance as an ammeter can be far le ss than an analog
meter. Consult Figure and Figure and their discussion in the text.
Stimulate a neuron and monitor what happens. Pause, rewi nd, and move forward in time in order to observe the ions as they
move across the neuron membrane.
Figure: Circuit Construction Kit (DC Only), Virtual Lab
Summary
V oltmeters measure voltage, and ammeters measure current.
A voltmeter is placed in parallel with the voltage source to receive full voltage and must have a large resistance to limit its effect
on the circuit.
An ammeter is placed in series to get the full current f lowing through a branch and must have a small resistance to limi t its
effect on the circuit.
Both can be based on the combination of a resistor and a galvanometer, a device that gives an analog reading of c urrent.
Standard voltmeters and ammeters alter the circuit being measured and are thus limited in accuracy.
Glossary
voltmeter
an instrument that measures voltage
ammeter
an instrument that measures currentExercise
PHET EXPLORATIONS: CIRCUIT CONSTRUCTION KIT (DC ONLY), VIRTUAL LAB

6.7.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83975analog meter
a measuring instrument that gives a readout in the form o f a needle movement over a marked gauge
digital meter
a measuring instrument that gives a readout in a digital f orm
galvanometer
an analog measuring device, denoted by G, that measures curre nt flow using a needle deflection caused by a magnetic fi eld
force acting upon a current-carrying wire
current sensitivity
the maximum current that a galvanometer can read
full-scale deflection
the maximum deflection of a galvanometer needle, also known as current sensitivity; a galvanometer with a full- scale deflection
of has a maximum deflection of its needle when flows thro ugh it
shunt resistance
a small resistance placed in parallel with a galvanometer G to produce an ammeter; the larger the current to be measu red, the
smaller must be; most of the current flowing through th e meter is shunted through to protect the galvanomet er
This page titled 6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.4: DC Voltmeters and Ammeters by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

6.7.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839766.7.6: Null Measurements
By the end of this section, you will be able to
Explain why a null measurement device is more accurate th an a standard voltmeter or ammeter.
Demonstrate how a Wheatstone bridge can be used to accur ately calculate the resistance in a circuit.
Standard measurements of voltage and current alter t he circuit being measured, introducing uncertaintie s in the measurements.
V oltmeters draw some extra current, whereas ammeters r educe current flow. Null measurements balance voltages so that there is
no current flowing through the measuring device and, ther efore, no alteration of the circuit being measured.
Null measurements are generally more accurate but are also more complex than the use of standard voltmeter s and ammeters, and
they still have limits to their precision. In this mod ule, we shall consider a few specific types of null mea surements, because they
are common and interesting, and they further illuminate principles of electric circuits.
The Potentiometer
Suppose you wish to measure the emf of a battery. Conside r what happens if you connect the battery directly t o a standard
voltmeter as shown in Figure. (Once we note the problems with this measurement, we wi ll examine a null measurement that
improves accuracy.) As discussed before, the actual qua ntity measured is the terminal voltage, which is rel ated to the emf of the
battery by, where is the current that flows and is the internal resistance of the battery.
The emf could be accurately calculated if were very accurately known, but it is usually not. If the curr ent could be made zero,
then, and so emf could be directly measured. However, standard voltmeters need a current to operate; thus, another
technique is needed.
Figure: An analog voltmeter attached to a battery d raws a small but nonzero current and measures a termina l voltage that
differs from the emf of the battery. (Note that the script capital E symbolizes electromotive force, or em f.) Since the internal
resistance of the battery is not known precisely, it is not possible to calculate the emf precisely.
A potentiometer is a null measurement device for measuring potential s (voltages). (See Figure.) A voltage source is connected to a
resistor say, a long wire, and passes a constant current through it. There is a steady drop in potential (an drop) along the wire,
so that a variable potential can be obtained by making c ontact at varying locations along the wire.
Figure (b) shows an unknown (represented by script in the f igure) connected in series with a galvanometer. Note t hat
opposes the other voltage source. The location of th e contact point (see the arrow on the drawing) is adju sted until theLearning Objectives

6.7.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83976galvanometer reads zero. When the galvanometer reads zero, where is the resistance of the section of wire up to the
contact point. Since no current flows through the galva nometer, none flows through the unknown emf, and so i s directly
sensed.
Now, a very precisely known standard is substituted for, and the contact point is adjusted until the galvan ometer again
reads zero, so that. In both cases, no current passes through the galvanometer, and so the current through the long
wire is the same. Upon taking the ratio, cancels, giving
Solving for gives
Figure:The potentiometer, a null measurement device. (a) A voltage source connected to a long wire resisto r passes a
constant current through it. (b) An unknown emf (la beled script in the figure) is connected as shown, and the point of contact
along is adjusted until the galvanometer reads zero. The segment of wire has a resistance and script, where is
unaffected by the connection since no current flows t hrough the galvanometer. The unknown emf is thus prop ortional to the
resistance of the wire segment.
Because a long uniform wire is used for, the ratio o f resistances is the same as the ratio of the leng ths of wire that zero the
galvanometer for each emf. The three quantities on t he right-hand side of the equation are now known or m easured, and can
be calculated. The uncertainty in this calculation ca n be considerably smaller than when using a voltmeter directly, but it is not
zero. There is always some uncertainty in the ratio o f resistances and in the standard. Furthermore, it is not possible to
tell when the galvanometer reads exactly zero, which intro duces error into both and, and may also affect the current.
Resistance Measurements and the Wheatstone Bridge
There is a variety of so-called ohmmeters that purport to measure resistance. What the most c ommon ohmmeters actually do is to
apply a voltage to a resistance, measure the current, and calculate the resistance using Ohm’s law. Their re adout is this calculated

6.7.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83976resistance. Two configurations for ohmmeters using sta ndard voltmeters and ammeters are shown in Figure. Such configurations
are limited in accuracy, because the meters alter both the voltage applied to the resistor and the current that fl ows through it.
Figure: Two methods for measuring resistance with standa rd meters. (a) Assuming a known voltage for the source, an
ammeter measures current, and resistance is calculated a s. (b) Since the terminal voltage varies with curre nt, it is better to
measure it. is most accurately known when is small, bu t itself is most accurately known when it is large.
The Wheatstone bridge is a null measurement device for calculating resist ance by balancing potential drops in a circuit. (See
Figure.) The device is called a bridge because the galvan ometer forms a bridge between two branches. A variety of bridge devices
are used to make null measurements in circuits.
Resistors and are precisely known, while the arrow t hrough indicates that it is a variable resistance. Th e value of can
be precisely read. With the unknown resistance in the circuit, is adjusted until the galvanometer reads ze ro. The potential
difference between points b and d is then zero, meanin g that b and d are at the same potential. With no cu rrent running through the
galvanometer, it has no effect on the rest of the ci rcuit. So the branches abc and adc are in parallel, a nd each branch has the full
voltage of the source. That is, the drops along abc and adc are the same. Since b and d are at the same potential, the drop
along ad must equal the drop along ab. Thus,
Again, since b and d are at the same potential, the drop a long dc must equal the drop along bc. Thus,
Taking the ratio of these last two expressions gives
Canceling the currents and solving for R yieldsx

6.7.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83976
Figure: The Wheatstone bridge is used to calculate unk nown resistances. The variable resistance is adjusted unt il the
galvanometer reads zero with the switch closed. This sim plifies the circuit, allowing to be calculated based on the drops as
discussed in the text.
This equation is used to calculate the unknown resistanc e when current through the galvanometer is zero. This method can be very
accurate (often to four significant digits), but it is limited by two factors. First, it is not possible to get the current through the
galvanometer to be exactly zero. Second, there are always unce rtainties in, and, which contribute to the uncertain ty in.
Identify other factors that might limit the accuracy of null measurements. Would the use of a digital devi ce that is more
sensitive than a galvanometer improve the accuracy of nu ll measurements?
Answer
One factor would be resistance in the wires and connect ions in a null measurement. These are impossible to m ake zero, and
they can change over time. Another factor would be te mperature variations in resistance, which can be reduc ed but not
completely eliminated by choice of material. Digital devices sensitive to smaller currents than analog d evices do improve
the accuracy of null measurements because they allow y ou to get the current closer to zero.
Summary
Null measurement techniques achieve greater accuracy by b alancing a circuit so that no current flows through the measur ing
device.
One such device, for determining voltage, is a potentiomet er.
Another null measurement device, for determining resistanc e, is the Wheatstone bridge.
Other physical quantities can also be measured with null meas urement techniques.
Glossary
null measurements
methods of measuring current and voltage more accurately b y balancing the circuit so that no current flows through the
measurement deviceExercise

6.7.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83976potentiometer
a null measurement device for measuring potentials (volta ges)
ohmmeter
an instrument that applies a voltage to a resistance, measur es the current, calculates the resistance using Ohm’s l aw, and
provides a readout of this calculated resistance
bridge device
a device that forms a bridge between two branches of a circuit; some bridge devices are used to make null measurement s in
circuits
Wheatstone bridge
a null measurement device for calculating resistance by b alancing potential drops in a circuit
This page titled 6.7.6: Null Measurements is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.5: Null Measurements by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

6.7.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839776.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the importance of the time constant, τ, and calculate the time constant for a given resistance and capacitance.
Explain why batteries in a flashlight gradually lose power and the light dims over time.
Describe what happens to a graph of the voltage across a ca pacitor over time as it charges.
Explain how a timing circuit works and list some application s.
Calculate the necessary speed of a strobe flash needed to “stop” the movement of an object over a particular lengt h.
When you use a flash camera, it takes a few seconds t o charge the capacitor that powers the flash. The ligh t flash discharges the
capacitor in a tiny fraction of a second. Why does cha rging take longer than discharging? This question an d a number of other
phenomena that involve charging and discharging capacito rs are discussed in this module.
RC Circuits
An circuit is one containing a resistor and capacit or. The capacitor is an electrical component that sto res electric charge.
Figure shows a simple circuit that employs a DC (direct cur rent) voltage source. The capacitor is initially un charged. As soon
as the switch is closed, current flows to and from the initially uncharged capacitor. As charge increases on the capacitor plates,
there is increasing opposition to the flow of charge by the repulsion of like charges on each plate.
In terms of voltage, this is because voltage across t he capacitor is given by, where is the amount of ch arge stored on
each plate and is the capacitance. This voltage opp oses the battery, growing from zero to the maximum em f when fully charged.
The current thus decreases from its initial value of to zero as the voltage on the capacitor reaches the same value as the
emf. When there is no current, there is no drop, a nd so the voltage on the capacitor must then equal t he emf of the voltage
source. This can also be explained with Kirchhoff’s sec ond rule (the loop rule), discussed in Kirchhoff’s Rules, which says that the
algebraic sum of changes in potential around any closed loo p must be zero.
The initial current is, because all of the drop is i n the resistance. Therefore, the smaller the resistance, the faster a
given capacitor will be charged. Note that the intern al resistance of the voltage source is included in, as are the resistances of the
capacitor and the connecting wires. In the flash cam era scenario above, when the batteries powering the cam era begin to wear out,
their internal resistance rises, reducing the current an d lengthening the time it takes to get ready for the next f lash.
Figure: (a) An circuit with an initially uncharged capacitor. Current flows in the direction shown (opp osite of electron
flow) as soon as the switch is closed. Mutual repulsion of like charges in the capacitor progressively slows the f low as the capacitor
is charged, stopping the current when the capacitor i s fully charged and. (b) A graph of voltage across th e capacitor
versus time, with the switch closing at time. (Note th at in the two parts of the figure, the capital script E stands for emf,
stands for the charge stored on the capacitor, and is the time constant.)
V oltage on the capacitor is initially zero and rise s rapidly at first, since the initial current is a m aximum. Figure (b) shows a graph of
capacitor voltage versus time () starting when the swit ch is closed at. The voltage approaches emf asympt otically, since theLearning Objectives

6.7.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83977closer it gets to emf the less current flows. The equat ion for voltage versus time when charging a capacito r through a resistor,
derived using calculus, is
where is the voltage across the capacitor, emf is eq ual to the emf of the DC voltage source, and the expon ential e = 2.718 … is
the base of the natural logarithm. Note that the units of a re seconds. We define
where (the Greek letter tau) is called the time cons tant for an circuit. As noted before, a small resistan ce allows the
capacitor to charge faster. This is reasonable, since a larger current flows through a smaller resistance. It is also reasonable that the
smaller the capacitor, the less time needed to charge it. Both factors are contained in.
More quantitatively, consider what happens when. Then the voltage on the capacitor is
This means that in the time, the voltage rises to 0.632 of its final value. The voltage will rise 0.632 of the remainder in the
next time It is a characteristic of the exponentia l function that the final value is never reached, but 0.632 of the remainder to that
value is achieved in every time. In just a few multi ples of the time constant, then, the final value is very nearly achieved, as the
graph in Figure (b) illustrates.
Discharging a Capacitor
Discharging a capacitor through a resistor proceeds in a similar fashion, as Figure illustrates. Initially, the current is, driven
by the initial voltage on the capacitor. As the volt age decreases, the current and hence the rate of disch arge decreases, implying
another exponential formula for. Using calculus, th e voltage on a capacitor being discharged through a resistor is found to
be
Figure: (a) Closing the switch discharges the capacitor through the resistor. Mutual repulsion of like char ges on each
plate drives the current. (b) A graph of voltage acr oss the capacitor versus time, with at. The voltage d ecreases
exponentially, falling a fixed fraction of the way to zero in each subsequent time constant.
The graph in Figure (b) is an example of this exponential decay. Again, th e time constant is. A small resistance allows the
capacitor to discharge in a small time, since the curr ent is larger. Similarly, a small capacitance requires less time to discharge,
since less charge is stored. In the first time interv al after the switch is closed, the voltage falls to 0. 368 of its initial value,
since.
During each successive time, the voltage falls to 0. 368 of its preceding value. In a few multiples of, t he voltage becomes very
close to zero, as indicated by the graph in Figure (b).

6.7.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83977Now we can explain why the flash camera in our scenario takes so much longer to charge than discharge; the r esistance while
charging is significantly greater than while discharg ing. The internal resistance of the battery accounts for most of the resistance
while charging. As the battery ages, the increasing i nternal resistance makes the charging process even s lower. (You may have
noticed this.)
The flash discharge is through a low-resistance ioniz ed gas in the flash tube and proceeds very rapidly. Flash photographs, such as
in Figure, can capture a brief instant of a rapid motion beca use the flash can be less than a microsecond in dura tion. Such flashes
can be made extremely intense.
During World War II, nighttime reconnaissance photog raphs were made from the air with a single flash illum inating more than a
square kilometer of enemy territory. The brevity of the flash eliminated blurring due to the surveillan ce aircraft’s motion. Today, an
important use of intense flash lamps is to pump energy into a laser. The short intense flash can rapidly e nergize a laser and allow it
to reemit the energy in another form.
Figure: This stop-motion photograph of a rufous hummin gbird (Selasphorus rufus) feeding on a flower was obtai ned with an
extremely brief and intense flash of light powered by the discharge of a capacitor through a gas. (credit: Dean E. Biggins, U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service)
High-speed flash photography was pioneered by Doc Edger ton in the 1930s, while he was a professor of electrical engineering
at MIT. You might have seen examples of his work in the amazing shots of hummingbirds in motion, a drop of milk splattering
on a table, or a bullet penetrating an apple (see Figure). To stop the motion and capture these pictures, one n eeds a highintensity, very short pulsed flash, as mentioned earlier in this module.
Suppose one wished to capture the picture of a bullet (moving at) that was passing through an apple. The du ration
of the flash is related to the time constant. Wha t size capacitor would one need in the circuit to s ucceed, if the
resistance of the flash tube was? Assume the apple is a sph ere with a diameter of.
Strategy
We begin by identifying the physical principles invo lved. This example deals with the strobe light, as disc ussed above. Figure
shows the circuit for this probe. The characteristic time of the strobe is given as.
SolutionExample: Integrated Concept Problem: Calculating Capacitor Size—Strobe Lights

6.7.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83977We wish to find, but we don’t know. We want the flash to be on only while the bullet traverses the apple. So we need to use
the kinematic equations that describe the relationship b etween distance, velocity, and time:
The bullet’s velocity is given as, and the distance is. The traverse time, then, is
We set this value for the crossing time equal to. Ther efore,
(Note: Capacitance is typically measured in farads,, defined as Coulombs per volt. From the equation, we see that can
also be stated in units of seconds per ohm.)
Discussion
The flash interval of (the traverse time of the bu llet) is relatively easy to obtain today. Strobe lig hts have opened up new
worlds from science to entertainment. The information from the picture of the apple and bullet was used in the Warren
Commission Report on the assassination of President Joh n F. Kennedy in 1963 to confirm that only one bullet was f ired.
RC Circuits for Timing
circuits are commonly used for timing purposes. A mundane example of this is found in the ubiquitous i ntermittent wiper
systems of modern cars. The time between wipes is vari ed by adjusting the resistance in an circuit. Anoth er example of an
circuit is found in novelty jewelry, Halloween costumes, and various toys that have battery-powered flashing l ights. (See Figure for
a timing circuit.)
A more crucial use of circuits for timing purposes i s in the artificial pacemaker, used to control heart rate. The heart rate is
normally controlled by electrical signals generated by the sino-atrial (SA) node, which is on the wall of the right atrium chamber.
This causes the muscles to contract and pump blood. Som etimes the heart rhythm is abnormal and the heartbea t is too high or too
low.
The artificial pacemaker is inserted near the heart to provide electrical signals to the heart when nee ded with the appropriate time
constant. Pacemakers have sensors that detect body mo tion and breathing to increase the heart rate during exercise to meet the
body’s increased needs for blood and oxygen.

6.7.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83977
Figure: (a) The lamp in this circuit ordinarily has a very high resistance, so that the battery charges the capacitor as if the
lamp were not there. When the voltage reaches a thre shold value, a current flows through the lamp that dr amatically reduces its
resistance, and the capacitor discharges through the la mp as if the battery and charging resistor were not th ere. Once discharged, the
process starts again, with the flash period determined b y the constant. (b) A graph of voltage versus time f or this circuit.
A heart defibrillator is used to resuscitate an acci dent victim by discharging a capacitor through the trunk of her body. A
simplified version of the circuit is seen in Figure. (a) What is the time constant if an capacitor is used and the path
resistance through her body is? (b) If the initial voltag e is 10.0 kV, how long does it take to decline to?
Strategy
Since the resistance and capacitance are given, it is straightforward to multiply them to give the time c onstant asked for in part
(a). To find the time for the voltage to decline to, we repeatedly multiply the initial voltage by 0.368 until a voltage
less than or equal to is obtained. Each multiplication co rresponds to a time of seconds.
Solution for (a)
The time constant is given by the equation. Enteri ng the given values for resistance and capacitance (and
remembering that units for a farad can be expressed as) g ives
Solution for (b)
In the first 8.00 ms, the voltage (10.0 kV) declines to 0.368 of its initial value. That is:
(Notice that we carry an extra digit for each interme diate calculation.) After another 8.00 ms, we multiply by 0.368 again, and
the voltage isExample: Calculating Time: RC Circuit in a Heart Defibrillator

6.7.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83977Similarly, after another 8.00 ms, the voltage is
Discussion
So after only 24.0 ms, the voltage is down to 498 V, o r 4.98% of its original value.Such brief times are usef ul in heart
defibrillation, because the brief but intense curre nt causes a brief but effective contraction of the heart. The actual circuit in a
heart defibrillator is slightly more complex than t he one in Figure, to compensate for magnetic and AC effects that will be
covered in Magnetism.
When is the potential difference across a capacitor an emf?
Answer
Only when the current being drawn from or put into the capacitor is zero. Capacitors, like batteries, have internal resistance,
so their output voltage is not an emf unless current is zero. This is difficult to measure in practice so we refer to a
capacitor’s voltage rather than its emf. But the source of potential difference in a capacitor is fundamental and it is an emf.
Section Summary
An circuit is one that has both a resistor and a capacito r.
The time constant for an circuit is.
When an initially uncharged at capacitor in series wit h a resistor is charged by a DC voltage source, the voltage
rises, asymptotically approaching the emf of the volt age source; as a function of time,
Within the span of each time constant, the voltage rise s by 0.632 of the remaining value, approaching the final v oltage
asymptotically.
If a capacitor with an initial voltage is discharged th rough a resistor starting at, then its voltage decreas es exponentially
as given by
In each time constant τ, the voltage falls by 0.368 of i ts remaining initial value, approaching zero asymptoti cally.
Glossary
RC circuit
a circuit that contains both a resistor and a capacitor
capacitor
an electrical component used to store energy by separatin g electric charge on two opposing plates
capacitance
the maximum amount of electric potential energy that can be stored (or separated) for a given electric potenti al
This page titled 6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Exercise

6.7.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8397721.6: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

6.7.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839786.7.E: Circuits and DC Instruments (Exercise)
Conceptual Questions
21.1: Resistors in Series and Parallel
1. A switch has a variable resistance that is nearly ze ro when closed and extremely large when open, and it i s placed in series
with the device it controls. Explain the effect the switch in Figure has on current when open and when closed.
A switch is ordinarily in series with a resistance and volta ge source. Ideally, the switch has nearly zero resistance when
closed but has an extremely large resistance when open. (Note that in this diagram, the script E represents the vo ltage (or
electromotive force) of the battery.)
2. What is the voltage across the open switch in Figure?
3. There is a voltage across an open switch, such as in Figure. Why, then, is the power dissipated by the open switch s mall?
4. Why is the power dissipated by a closed switch, such as in Fig ure, small?
5. A student in a physics lab mistakenly wired a light bulb, battery, and switch as shown in Figure. Explain why the bulb is
on when the switch is open, and off when the switch is closed. (Do not try this—it is hard on the battery!)
A wiring mistake put this switch in parallel with the device repr esented by. (Note that in this diagram, the script E
represents the voltage (or electromotive force) of the batt ery.)
6. Knowing that the severity of a shock depends on the ma gnitude of the current through your body, would you prefer to be
in series or parallel with a resistance, such as the heating element of a toaster, if shocked by it? Explain.
7. Would your headlights dim when you start your car’s engine if the wires in your automobile were supercond uctors? (Do
not neglect the battery’s internal resistance.) Explain.
8. Some strings of holiday lights are wired in series to sa ve wiring costs. An old version utilized bulbs that break the
electrical connection, like an open switch, when they burn out. If one such bulb burns out, what happens to t he others? If
such a string operates on 120 V and has 40 identical bulbs, what is the normal operating voltage of each? Newer versions use

6.7.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978bulbs that short circuit, like a closed switch, when t hey burn out. If one such bulb burns out, what happens to the others? If
such a string operates on 120 V and has 39 remaining ide ntical bulbs, what is then the operating voltage of each?
9. If two household lightbulbs rated 60 W and 100 W are connected in series to household power, which will be bri ghter?
Explain.
10. Suppose you are doing a physics lab that asks you to put a resistor into a circuit, but all the resistors supplied have a
larger resistance than the requested value. How would y ou connect the available resistances to attempt to ge t the smaller
value asked for?
11. Before World War II, some radios got power through a “resistance cord” that had a significant resistance. Such a
resistance cord reduces the voltage to a desired le vel for the radio’s tubes and the like, and it saves the expense of a
transformer. Explain why resistance cords become warm and was te energy when the radio is on.
12. Some light bulbs have three power settings (not includ ing zero), obtained from multiple filaments that are individually
switched and wired in parallel. What is the minimum num ber of filaments needed for three power settings?
21.2: Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage
13. Is every emf a potential difference? Is every potentia l difference an emf? Explain.
14. Explain which battery is doing the charging and which is being charged in Figure.
15. Given a battery, an assortment of resistors, and a variet y of voltage and current measuring devices, describe how you
would determine the internal resistance of the battery.
16. Two different 12-V automobile batteries on a store she lf are rated at 600 and 850 “cold cranking amps.” W hich has the
smallest internal resistance?
17. What are the advantages and disadvantages of connect ing batteries in series? In parallel?
18. Semitractor trucks use four large 12-V batteries. The starter system requires 24 V, while normal operation of the truck’s
other electrical components utilizes 12 V. How could t he four batteries be connected to produce 24 V? To pr oduce 12 V?
Why is 24 V better than 12 V for starting the truck’s en gine (a very heavy load)?
21.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
19. Can all of the currents going into the junction in Figu re be positive? Explain.
20. Apply the junction rule to junction b in Figure. Is an y new information gained by applying the junction ru le at e? (In the
figure, each emf is represented by script E.)

6.7.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978
21. (a) What is the potential difference going from po int a to point b in Figure? (b) What is the potential difference going
from c to b? (c) From e to g? (d) From e to d?
22. Apply the loop rule to loop afedcba in Figure.
23. Apply the loop rule to loops abgefa and cbgedc in Figu re.
21.4: DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
24. Why should you not connect an ammeter directly acro ss a voltage source as shown in Figure? (Note that scrip t E in the
figure stands for emf.)
25. Suppose you are using a multimeter (one designed to measure a range of voltages, currents, and resistan ces) to measure
current in a circuit and you inadvertently leave it in a voltmeter mode. What effect will the meter have on the circuit? What
would happen if you were measuring voltage but accidentall y put the meter in the ammeter mode?
26. Specify the points to which you could connect a voltmeter to measure the following potential differences in Figure:
(a) the potential difference of the voltage source;
(b) the potential difference across;
(c) across;
(d) across;
(e) across and.
Note that there may be more than one answer to each part.

6.7.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978
27. To measure currents in Figure, you would replace a wire be tween two points with an ammeter. Specify the points
between which you would place an ammeter to measure the fol lowing:
(a) the total current;
(b) the current flowing through;
(c) through;
(d) through.
Note that there may be more than one answer to each part.
21.5: Null Measurements
28. Why can a null measurement be more accurate than o ne using standard voltmeters and ammeters? What fac tors limit the
accuracy of null measurements?
29. If a potentiometer is used to measure cell emfs on th e order of a few volts, why is it most accurate for th e standard emfs
size 12{"emf" rSub { size 8{s} } } {} to be the same order of magnitude and the resistances to be in the range of a few
ohms?
21.6: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors
30. Regarding the units involved in the relationship, verify that the units of resistance times capacitance are time, that
is,.
31. The time constant in heart defibrillation is cruci al to limiting the time the current flows. If the capa citance in the
defibrillation unit is fixed, how would you manipulate resistance in the circuit to adjust the constant? Would an
adjustment of the applied voltage also be needed to ensure that the current delivered has an appropriate value?
32. When making an ECG measurement, it is important to me asure voltage variations over small time intervals. Th e time is
limited by the constant of the circuit—it is not po ssible to measure time variations shorter than. How woul d you
manipulate and in the circuit to allow the necessary me asurements?
33. Draw two graphs of charge versus time on a capacitor. Dr aw one for charging an initially uncharged capacitor in series
with a resistor, as in the circuit in Figure, starting fro m. Draw the other for discharging a capacitor throug h a resistor, as
in the circuit in Figure, starting at, with an initial cha rge. Show at least two intervals of.
34. When charging a capacitor, as discussed in conjunction with Figure, how long does it take for the voltage on the capacitor
to reach emf? Is this a problem?
35. When discharging a capacitor, as discussed in conjunc tion with Figure, how long does it take for the voltage on the
capacitor to reach zero? Is this a problem?
36. Referring to Figure, draw a graph of potential differ ence across the resistor versus time, showing at least t wo intervals of
. Also draw a graph of current versus time for this situati on.
37. A long, inexpensive extension cord is connected from inside the house to a refrigerator outside. The ref rigerator doesn’t
run as it should. What might be the problem?

6.7.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8397838. In Figure, does the graph indicate the time constant is shorter for discharging than for charging? Would you expect
ionized gas to have low resistance? How would you adjus t to get a longer time between flashes? Would adjus ting affect
the discharge time?
39. An electronic apparatus may have large capacitors at high voltage in the power supply section, presenting a shock hazard
even when the apparatus is switched off. A “bleeder res istor” is therefore placed across such a capacitor, a s shown
schematically in Figure, to bleed the charge from it after the apparatus is off. Why must the bleeder resis tance be much
greater than the effective resistance of the rest o f the circuit? How does this affect the time constant for discharging the
capacitor?
A bleeder resistor discharges the capacitor in this ele ctronic device once it is switched off.
Problem & Exercises
21.1: Resistors in Series and Parallel
Note: Data taken from figures can be assumed to be accurate to three signifi cant digits.
40. (a) What is the resistance of ten resistors connected in series?
(b) In parallel?
Solution
(a)
(b)
41. (a) What is the resistance of a a, and a resistor con nected in series?
(b) In parallel?
42. What are the largest and smallest resistances you can obtain by connecting a, a, and a resistor
together?
Solution
(a)
(b)
43. An 1800-W toaster, a 1400-W electric frying pan, and a 75-W lamp are plugged into the same outlet in a 1 5-A, 120-V
circuit. (The three devices are in parallel when plugge d into the same socket.).
(a) What current is drawn by each device?
(b) Will this combination blow the 15-A fuse?
44. Your car’s 30.0-W headlight and 2.40-kW starter are ordinarily connected in parallel in a 12.0-V system. What power
would one headlight and the starter consume if connec ted in series to a 12.0-V battery? (Neglect any other resistance in the
circuit and any change in resistance in the two devices.)
Solution

6.7.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8397845. (a) Given a 48.0-V battery and and resistors, find the current and power for each when connected in
series. (b) Repeat when the resistances are in parallel.
46. Referring to the example combining series and para llel circuits and Figure, calculate in the following two different
ways:
(a) from the known values of and;
(b) using Ohm’s law for. In both parts explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategi es
for Series and Parallel Resistors.
Solution
(a) 0.74 A
(b) 0.742 A
47. Referring to Figure:
(a) Calculate and note how it compares with found in the f irst two example problems in this module.
(b) Find the total power supplied by the source and compare it with the sum of the powers dissipated by the resistors.
48. Refer to Figure and the discussion of lights dimming when a heavy appliance comes on.
(a) Given the voltage source is 120 V, the wire resistan ce is, and the bulb is nominally 75.0 W, what power wil l
the bulb dissipate if a total of 15.0 A passes throug h the wires when the motor comes on? Assume negligible c hange in
bulb resistance.
(b) What power is consumed by the motor?
Solution
(a) 60.8 W
(b) 3.18 kW
49. A 240-kV power transmission line carrying is hung from grounded metal towers by ceramic insulators, each
having a resistance. Figure.
(a) What is the resistance to ground of 100 of these insul ators?
(b) Calculate the power dissipated by 100 of them.
(c) What fraction of the power carried by the line i s this? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the ProblemSolving Strategies for Series and Parallel Resistors.
High-voltage (240-kV) transmission line carrying is hung from a grounded metal transmission tower. The row of
ceramic insulators provide of resistance each.
50. Show that if two resistors and are combined and one is much greater than the other ():
(a) Their series resistance is very nearly equal to the gre ater resistance.

6.7.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978(b) Their parallel resistance is very nearly equal to sm aller resistance.
Solution
(a)
(b)
so that
51. Unreasonable Results
Two resistors, one having a resistance of, are connected in parallel to produce a total resistance of.
(a) What is the value of the second resistance?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
52. Unreasonable Results
Two resistors, one having a resistance of, are connected in series to produce a total resistance of.
(a) What is the value of the second resistance?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
Solution
(a)
(b) Resistance cannot be negative.
(c) Series resistance is said to be less than one of the resi stors, but it must be greater than any of the resistors.
21.2: Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage
53. Standard automobile batteries have six lead-acid ce lls in series, creating a total emf of 12.0 V. What is the emf of an
individual lead-acid cell?
Solution
2.00 V
54. Carbon-zinc dry cells (sometimes referred to as no n-alkaline cells) have an emf of 1.54 V, and they are produced as
single cells or in various combinations to form other voltages.
(a) How many 1.54-V cells are needed to make the common 9-V battery used in many small electronic devices?
(b) What is the actual emf of the approximately 9-V batt ery?
(c) Discuss how internal resistance in the series conne ction of cells will affect the terminal voltage of t his
approximately 9-V battery.
55. What is the output voltage of a 3.0000-V lithium cell in a digital wristwatch that draws 0.300 mA, if the cel l’s internal
resistance is?
Solution
2.9994 V
56. (a) What is the terminal voltage of a large 1.54-V carbon-zinc dry cell used in a physics lab to supply 2.00 A to a circuit,
if the cell’s internal resistance is?
(b) How much electrical power does the cell produce?
(c) What power goes to its load?

6.7.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8397857. What is the internal resistance of an automobile ba ttery that has an emf of 12.0 V and a terminal voltag e of 15.0 V while
a current of 8.00 A is charging it?
Solution
58. (a) Find the terminal voltage of a 12.0-V motorcycle battery having a internal resistance, if it is being charged
by a current of 10.0 A.
(b) What is the output voltage of the battery charger?
59. A car battery with a 12-V emf and an internal resistan ce of is being charged with a current of 60 A. Note th at in
this process the battery is being charged.
(a) What is the potential difference across its terminals?
(b) At what rate is thermal energy being dissipated in the battery?
(c) At what rate is electric energy being converted to c hemical energy?
(d) What are the answers to (a) and (b) when the battery is used to supply 60 A to the starter motor?
60. The hot resistance of a flashlight bulb is, and it is run by a 1.58-V alkaline cell having a internal
resistance.
(a) What current flows?
(b) Calculate the power supplied to the bulb using.
(c) Is this power the same as calculated using?
Solution
(a) 0.658 A
(b) 0.997 W
(c) 0.997 W; yes
61. The label on a portable radio recommends the use of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells (nicads), althoug h they have a
1.25-V emf while alkaline cells have a 1.58-V emf. The ra dio has a resistance.
(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the radio and its batteries. Now, c alculate the power delivered to the radio.
(b) When using Nicad cells each having an internal resista nce of.
(c) When using alkaline cells each having an internal re sistance of.
(d) Does this difference seem significant, consideri ng that the radio’s effective resistance is lowered when its volume is
turned up?
62. An automobile starter motor has an equivalent resis tance of and is supplied by a 12.0-V battery with a
internal resistance.
(a) What is the current to the motor?
(b) What voltage is applied to it?
(c) What power is supplied to the motor?
(d) Repeat these calculations for when the battery co nnections are corroded and add to the circuit. (Sig nificant
problems are caused by even small amounts of unwanted re sistance in low-voltage, high-current applications.)
Solution
(a) 200 A
(b) 10.0 V
(c) 2.00 kW
(d)

6.7.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8397863. A child’s electronic toy is supplied by three 1.58- V alkaline cells having internal resistances of in series with a
1.53-V carbon-zinc dry cell having a internal resistan ce. The load resistance is.
(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the toy and its batteries
(b) What current flows?
(c) How much power is supplied to the load?
(d) What is the internal resistance of the dry cell if i t goes bad, resulting in only 0.500 W being supplied t o the load?
64. (a) What is the internal resistance of a voltage so urce if its terminal voltage drops by 2.00 V when th e current supplied
increases by 5.00 A?
(b) Can the emf of the voltage source be found with the i nformation supplied?
Solution
(a)
(b) No, there is only one independent equation, so only can be found.
65. A person with body resistance between his hands of ac cidentally grasps the terminals of a 20.0-kV power sup ply.
(Do NOT do this!)
(a) Draw a circuit diagram to represent the situation.
(b) If the internal resistance of the power supply is, what is the current through his body?
(c) What is the power dissipated in his body?
(d) If the power supply is to be made safe by increasi ng its internal resistance, what should the internal r esistance be
for the maximum current in this situation to be 1.00 mA o r less?
(e) Will this modification compromise the effective ness of the power supply for driving low-resistance devi ces?
Explain your reasoning.
66. Electric fish generate current with biological cells called electroplaques, which are physiological emf de vices. The
electroplaques in the South American eel are arranged in 140 rows, each row stretching horizontally along the body and each
containing 5000 electroplaques. Each electroplaque ha s an emf of 0.15 V and internal resistance of. If t he water
surrounding the fish has resistance of, how much current c an the eel produce in water from near its head to near its tail?
67. Integrated Concepts
A 12.0-V emf automobile battery has a terminal voltage o f 16.0 V when being charged by a current of 10.0 A.
(a) What is the battery’s internal resistance?
(b) What power is dissipated inside the battery?
(c) At what rate (in) will its temperature increase i f its mass is 20.0 kg and it has a specific heat of
, assuming no heat escapes?
68. Unreasonable Results
A 1.58-V alkaline cell with a internal resistance is su pplying 8.50 A to a load.
(a) What is its terminal voltage?
(b) What is the value of the load resistance?
(c) What is unreasonable about these results?
(d) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
Solution
(a) –0.120 V
(b)

6.7.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978(c) Negative terminal voltage; negative load resistance.
(d) The assumption that such a cell could provide 8.50 A i s inconsistent with its internal resistance.
69. Unreasonable Results
(a) What is the internal resistance of a 1.54-V dry cell th at supplies 1.00 W of power to a bulb?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
21.3: Kirchhoff’s Rules
70. Apply the loop rule to loop abcdefgha in Figure.
Solution
71. Apply the loop rule to loop aedcba in Figure in Question 70.
72. Verify the second equation in Example by substituting t he values found for the currents and.
73. Verify the third equation in Example by substituting the values found for the currents and.
74. Apply the junction rule at point a in Figure.
Solution
75. Apply the loop rule to loop abcdefghija in Figure in Question 74.
76. Apply the loop rule to loop akledcba in Figure in Question 74.
Solution

6.7.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8397877. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in Figure in Question 74. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the
Problem-Solving Strategies for Series and Parallel Resistors.
78. Solve Example, but use loop abcdefgha instead of loo p akledcba. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in t he
Problem-Solving Strategies for Series and Parallel Resistors.
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c)
79. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in Figure.
80. Unreasonable Results
Consider the circuit in Figure, and suppose that the emfs are unknown and the currents are given to be
, and.
(a) Could you find the emfs?
(b) What is wrong with the assumptions?
Solution
(a) No, you would get inconsistent equations to solve.
(b). The assumed currents violate the junction rule.
21.4: DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
81. What is the sensitivity of the galvanometer (that is, what current gives a full-scale deflection) inside a voltmeter that has a
resistance on its 30.0-V scale?
Solution

6.7.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8397882. What is the sensitivity of the galvanometer (that is, what current gives a full-scale deflection) inside a voltmeter that has a
resistance on its 100-V scale?
83. Find the resistance that must be placed in series with a galvanometer having a sensitivity (the same as
the one discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a 0.100-V full-scale reading.
Solution
84. Find the resistance that must be placed in series with a galvanometer having a sensitivity (the same as
the one discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a 3000-V full-scale reading. Inc lude a circuit diagram
with your solution.
85. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel with a galvanometer having a sensitivity (the same
as the one discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as an ammeter with a 10.0-A full-scale reading. I nclude a circuit
diagram with your solution.
Solution
86. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel with a galvanometer having a sensitivity (the same
as the one discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as an am meter with a 300-mA full-scale reading.
87. Find the resistance that must be placed in series wi th a galvanometer having a sensitivity to allow it t o
be used as a voltmeter with:
(a) a 300-V full-scale reading, and
(b) a 0.300-V full-scale reading.
Solution
(a)
(b)
88. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel with a galvanometer having a sensitivity to allow it
to be used as an ammeter with:
(a) a 20.0-A full-scale reading, and
(b) a 100-mA full-scale reading.
89. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a 1.585 -V alkaline cell having an internal resistance of by placing a
voltmeter across its terminals. (See Figure.)
(a) What current flows?
(b) Find the terminal voltage.
(c) To see how close the measured terminal voltage is to the e mf, calculate their ratio.
Solution
(a) 1.58 mA

6.7.E.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978(b) 1.5848 V (need four digits to see the difference)
(c) 0.99990 (need five digits to see the difference fr om unity)
90. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a 3.200 -V lithium cell having an internal resistance of b y placing a
voltmeter across its terminals.
(a) What current flows?
(b) Find the terminal voltage.
(c) To see how close the measured terminal voltage is to the e mf, calculate their ratio.
91. A certain ammeter has a resistance of on its 3.00- A scale and contains a galvanometer. What is the
sensitivity of the galvanometer?
Solution
92. A voltmeter is placed in parallel with a resistor in a circuit.
(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the connection.
(b) What is the resistance of the combination?
(c) If the voltage across the combination is kept th e same as it was across the resistor alone, what is th e
percent increase in current?
(d) If the current through the combination is kept the same as it was through the resistor alone, what i s the
percentage decrease in voltage?
(e) Are the changes found in parts (c) and (d) significan t? Discuss.
93. A ammeter is placed in series with a resistor in a c ircuit.
(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the connection.
(b) Calculate the resistance of the combination.
(c) If the voltage is kept the same across the combi nation as it was through the resistor alone, what is the
percent decrease in current?
(d) If the current is kept the same through the comb ination as it was through the resistor alone, what is the
percent increase in voltage?
(e) Are the changes found in parts (c) and (d) significan t? Discuss.
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c) 0.9980, or a percent decrease
(d) 1.002, or a percent increase
(e) Not significant.
94. Unreasonable Results
Suppose you have a galvanometer with a sensitivity.
(a) What resistance would you put in series with it to allow it to be used as a voltmeter that has a full-s cale
deflection for 0.500 mV?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?

6.7.E.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
95. Unreasonable Results
(a) What resistance would you put in parallel with a g alvanometer having a 25.0-μA sensitivity to allow it t o
be used as an ammeter that has a full-scale deflection fo r?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
Solution
(a)
(b) You can’t have negative resistance.
(c) It is unreasonable that is greater than (see Figure). You cannot achieve a full-scale deflection using a current
less than the sensitivity of the galvanometer.
21.5: Null Measurements
96. What is the of a cell being measured in a potentio meter, if the standard cell’s emf is 12.0 V and the po tentiometer
balances for and?
Solution
24.0 V
97. Calculate the of a dry cell for which a potentiome ter is balanced when, while an alkaline standard cel l
with an emf of 1.600 V requires to balance the potentiomete r.
98. When an unknown resistance is placed in a Wheatston e bridge, it is possible to balance the bridge by adj usting to
be. What is if?
Solution
99. To what value must you adjust to balance a Wheatst one bridge, if the unknown resistance is is, and
is?
100. (a) What is the unknown in a potentiometer that bala nces when is, and balances when is for a
standard 3.000-V emf?
(b) The same is placed in the same potentiometer, which now balances when is for a standard emf of
3.100 V. At what resistance will the potentiometer bala nce?
Solution
(a) 2.00 V
(b)
101. Suppose you want to measure resistances in the range from to using a Wheatstone bridge that has
. Over what range should be adjustable?
Solution
Range = 5.00Ω to 5.00kΩ
21.6: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors
102. The timing device in an automobile’s intermittent wiper system is based on an time constant and utilize s a
capacitor and a variable resistor. Over what range mu st be made to vary to achieve time constants from 2.0 0 to 15.0
s?
Solution
range to

6.7.E.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978103. A heart pacemaker fires 72 times a minute, each time a 25.0-nF capacitor is charged (by a battery in ser ies with a
resistor) to 0.632 of its full voltage. What is the valu e of the resistance?
104. The duration of a photographic flash is related to an t ime constant, which is for a certain camera.
(a) If the resistance of the flash lamp is during discha rge, what is the size of the capacitor supplying its energy?
(b) What is the time constant for charging the capacito r, if the charging resistance is?
Solution
(a)
(b) 2.00 s
105. A 2.00- and a capacitor can be connected in serie s or parallel, as can a 25.0- and a resistor. Calcu late
the four time constants possible from connecting the res ulting capacitance and resistance in series.
106. After two time constants, what percentage of the final voltage, emf, is on an initially uncharged capacitor, charged
through a resistance?
Solution
86.5%
107. A resistor, an uncharged capacitor, and a 6.16-V emf are connected in series.
(a) What is the initial current?
(b) What is the time constant?
(c) What is the current after one time constant?
(d) What is the voltage on the capacitor after one time constant?
108. A heart defibrillator being used on a patient has a n time constant of 10.0 ms due to the resistance of th e patient and
the capacitance of the defibrillator.
(a) If the defibrillator has an capacitance, what i s the resistance of the path through the patient? (Yo u may
neglect the capacitance of the patient and the resistanc e of the defibrillator.)
(b) If the initial voltage is 12.0 kV, how long does it take to decline to?
Solution
(a)
(b) 30.0 ms
109. An ECG monitor must have an time constant less than t o be able to measure variations in voltage over
small time intervals.
(a) If the resistance of the circuit (due mostly to t hat of the patient’s chest) is, what is the maximum capacitance
of the circuit?
(b) Would it be difficult in practice to limit the capaci tance to less than the value found in (a)?
110. Figure shows how a bleeder resistor is used to discharg e a capacitor after an electronic device is shut off, allowing a
person to work on the electronics with less risk of shock.
(a) What is the time constant?
(b) How long will it take to reduce the voltage on the capacitor to 0.250% (5% of 5%) of its full value on ce discharge
begins?
(c) If the capacitor is charged to a voltage throu gh a resistance, calculate the time it takes to rise to
(This is about two time constants.)

6.7.E.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978
Solution
(a) 20.0 s
(b) 120 s
(c) 16.0 ms
111. Using the exact exponential treatment, find how much time is required to discharge a capacitor through a
resistor down to 1.00% of its original voltage.
112. Using the exact exponential treatment, find how much ti me is required to charge an initially uncharged 100 -pF capacitor
through a resistor to 90.0% of its final voltage.
Solution
113. Integrated Concepts
If you wish to take a picture of a bullet traveling at 500 m/s, then a very brief flash of light produced by an
discharge through a flash tube can limit blurring. As suming 1.00 mm of motion during one constant is acc eptable,
and given that the flash is driven by a capacitor, what i s the resistance in the flash tube?
Solution
114. Integrated Concepts
A flashing lamp in a Christmas earring is based on an discharge of a capacitor through its resistance. T he effective
duration of the flash is 0.250 s, during which it produce s an average 0.500 W from an average 3.00 V.
(a) What energy does it dissipate?
(b) How much charge moves through the lamp?
(c) Find the capacitance.
(d) What is the resistance of the lamp?
115. Integrated Concepts
A capacitor charged to 450 V is discharged through a resistor.
(a) Find the time constant.
(b) Calculate the temperature increase of the resis tor, given that its mass is 2.50 g and its specific he at is
, noting that most of the thermal energy is retained in t he short time of the discharge.
(c) Calculate the new resistance, assuming it is pure carbo n.
(d) Does this change in resistance seem significant?
Solution
(a) 4.99 s
(b)

6.7.E.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83978(c)
(d) No
116. Unreasonable Results
(a) Calculate the capacitance needed to get an time co nstant of with a resistor.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
117. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a camera’s flash unit. Construct a problem i n which you calculate the size of the capacitor that stores energy
for the flash lamp. Among the things to be considered are the voltage applied to the capacitor, the ener gy needed in the
flash and the associated charge needed on the capaci tor, the resistance of the flash lamp during discharge, a nd the
desired RC size 12{ ital "RC"} {} time constant.
118. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a rechargeable lithium cell that is to be u sed to power a camcorder. Construct a problem in which you
calculate the internal resistance of the cell durin g normal operation. Also, calculate the minimum voltag e output of a
battery charger to be used to recharge your lithium cell. Among the things to be considered are the emf and useful
terminal voltage of a lithium cell and the current it shoul d be able to supply to a camcorder.
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State University of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univer sity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
6.7.E: Circuits and DC Instruments (Exercise) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
21: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments (Exercises) has no license indicated. Original source:
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and -computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applicat ions-spring-2009.

6.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839686.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the differences and similarities between AC and DC c urrent.
Calculate rms voltage, current, and average power.
Explain why AC current is used for power transmission.
Alternating Current
Most of the examples dealt with so far, and particularl y those utilizing batteries, have constant voltage sou rces. Once the current is
established, it is thus also a constant. Direct current (DC) is the flow of electric charge in only one direc tion. It is the steady state
of a constant-voltage circuit. Most well-known applica tions, however, use a time-varying voltage source. Alternating current
(AC) is the flow of electric charge that periodically reverses direction. If the source varies periodically, particularly sinusoidally, the
circuit is known as an alternating current circuit. E xamples include the commercial and residential power that serves so many of
our needs. Figure shows graphs of voltage and curren t versus time for typical DC and AC power. The AC voltag es and
frequencies commonly used in homes and businesses vary around the world.
Figure: (a) DC voltage and current are constant in t ime, once the current is established. (b) A graph of v oltage and current
versus time for 60-Hz AC power. The voltage and curre nt are sinusoidal and are in phase for a simple resistanc e circuit. The
frequencies and peak voltages of AC sources differ grea tly.
Figure shows a schematic of a simple circuit with an AC voltage source. The voltage between the terminals fl uctuates as
shown, with the AC voltage given by
where is the voltage at time,, is the peak voltage, and is the frequency in hertz. For this simple resis tance circuit,
, and so the AC current is
where is the current at time, and is the peak curre nt. For this example, the voltage and current are sa id to be in phase,
as seen in Figure.Learning Objectives

6.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83968
Figure: The potential difference between the termi nals of an AC voltage source fluctuates as shown. The ma thematical
expression for is given by.
Current in the resistor alternates back and forth just like the driving voltage, since. If the resistor is a fluorescent light
bulb, for example, it brightens and dims 120 times p er second as the current repeatedly goes through zer o. A 120-Hz flicker is too
rapid for your eyes to detect, but if you wave your h and back and forth between your face and a fluorescen t light, you will see a
stroboscopic effect evidencing AC. The fact that the light output fluctuates means that the power is fluct uating. The power supplied
is. Using the expressions for and above, we see that t he time dependence of power is, as shown in
Figure.
Figure: AC power as a function of time. Since the vo ltage and current are in phase here, their product i s non-negative and
fluctuates between zero and. Average power is.
Wave your hand back and forth between your face and a fluorescent light bulb. Do you observe the same th ing with the
headlights on your car? Explain what you observe. Warning: Do not look directly at very bright light.
We are most often concerned with average power rather than its fluctuations—that 60-W light bulb in your desk lamp has an
average power consumption of 60 W, for example. As illustrat ed in Figure 3, the average power is
This is evident from the graph, since the areas above and below the line are equal, but it can also be p roven using
trigonometric identities. Similarly, we define an average or rms current and average or rms voltage to be, respectively,
andMaking Connections: Take-Home Experiment—AC/DC Lights

6.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83968where rms stands for root mean square, a particular ki nd of average. In general, to obtain a root mean squ are, the particular quantity
is squared, its mean (or average) is found, and the square root is taken. This is useful for AC, since the average va lue is zero. Now,
which gives
as stated above. It is standard practice to quote,, and rather than the peak values. For example, most h ousehold
electricity is 120 V AC, which means that is 120 V. T he common 10-A circuit breaker will interrupt a sustai ned greater
than 10 A. Your 1.0-kW microwave oven consumes, and s o on. You can think of these rms and average values as the
equivalent DC values for a simple resistive circuit.
To summarize, when dealing with AC, Ohm’s law and the equat ions for power are completely analogous to those for DC, but rms
and average values are used for AC. Thus, for AC, Ohm’s law is wr itten
The various expressions for AC power are
and
(a) What is the value of the peak voltage for 120-V AC po wer?
Strategy
We are told that is 120V and is 60.0 W. We can use to find the peak voltage, and we can manipulate the
definition of power to find the peak power from the given average power.
Solution
Solving the equation for the peak voltage and substi tuting the known value for gives
Discussion
This means that the AC voltage swings from 170 V to an d back 60 times every second. An equivalent DC voltag e
is a constant 120 V.
(b) What is the peak power consumption rate of a 60.0-W AC l ight bulb?
Solution
Peak power is peak current times peak voltage. Thus,
We know the average power is 60.0 W, and soExample: Peak Voltage and Power for AC

6.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83968Discussion
So the power swings from zero to 120 W one hundred twent y times per second (twice each cycle), and the power averages 60
W.
Why Use AC for Power Distribution?
Most large power-distribution systems are AC. Moreover, th e power is transmitted at much higher voltages than t he 120-V AC (240
V in most parts of the world) we use in homes and on t he job. Economies of scale make it cheaper to build a few very large electric
power-generation plants than to build numerous small o nes. This necessitates sending power long distances, and it is obviously
important that energy losses en route be minimized. Hig h voltages can be transmitted with much smaller power losses than low
voltages, as we shall see. (See Figure 4.) For safety reas ons, the voltage at the user is reduced to familiar values. The crucial factor
is that it is much easier to increase and decrease AC voltag es than DC, so AC is used in most large power distribution syste ms.
Figure: Power is distributed over large distances at hi gh voltage to reduce power loss in the transmission line s. The voltages
generated at the power plant are stepped up by passive devices called transformers (see Transformers) to 330,00 0 volts (or more in
some places worldwide). At the point of use, the transf ormers reduce the voltage
(a) What current is needed to transmit 100 MW of power at 2 00 kV?
Strategy
We are given,, and the resistance of the lines is. Using these givens, we can find the
current flowing (from) and then the power dissipated in the lines (), and we take the ratio to the total power
transmitted.
Solution
To find the current, we rearrange the relationship and s ubstitute known values. This gives
(b) What is the power dissipated by the transmission lines if they have a resistance of?
Solution
Knowing the current and given the resistance of the l ines, the power dissipated in them is found from.
Substituting the known value gives
(c) What percentage of the power is lost in the transmissio n lines?
Solution
The percent loss is the ratio of this lost power to the to tal or input power, multiplied by 100:Example: Power losses are less for high-voltage transmission

6.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83968Discussion
One-fourth of a percent is an acceptable loss. Note tha t if 100 MW of power had been transmitted at 25 kV, th en a current of
4000 A would have been needed. This would result in a power loss in the lines of 16.0 MW, or 16.0% rather than 0.250%. The
lower the voltage, the more current is needed, and th e greater the power loss in the fixed-resistance transmi ssion lines. Of
course, lower-resistance lines can be built, but this re quires larger and more expensive wires. If supercondu cting lines could be
economically produced, there would be no loss in the transmission lines at all. But, as we shall see in a l ater chapter, there is a
limit to current in superconductors, too. In short, h igh voltages are more economical for transmitting p ower, and AC voltage is
much easier to raise and lower, so that AC is used in most larg e-scale power distribution systems.
It is widely recognized that high voltages pose great er hazards than low voltages. But, in fact, some high v oltages, such as those
associated with common static electricity, can be ha rmless. So it is not voltage alone that determines a ha zard. It is not so widely
recognized that AC shocks are often more harmful than similar DC shocks. Thomas Edison thought that AC shoc ks were more
harmful and set up a DC power-distribution system in Ne w York City in the late 1800s. There were bitter fight s, in particular
between Edison and George Westinghouse and Nikola Tesl a, who were advocating the use of AC in early power-dist ribution
systems. AC has prevailed largely due to transformers and lower power losses with high-voltage transmission.
Generate electricity with a bar magnet! Discover the ph ysics behind the phenomena by exploring magnets and h ow you can
use them to make a bulb light.
Figure: Generator
Summary
Direct current (DC) is the flow of electric current in only one direction. It refers to systems where the source volt age is constant.
The voltage source of an alternating current (AC) system puts out, where is the voltage at time, is the pe ak
voltage, and is the frequency in hertz.
In a simple circuit, and AC current is, where is the current at time, and is the peak current.
The average AC power is.
Average (rms) current and average (rms) voltage and and, where rms stands for root mean
square.
Thus,.
Ohm's law for AC is.
Expressions for the average power of an AC circuit are,, and, analogous to the
expressions for DC circuits.
Glossary
direct current
(DC) the flow of electric charge in only one direction
alternating current
(AC) the flow of electric charge that periodically reve rses direction
AC voltage
voltage that fluctuates sinusoidally with time, expressed as V = V sin 2 πft, where V is the voltage at time t, V is the peak
voltage, and f is the frequency in hertz
AC current
current that fluctuates sinusoidally with time, expressed as I = I sin 2 πft, where I is the current at time t, I is the peak current,
and f is the frequency in hertzPHET EXPLORATIONS: GENERATOR
0 0
0 0

6.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83968rms current
the root mean square of the current,, where I is the peak current, in an AC system
rms voltage
the root mean square of the voltage,, where V is the peak voltage, in an AC system
This page titled 6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
20.5: Alternating Current versus Direct Current by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.0

6.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839986.9: Practice
Conceptual Questions
Electromotive Force
1. What effect will the internal resistance of a rechargeabl e battery have on the energy being used to recharge the b attery?
2. A battery with an internal resistance of r and an em f of 10.00 V is connected to a load resistor R=r. As the battery ages, the
internal resistance triples. How much is the current through the load resistor reduced?
3. Show that the power dissipated by the load resistor is maximum when the resistance of the load resistor is equa l to the
internal resistance of the battery.
Resistors in Series and Parallel
4. A voltage occurs across an open switch. What is the power di ssipated by the open switch?
5. The severity of a shock depends on the magnitude of the current through your body. Would you prefer to be in series or in
parallel with a resistance, such as the heating element of a to aster, if you were shocked by it? Explain.
6. Suppose you are doing a physics lab that asks you to p ut a resistor into a circuit, but all the resistors sup plied have a larger
resistance than the requested value. How would you con nect the available resistances to attempt to get th e smaller value
asked for?
7. Some light bulbs have three power settings (not inclu ding zero), obtained from multiple filaments that ar e individually
switched and wired in parallel. What is the minimum num ber of filaments needed for three power settings?
Kirchhoff's Rules
8. Can all of the currents going into the junction shown b elow be positive? Explain.
9. Consider the circuit shown below. Does the analysis of t he circuit require Kirchhoff’s method, or can it be r edrawn to
simplify the circuit? If it is a circuit of series and pa rallel connections, what is the equivalent resistance?
10. Do batteries in a circuit always supply power to a circ uit, or can they absorb power in a circuit? Give an example.
11. What are the advantages and disadvantages of connecting bat teries in series? In parallel?
12. Semi-tractor trucks use four large 12-V batteries. Th e starter system requires 24 V, while normal operation of the truck’s
other electrical components utilizes 12 V. How could t he four batteries be connected to produce 24 V? To pr oduce 12 V?

6.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998Why is 24 V better than 12 V for starting the truck’s en gine (a very heavy load)?
Electrical Measuring Instruments
13. What would happen if you placed a voltmeter in series with a c omponent to be tested?
14. What is the basic operation of an ohmmeter as it measures a re sistor?
15. Why should you not connect an ammeter directly across a vo ltage source as shown below?
RC Circuits
16. A battery, switch, capacitor, and lamp are connected i n series. Describe what happens to the lamp when the swit ch is
closed.
17. When making an ECG measurement, it is important to me asure voltage variations over small time intervals. The time is
limited by the RC constant of the circuit—it is not possible to measure time variations shorter than R C. How would you
manipulate R and C in the circuit to allow the necessary m easurements?
10.6 Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
18. Why isn’t a short circuit necessarily a shock hazard?
19. We are often advised to not flick electric switches with wet hands, dry your hand first. We are also advised to never throw
water on an electric fire. Why?
Problems
Electromotive Force
20. A car battery with a 12-V emf and an internal resistan ce of 0.050Ω is being charged with a current of 60 A. Note that in
this process, the battery is being charged.
(a) What is the potential difference across its terminals?
(b) At what rate is thermal energy being dissipated in the battery?
(c) At what rate is electric energy being converted into chemical energy?
21. The label on a battery-powered radio recommends the use of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells (nicads), a lthough they
have a 1.25-V emf, whereas alkaline cells have a 1.58-V emf. The radio has a 3.20Ω resistance.
(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the radio and its batteries. Now, c alculate the power delivered to the radio
(b) when using nicad cells, each having an internal resista nce of 0.0400Ω, and
(c) when using alkaline cells, each having an internal resistance of 0.200Ω.
(d) Does this difference seem significant, consideri ng that the radio’s effective resistance is lowered when its volume is
turned up?
22. An automobile starter motor has an equivalent resista nce of 0.0500Ω and is supplied by a 12.0-V battery with a 0.0100-Ω
internal resistance.

6.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998(a) What is the current to the motor?
(b) What voltage is applied to it?
(c) What power is supplied to the motor?
(d) Repeat these calculations for when the battery c onnections are corroded and add 0.0900Ω to the circuit.
(Significant problems are caused by even small amoun ts of unwanted resistance in low-voltage, high-current
applications.)
23. (a) What is the internal resistance of a voltage source if its terminal potential drops by 2.00 V when the c urrent supplied
increases by 5.00 A?
(b) Can the emf of the voltage source be found with the i nformation supplied?
24. A person with body resistance between his hands of 10.0kΩ accidentally grasps the terminals of a 20.0-kV power supply.
(Do NOT do this!)
(a) Draw a circuit diagram to represent the situation.
(b) If the internal resistance of the power supply is 2000Ω, what is the current through his body?
(c) What is the power dissipated in his body?
(d) If the power supply is to be made safe by increasi ng its internal resistance, what should the internal r esistance be
for the maximum current in this situation to be 1.00 mA o r less?
(e) Will this modification compromise the effective ness of the power supply for driving low-resistance devi ces?
Explain your reasoning.
25. A 12.0-V emf automobile battery has a terminal voltage o f 16.0 V when being charged by a current of 10.0 A.
(a) What is the battery’s internal resistance?
(b) What power is dissipated inside the battery?
(c) At what rate (in °C/min) will its temperature increase if its mass is 20.0 kg and it has a specific heat of
0.300kcal/kg ⋅°C, assuming no heat escapes?
Resistors in Series and Parallel
26. (a) What is the resistance of a a and a resistor conn ected in series?
(b) In parallel?
27. What are the largest and smallest resistances you can obtain by connecting a 36.0-Ω, a 50.0-Ω, and a 700-Ω resistor
together?
28. An 1800-W toaster, a 1400-W speaker, and a 75-W lamp a re plugged into the same outlet in a 15-A fuse and 12 0-V
circuit. (The three devices are in parallel when plugge d into the same socket.)
(a) What current is drawn by each device?
(b) Will this combination blow the 15-A fuse?
29. Your car’s 30.0-W headlight and 2.40-kW starter are ordinarily connected in parallel in a 12.0-V system. W hat power
would one headlight and the starter consume if connec ted in series to a 12.0-V battery? (Neglect any other resistance in the
circuit and any change in resistance in the two devices.)
30. (a) Given a 48.0-V battery and 24.0-Ω and 96.0-Ω 9 resistors, find the current and power for each when connected in
series.
(b) Repeat when the resistances are in parallel.
31. Referring to the example combining series and paral lel circuits and Figure 10.16, calculate in the followin g two
different ways:

6.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998(a) from the known values of and;
(b) using Ohm’s law for. In both parts, explicitly show how y ou follow the steps in the Figure 10.17.
32. Referring to Figure 10.16,
(a) Calculate and note how it compares with found in the f irst two example problems in this module.
(b) Find the total power supplied by the source and compare it with the sum of the powers dissipated by the resistors.
33. Refer to Figure 10.17 and the discussion of lights dimmin g when a heavy appliance comes on.
(a) Given the voltage source is 120 V, the wire resistan ce is 0.800Ω, and the bulb is nominally 75.0 W, what power will
the bulb dissipate if a total of 15.0 A passes throug h the wires when the motor comes on? Assume negligible c hange in
bulb resistance.
(b) What power is consumed by the motor?
34. Show that if two resistors and are combined and one is muc h greater than the other (),
(a) their series resistance is very nearly equal to the grea ter resistance and
(b) their parallel resistance is very nearly equal to the smaller resistance.
35. Consider the circuit shown below. The terminal voltage of the battery is V=18.00V.
(a) Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit.
(b) Find the current through each resistor.
(c) Find the potential drop across each resistor.
(d) Find the power dissipated by each resistor. (e) Find the power supplied by the battery.
Kirchhoff's Rules
36. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a) Find the voltage across each resistor.
(b)What is the power supplied to the circuit and the powe r dissipated or consumed by the circuit?

6.9.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8399837. Consider the circuits shown below.
(a) What is the current through each resistor in part (a)?
(b) What is the current through each resistor in part (b)?
(c) What is the power dissipated or consumed by each circu it?
(d) What is the power supplied to each circuit?
38. Consider the circuit shown below. Find, and.
39. Consider the circuit shown below. Find, and.
40. Consider the circuit shown below. Find, and.

6.9.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998
41. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a) Find and.
(b) Find the power supplied by the voltage sources.
(c) Find the power dissipated by the resistors
42. Consider the circuit shown below. Write the three loop equations for the loops shown.
43. Consider the circuit shown below. Write equations for the three currents in terms of R and V.
44. Consider the circuit shown in the preceding problem. Write equations for the power supplied by the voltag e sources and
the power dissipated by the resistors in terms of R and V.
45. A child’s electronic toy is supplied by three 1.58-V alkaline cells having internal resistances of 0.0200Ω in series with a
1.53-V carbon-zinc dry cell having a 0.100-Ω internal resistance. The load resistance is 10.0Ω.

6.9.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998(a) Draw a circuit diagram of the toy and its batteries.
(b) What current flows?
(c) How much power is supplied to the load?
(d) What is the internal resistance of the dry cell if i t goes bad, resulting in only 0.500 W being supplied t o the load?
46. Apply the junction rule to Junction b shown below. Is any new inf ormation gained by applying the junction rule at e?
47. Apply the loop rule to Loop afedcba in the preceding prob lem.
Electrical Measuring Instruments
48. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a 1.585-V a lkaline cell having an internal resistance of 0.100Ω by placing a
1.00-kΩ voltmeter across its terminals (see below).
(a) What current flows?
(b) Find the terminal voltage.
(c) To see how close the measured terminal voltage is to the e mf, calculate their ratio.
RC Circuits
49. The timing device in an automobile’s intermittent wip er system is based on an RC time constant and utiliz es a 0.500-μF
capacitor and a variable resistor. Over what range must R be made to vary to achieve time constants from 2.00 to 15.0 s?
50. A heart pacemaker fires 72 times a minute, each time a 25.0-nF capacitor is charged (by a battery in seri es with a resistor)
to 0.632 of its full voltage. What is the value of the r esistance?
51. The duration of a photographic flash is related to an R C time constant, which is 0.100μs for a certain camera.

6.9.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998(a) If the resistance of the flash lamp is 0.0400Ω during discharge, what is the size of the capacitor sup plying its
energy?
(b) What is the time constant for charging the capacito r, if the charging resistance is 800kΩ?
52. A 2.00- and a 7.50-μF capacitor can be connected in series or parallel, as can a 25.0- and a 100-kΩ resistor. Calculate the
four RC time constants possible from connecting the resu lting capacitance and resistance in series.
53. A 500-Ω resistor, an uncharged 1.50-μF capacitor, and a 6.16-V emf are connected in series.
(a) What is the initial current?
(b) What is the RC time constant?
(c) What is the current after one time constant? (d) Wh at is the voltage on the capacitor after one time consta nt?
54. A heart defibrillator being used on a patient has a n RC time constant of 10.0 ms due to the resistance of the patient and
the capacitance of the defibrillator.
(a) If the defibrillator has a capacitance of 8.00μF, what is the resistance of the path through the patien t? (You may
neglect the capacitance of the patient and the resistanc e of the defibrillator.)
(b) If the initial voltage is 12.0 kV, how long does it take to decline to?
55. An ECG monitor must have an RC time constant less than to be able to measure variations in voltage over
small time intervals.
(a) If the resistance of the circuit (due mostly to that of the patient’s chest) is 1.00kΩ, what is the maximum
capacitance of the circuit?
(b) Would it be difficult in practice to limit the capaci tance to less than the value found in (a)?
56. Using the exact exponential treatment, determine how mu ch time is required to charge an initially uncharge d 100-pF
capacitor through a 75.0-MΩ resistor to 90.0% of its final voltage.
57. If you wish to take a picture of a bullet traveling at 500 m/s, then a very brief flash of light produce d by an RC discharge
through a flash tube can limit blurring. Assuming 1.00 mm of motion during one RC constant is acceptable, and given that
the flash is driven by a 600-μF capacitor, what is the resistance in the flash tube?
Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
58. (a) How much power is dissipated in a short circuit of 240-V ac t hrough a resistance of 0.250Ω? (b) What current flows?
59. What voltage is involved in a 1.44-kW short circuit throug h a 0.100-Ω resistance?
60. Find the current through a person and identify the likel y effect on her if she touches a 120-V ac source:
(a) if she is standing on a rubber mat and offers a total resi stance of 300kΩ;
(b) if she is standing barefoot on wet grass and has a resist ance of only 4000kΩ.
61. While taking a bath, a person touches the metal case of a radio. The path through the person to the drainp ipe and ground
has a resistance of 4000Ω. What is the smallest voltage on the case of the radio that could cause ventricular fibrillation?
62. A man foolishly tries to fish a burning piece of brea d from a toaster with a metal butter knife and comes i nto contact with
120-V ac. He does not even feel it since, luckily, he is wearing rubber-soled shoes. What is the minimum re sistance of the
path the current follows through the person?
63. (a) During surgery, a current as small as 20.0μA applied directly to the heart may cause ventricula r fibrillation. If the
resistance of the exposed heart is 300Ω, what is the smallest voltage that poses this danger?
(b) Does your answer imply that special electrical safety prec autions are needed?
64. (a) What is the resistance of a 220-V ac short circuit tha t generates a peak power of 96.8 kW?
(b) What would the average power be if the voltage were 120 V ac?

6.9.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8399865. A heart defibrillator passes 10.0 A through a patient’s tors o for 5.00 ms in an attempt to restore normal beating.
(a) How much charge passed?
(b) What voltage was applied if 500 J of energy was dissip ated?
(c) What was the path’s resistance? (d) Find the temperatu re increase caused in the 8.00 kg of affected tissue.
66. A short circuit in a 120-V appliance cord has a 0.500-Ω resistance. Calculate the temperature rise of the 2.0 0 g of
surrounding materials, assuming their specific heat capacity is 0.200cal/g ⋅°C and that it takes 0.0500 s for a circuit breaker to
interrupt the current. Is this likely to be damaging?
Additional Problems
67. A circuit contains a D cell battery, a switch, a 20-Ω resistor, and four 20-mF capacitors connected in series.
(a) What is the equivalent capacitance of the circuit?
(b) What is the RC time constant?
(c) How long before the current decreases to 50% of the initial value once the switch is closed?
68. A circuit contains a D-cell battery, a switch, a 20-Ω resistor, and three 20-mF capacitors. The capacitors a re connected in
parallel, and the parallel connection of capacitors are c onnected in series with the switch, the resistor and the b attery.
(a) What is the equivalent capacitance of the circuit?
(b) What is the RC time constant?
(c) How long before the current decreases to 50% of the initial value once the switch is closed?
69. Consider the circuit below. The battery has an emf of ε=30.00V and an internal resistance of r=1.00Ω.
(a) Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit and the c urrent out of the battery.
(b) Find the current through each resistor.
(c) Find the potential drop across each resistor.
(d) Find the power dissipated by each resistor.
(e) Find the total power supplied by the batteries.
70. A homemade capacitor is constructed of 2 sheets of al uminum foil with an area of 2.00 square meters, separat ed by paper,
0.05 mm thick, of the same area and a dielectric con stant of 3.7. The homemade capacitor is connected in series with a
100.00-Ω resistor, a switch, and a 6.00-V voltage source.
(a) What is the RC time constant of the circuit?
(b) What is the initial current through the circuit, when the switch is closed? (c) How long does it take the current to
reach one third of its initial value?

6.9.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8399871. A student makes a homemade resistor from a graphite pencil 5.00 cm long, where the graphite is 0.05 mm i n diameter.
The resistivity of the graphite is. The homemade resi stor is place in series with a switch, a 10.00-mF
capacitor and a 0.50-V power source.
(a) What is the RC time constant of the circuit?
(b) What is the potential drop across the pencil 1.00 s af ter the switch is closed?
72. The rather simple circuit shown below is known as a volta ge divider. The symbol consisting of three horizontal lines is
represents “ground” and can be defined as the point wh ere the potential is zero. The voltage divider is widel y used in circuits
and a single voltage source can be used to provide reduced voltage to a load resistor as shown in the s econd part of the
figure. (a) What is the output voltage of circuit
(a) in terms of and?
(b) What is the output voltage of circuit (b) in terms of and?
73. Three 300-Ω resistors are connect in series with an AAA battery wit h a rating of 3 AmpHours. (a) How long can the
battery supply the resistors with power? (b) If the resisto rs are connected in parallel, how long can the battery last?
74. Consider a circuit that consists of a real battery with an emf εε and an internal resistance of r connecte d to a variable
resistor R.
(a) In order for the terminal voltage of the batter y to be equal to the emf of the battery, what should the resistance of
the variable resistor be adjusted to?
(b) In order to get the maximum current from the ba ttery, what should the resistance of the variable res istor be adjusted
to?
(c) In order for the maximum power output of the bat tery to be reached, what should the resistance of the variable
resistor be set to?
75. Consider the circuit shown below. What is the energy stored in each capacitor after the switch has been cl osed for a very
long time?
76. Consider a circuit consisting of a battery with an e mf εε and an internal resistance of r connected in series with a
resistorR and a capacitor C. Show that the total energy suppl ied by the battery while charging the battery is equal to.
77. Consider the circuit shown below. The terminal voltage s of the batteries are shown.
(a) Find the equivalent resistance of the circuit and the c urrent out of the battery.

6.9.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998(b) Find the current through each resistor.
(c) Find the potential drop across each resistor.
(d) Find the power dissipated by each resistor.
(e) Find the total power supplied by the batteries.
78. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a) What is the terminal voltage of the battery?
(b) What is the potential drop across resistor?
79. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a)Determine the equivalent resistance and the current fr om the battery with switch open.
(b) Determine the equivalent resistance and the current fr om the battery with switch closed.
80. Two resistors, one having a resistance of 145Ω, are connected in parallel to produce a total resistanc e of 150Ω.
(a) What is the value of the second resistance?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
81. Two resistors, one having a resistance of 900kΩ, are connected in series to produce a total resistan ce of 0.500MΩ.
(a) What is the value of the second resistance?

6.9.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
82. Apply the junction rule at point a shown below.
83. Apply the loop rule to Loop akledcba in the preceding problem.
84. Find the currents flowing in the circuit in the preced ing problem. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the
Problem-Solving Strategy: Series and Parallel Resistors.
85. Consider the circuit shown below.
(a) Find the current through each resistor.
(b) Check the calculations by analyzing the power in the ci rcuit.
86. A flashing lamp in a Christmas earring is based on an RC discharge of a capacitor through its resistance. T he effective
duration of the flash is 0.250 s, during which it produce s an average 0.500 W from an average 3.00 V.
(a) What energy does it dissipate?
(b) How much charge moves through the lamp?
(c) Find the capacitance.
(d) What is the resistance of the lamp? (Since avera ge values are given for some quantities, the shape of th e pulse
profile is not needed.)
87. A 160-μF capacitor charged to 450 V is discharged through a 31.2-kΩ resistor.
(a) Find the time constant.

6.9.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998(b) Calculate the temperature increase of the resis tor, given that its mass is 2.50 g and its specific he at is 1.67kJ/kg ⋅°C,
noting that most of the thermal energy is retained in th e short time of the discharge.
(c) Calculate the new resistance, assuming it is pure carbo n.
(d) Does this change in resistance seem significant?
Challenge Problems
88. Some camera flashes use flash tubes that require a high voltage. They obtain a high voltage by charging cap acitors in
parallel and then internally changing the connectio ns of the capacitors to place them in series. Consider a circuit that uses
four AAA batteries connected in series to charge six 10- mF capacitors through an equivalent resistance of 100Ω. The
connections are then switched internally to place the capacitors in series. The capacitors discharge throug h a lamp with a
resistance of 100Ω.
(a) What is the RC time constant and the initial current out of the batteries while they are connected in parallel?
(b) How long does it take for the capacitors to charge to 90% of the terminal voltages of the batteries?
(c) What is the RC time constant and the initial cur rent of the capacitors connected in series assuming it discharges at
90%90% of full charge?
(d) How long does it take the current to decrease to 10% of the initial value?
89. Consider the circuit shown below. Each battery has an em f of 1.50 V and an internal resistance of 1.00Ω.
(a) What is the current through the external resistor, whic h has a resistance of 10.00 ohms?
(b) What is the terminal voltage of each battery?
90. Analog meters use a galvanometer, which essentially co nsists of a coil of wire with a small resistance and a p ointer with
a scale attached. When current runs through the coi l, the pointer turns; the amount the pointer turns i s proportional to the
amount of current running through the coil. Galvanome ters can be used to make an ammeter if a resistor is placed in parallel
with the galvanometer. Consider a galvanometer that ha s a resistance of 25.00Ω and gives a full scale reading when a 50-μA
current runs through it. The galvanometer is to be used to make an ammeter that has a full scale readi ng of 10.00 A, as shown
below. Recall that an ammeter is connected in series wi th the circuit of interest, so all 10 A must run through the meter.
(a) What is the current through the parallel resistor in t he meter?
(b) What is the voltage across the parallel resistor?
(c) What is the resistance of the parallel resistor?

6.9.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998
91. Analog meters use a galvanometer, which essentially co nsists of a coil of wire with a small resistance and a p ointer with
a scale attached. When current runs through the coi l, the point turns; the amount the pointer turns is proportional to the
amount of current running through the coil. Galvanom eters can be used to make a voltmeter if a resistor is placed in series
with the galvanometer. Consider a galvanometer that ha s a resistance of 25.00Ω and gives a full scale reading when a 50-μA
current runs through it. The galvanometer is to be u sed to make an voltmeter that has a full scale readi ng of 10.00 V, as
shown below. Recall that a voltmeter is connected in parallel with the component of interest, so the meter must have a high
resistance or it will change the current running through the component.
(a) What is the potential drop across the series resistor i n the meter?
(b) What is the resistance of the parallel resistor?
92. Consider the circuit shown below. Find and.

6.9.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998
93. Consider the circuit below.
(a) What is the RC time constant of the circuit?
(b) What is the initial current in the circuit once the swi tch is closed?
(c) How much time passes between the instant the switch is closed and the time the current has reached half of the
initial current?
94. Consider the circuit below.
(a) What is the initial current through resistor when th e switch is closed?
(b) What is the current through resistor when the capac itor is fully charged, long after the switch is closed?
(c) What happens if the switch is opened after it has be en closed for some time?
(d) If the switch has been closed for a time period l ong enough for the capacitor to become fully charge d, and then the
switch is opened, how long before the current through res istor reaches half of its initial value?
95. Consider the infinitely long chain of resistors shown be low. What is the resistance between terminals a and b?

6.9.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998
96. Consider the circuit below. The capacitor has a capa citance of 10 mF. The switch is closed and after a lon g time the
capacitor is fully charged.
(a) What is the current through each resistor a long time a fter the switch is closed?
(b) What is the voltage across each resistor a long time after the switch is closed?
(c) What is the voltage across the capacitor a long time after the switch is closed?
(d) What is the charge on the capacitor a long time aft er the switch is closed?
(e) The switch is then opened. The capacitor dischar ges through the resistors. How long from the time befor e the
current drops to one fifth of the initial value?
97. A 120-V immersion heater consists of a coil of wire t hat is placed in a cup to boil the water. The heater can boil one cup
of 20.00°C water in 180.00 seconds. You buy one to use in your do rm room, but you are worried that you will overload th e
circuit and trip the 15.00-A, 120-V circuit breaker, whi ch supplies your dorm room. In your dorm room, you ha ve four
100.00-W incandescent lamps and a 1500.00-W space heat er.
(a) What is the power rating of the immersion heater?
(b) Will it trip the breaker when everything is turned on?
(c) If it you replace the incandescent bulbs with 18.00- W LED, will the breaker trip when everything is turned on?
98. Find the resistance that must be placed in series with a 25.0-Ω galvanometer having a 50.0-μA sensitivity (the same as
the one discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a 3000-V full-scale reading. Inc lude a circuit diagram
with your solution.
99. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel wi th a 60.0-Ω galvanometer having a 1.00-mA sensitivity (the same as
the one discussed in the text) to allow it to be used as an ammeter with a 25.0-A full-scale reading. Incl ude a circuit diagram
with your solution.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).

6.9.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998Practice Answers
Check Your Understanding
1. If a wire is connected across the terminals, the loa d resistance is close to zero, or at least considerabl y less than the internal
resistance of the battery. Since the internal resist ance is small, the current through the circuit will b e large,
.The large current causes a high power to be dissipa ted by the internal resistance. The power is
dissipated as heat.
2. The equivalent resistance of nine bulbs connected i n series is 9R. The current is. If one bulb burns out, the
equivalent resistance is 8R, and the voltage does not change, but the current i ncreases. As more bulbs burn out,
the current becomes even higher. Eventually, the current becomes too high, burning out the shunt.
3. The equivalent of the series circuit would be, which is higher than the equivalent
resistance of the parallel circuit. The equivalent resistor of any number of resistors is always higher t han the
equivalent resistance of the same resistors connected in parallel. The current through for the series ci rcuit would be
, which is lower than the sum of the currents through each resistor in the parallel circuit,. This is
not surprising since the equivalent resistance of the series circuit is higher. The current through a seri es connection of any
number of resistors will always be lower than the curr ent into a parallel connection of the same resistors, s ince the equivalent
resistance of the series circuit will be higher than the parallel circuit. The power dissipated by the resi stors in series would be
, which is lower than the power dissipated in the parallel cir cuit.
4. A river, flowing horizontally at a constant rate, split s in two and flows over two waterfalls. The water molecu les are
analogous to the electrons in the parallel circuits. The number of water molecules that flow in the river and falls must be
equal to the number of molecules that flow over each waterfall, just like sum of the current through each resistor must be
equal to the current flowing into the parallel circu it. The water molecules in the river have energy due to their motion and
height. The potential energy of the water molecules i n the river is constant due to their equal heights. T his is analogous to the
constant change in voltage across a parallel circuit. V o ltage is the potential energy across each resistor.
The analogy quickly breaks down when considering the energy. In the waterfall, the potential energy is con verted into kinetic
energy of the water molecules. In the case of electro ns flowing through a resistor, the potential drop is converted into heat
and light, not into the kinetic energy of the electrons.
5.
1. All the overhead lighting circuits are in parallel and connected to the main supply line, so when one bu lb burns out,
all the overhead lighting does not go dark. Each ov erhead light will have at least one switch in series with the light, so
you can turn it on and off.
2. A refrigerator has a compressor and a light that goes on when the door opens. There is usually only one cord for the
refrigerator to plug into the wall. The circuit cont aining the compressor and the circuit containing the lighting circuit
are in parallel, but there is a switch in series with the light. A thermostat controls a switch that is in se ries with the
compressor to control the temperature of the refrigerat or.
6. The circuit can be analyzed using Kirchhoff’s loop r ule. The first voltage source supplies power:. The
second voltage source consumes power:
7. The current calculated would be equal to instead of. The sum of the power dissipated and the power
consumed would still equal the power supplied.
8. Since digital meters require less current than analo g meters, they alter the circuit less than analog me ters. Their resistance
as a voltmeter can be far greater than an analog me ter, and their resistance as an ammeter can be far le ss than an analog
meter. Consult Figure 10.36 and Figure 10.35 and their discu ssion in the text.

6.9.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998Conceptual Questions
1. Some of the energy being used to recharge the battery will be dissipated as heat by the internal resistance.
3.
5. It would probably be better to be in series because the cu rrent will be less than if it were in parallel.
7. two filaments, a low resistance and a high resistance, connec ted in parallel
9. It can be redrawn.
11. In series the voltages add, but so do the internal resistances, because the internal resistances are in series. In parallel, the
terminal voltage is the same, but the equivalent int ernal resistance is smaller than the smallest individu al internal resistance
and a higher current can be provided.
13. The voltmeter would put a large resistance in series with the circuit, significantly changing the circuit. It would probably
give a reading, but it would be meaningless.
15. The ammeter has a small resistance; therefore, a larg e current will be produced and could damage the mete r and/or
overheat the battery.
17. The time constant can be shortened by using a smaller resistor and/or a smaller capacitor. Care should b e taken when
reducing the resistance because the initial current will i ncrease as the resistance decreases.
19. Not only might water drip into the switch and cause a shock, but also the resistance of your body is lower wh en you are
wet.
Problems
21. a.
b. 0.476W;
c. 0.691 W;
d. As is lowered, the power difference decreases; therefore, at higher volumes, there is no significant difference.
23. a.;
b. No, there is only one independent equation, so only r can be found.
25. a.;
b. 40.0 W;
c.
27. largest,, smallest,
29. 29.6 W
31. a. 0.74 A;
b. 0.742 A

6.9.19 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8399833. a. 60.8 W;
b. 3.18 kW
35. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.;
e.
37. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.
39.
41. a.;
b.;
c.
43.
45. a.
b. 0.617 A;
c. 3.81 W;
d.
47.
49. to

6.9.20 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8399851. a.;
b. 2.00 s
53. a. 12.3 mA;
b.;
c. 4.53 mA;
d. 3.89 V
55. a.;
b. No, in practice it would not be difficult to limit the capacitance to less than 100 nF, since typical capacitors range
from fractions of a picofarad (pF) to milifarad (mF).
57.
59. 12.0 V
61. 400 V
63. a. 6.00 mV;.
b. It would not be necessary to take extra precaution s regarding the power coming from the wall. However, it is
possible to generate voltages of approximately this v alue from static charge built up on gloves, for insta nce, so some
precautions are necessary.
65. a.;
b. 10.0 kV;
c.;
d.
Additional Problems
67. a.;
b.;
c. 0.069 s
69. a.;
b.;
c.;
d.;
e.
71. a.;
b.
73. a.;
b.
75.,
77. a.;

6.9.21 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998b.;
c.;
d.;
e.
79. a.;
b.
81. a.;
b. You cannot have negative resistance.
c. The assumption that is unreasonable. Series resis tance is always greater than any of the individual
resistances.
83.
85. a.;
b.
87. a. 4.99 s;
b.;
c.;
d. No, this change does not seem significant. It probably wo uld not be noticed.
Challenge Problems
89. a. 0.273 A; b.
91. a.;
b.
93. a.;
b. 1.26 A;
c.
95.
97. a.,
b.; Yes, the breaker will trip.
c.; No, the breaker will not trip.
99.

6.9.22 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83998Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.9: Practice is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
10.9: Direct-Current Circuits (Exercise) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.
10.10: Direct-Current Circuits (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

6.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/839996.S: Summary
Key Terms
ammeter instrument that measures current
electromotive force (emf)energy produced per unit charge, drawn from a source that
produces an electrical current
equivalent resistanceresistance of a combination of resistors; it can be thou ght of as the
resistance of a single resistor that can replace a combi nation of
resistors in a series and/or parallel circuit
internal resistanceamount of resistance to the flow of current within the voltage
source
junction rulesum of all currents entering a junction must equal the sum of all
currents leaving the junction
Kirchhoff’s rulesset of two rules governing current and changes in pote ntial in an
electric circuit
loop rulealgebraic sum of changes in potential around any close d circuit
path (loop) must be zero
potential differencedifference in electric potential between two points in an electric
circuit, measured in volts
potential droploss of electric potential energy as a current travels across a
resistor, wire, or other component
RC circuit circuit that contains both a resistor and a capacitor
shock hazard hazard in which an electric current passes through a pe rson
terminal voltagepotential difference measured across the terminals of a source
when there is no load attached
thermal hazardhazard in which an excessive electric current causes und esired
thermal effects
three-wire systemwiring system used at present for safety reasons, with live, neutral,
and ground wires
voltmeter instrument that measures voltage

6.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83999Key Equations
Terminal voltage of a single voltage source
Equivalent resistance of a series circuit
Equivalent resistance of a parallel circuit
Junction rule
Loop rule
Terminal voltage of N voltage sources in series
Terminal voltage of N voltage sources in parallel
Charge on a charging capacitor
Time constant
Current during charging of a capacitor
Charge on a discharging capacitor
Current during discharging of a capacitor
Summary
Electromotive Force
All voltage sources have two fundamental parts: a source of el ectrical energy that has a characteristic electromotive force (emf),
and an internal resistance r. The emf is the work done per charge to keep the potential difference of a source cons tant. The emf
is equal to the potential difference across the terminals whe n no current is flowing. The internal resistance r of a voltage source
affects the output voltage when a current flows.
The voltage output of a device is called its terminal v oltage and is given by, where I is the electric
current and is positive when flowing away from the positive t erminal of the voltage source and r is the internal resis tance.
Resistors in Series and Parallel
The equivalent resistance of an electrical circuit with r esistors wired in a series is the sum of the individual resi stances:
Each resistor in a series circuit has the same amount o f current flowing through it.
The potential drop, or power dissipation, across each ind ividual resistor in a series is different, and their combi ned total is the
power source input.
The equivalent resistance of an electrical circuit with r esistors wired in parallel is less than the lowest resistanc e of any of the
components and can be determined using the formula
Each resistor in a parallel circuit has the same full volt age of the source applied to it.
The current flowing through each resistor in a parallel c ircuit is different, depending on the resistance.
If a more complex connection of resistors is a combinatio n of series and parallel, it can be reduced to a single eq uivalent
resistance by identifying its various parts as series or p arallel, reducing each to its equivalent, and continui ng until a single
resistance is eventually reached.
Kirchhoff's Rules
Kirchhoff’s rules can be used to analyze any circuit, simp le or complex. The simpler series and parallel connection rules are
special cases of Kirchhoff’s rules.
Kirchhoff’s first rule, also known as the junction rule, app lies to the charge to a junction. Current is the flow of cha rge; thus,
whatever charge flows into the junction must flow out.

6.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/83999Kirchhoff’s second rule, also known as the loop rule, states tha t the voltage drop around a loop is zero.
When calculating potential and current using Kirchhof f’s rules, a set of conventions must be followed for determinin g the
correct signs of various terms.
When multiple voltage sources are in series, their inte rnal resistances add together and their emfs add togeth er to get the total
values.
When multiple voltage sources are in parallel, their int ernal resistances combine to an equivalent resistance that i s less than the
individual resistance and provides a higher current than a si ngle cell.
Solar cells can be wired in series or parallel to provide increased voltage or current, respectively.
Electrical Measuring Instruments
V oltmeters measure voltage, and ammeters measure current. Analog meters are based on the combination of a resisto r and a
galvanometer, a device that gives an analog reading of current or voltage. Digital meters are based on analog-to- digital
converters and provide a discrete or digital measureme nt of the current or voltage.
A voltmeter is placed in parallel with the voltage source to receive full voltage and must have a large resistance to limit its effect
on the circuit.
An ammeter is placed in series to get the full current f lowing through a branch and must have a small resistance to limi t its
effect on the circuit.
Standard voltmeters and ammeters alter the circuit they are connected to and are thus limited in accuracy.
Ohmmeters are used to measure resistance. The component i n which the resistance is to be measured should be isolated
(removed) from the circuit.
RC Circuits
An RC circuit is one that has both a resistor and a capacitor.
The time constant for an RC circuit is.
When an initially uncharged (at) capacitor in series wi th a resistor is charged by a dc voltage source, the capacito r
asymptotically approaches the maximum charge.
As the charge on the capacitor increases, the current expo nentially decreases from the initial current:.
If a capacitor with an initial charge Q is discharged through a resistor starting at, then its charge decreases exponentially.
The current flows in the opposite direction, compared to whe n it charges, and the magnitude of the charge decreases with time.
Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
The two types of electric hazards are thermal (excessive power) and shock (current through a person). Electrical saf ety systems
and devices are employed to prevent thermal and shock haz ards.
Shock severity is determined by current, path, duration, an d ac frequency.
Circuit breakers and fuses interrupt excessive current s to prevent thermal hazards.
The three-wire system guards against thermal and shock h azards, utilizing live/hot, neutral, and ground wires, an d grounding
the neutral wire and case of the appliance.
A ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) prevents shock b y detecting the loss of current to unintentional paths.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 6.S: Summary is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
10.8: Direct-Current Circuits (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Magnetism
7.1: Introduction
7.2: Magnets
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
7.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving Charge in a Ma gnetic Field
7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field- Exampl es and Applications
7.7: The Hall Effect
7.8: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
7.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents- Ampere’s Law
7.11: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
7.E: Magnetism (Exercises)
This page titled 7: Magnetism is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

7.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840017.1: Introduction
One evening, an Alaskan sticks a note to his refrigera tor with a small magnet. Through the kitchen window, th e Aurora Borealis
glows in the night sky. This grand spectacle is shaped by the same force that holds the note to the refrigerator.
Figure: The magnificent spectacle of the Aurora Bore alis, or northern lights, glows in the northern sky abo ve Bear Lake near
Eielson Air Force Base, Alaska. Shaped by the Earth’s ma gnetic field, this light is produced by radiation spew ed from solar storms.
(credit: Senior Airman Joshua Strang, via Flickr)
People have been aware of magnets and magnetism for th ousands of years. The earliest records date to well bef ore the time of
Christ, particularly in a region of Asia Minor called Magnesia (the name of this region is the source of wo rds like magnetic).
Magnetic rocks found in Magnesia, which is now part of western Turkey, stimulated interest during ancient tim es. A practical
application for magnets was found later, when they were employed as navigational compasses. The use of magnet s in compasses
resulted not only in improved long-distance sailing, but also in the names of “north” and “south” being g iven to the two types of
magnetic poles.
Today magnetism plays many important roles in our l ives. Physicists’ understanding of magnetism has ena bled the development of
technologies that affect our everyday lives. The iPo d in your purse or backpack, for example, wouldn’t hav e been possible without
the applications of magnetism and electricity on a smal l scale.
The discovery that weak changes in a magnetic field i n a thin film of iron and chromium could bring abou t much larger changes in
electrical resistance was one of the first large successe s of nanotechnology. The 2007 Nobel Prize in Physics we nt to Albert Fert
from France and Peter Grunberg from Germany for this dis covery of giant magnetoresistance and its applications to computer
memory.
All electric motors, with uses as diverse as powering r efrigerators, starting cars, and moving elevators, co ntain magnets.
Generators, whether producing hydroelectric power or r unning bicycle lights, use magnetic fields. Recyclin g facilities employ
magnets to separate iron from other refuse. Hundreds of millions of dollars are spent annually on magnet ic containment of fusion
as a future energy source. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has become an important diagnostic tool in th e field of medicine,
and the use of magnetism to explore brain activity is a subject of contemporary research and developme nt. The list of applications
also includes computer hard drives, tape recording, de tection of inhaled asbestos, and levitation of high -speed trains. Magnetism is
used to explain atomic energy levels, cosmic rays, and charged particles trapped in the Van Allen belts. Once a gain, we will find all
these disparate phenomena are linked by a small number o f underlying physical principles.
Figure: Engineering of technology like iPods would no t be possible without a deep understanding magnetism. (credit: Jesse!
S?, Flickr)

7.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84001Contributors and Attributions
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State Universi ty of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Ki m Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Universi ty of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physic s under a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 7.1: Introduction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
22.0: Prelude to Magnetism by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840027.2: Magnets
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the difference between the north and south pole s of a magnet.
Describe how magnetic poles interact with each other.
Figure: Magnets come in various shapes, sizes, and strengt hs. All have both a north pole and a south pole. Ther e is never an
isolated pole (a monopole).
All magnets attract iron, such as that in a refrigerat or door. However, magnets may attract or repel other m agnets. Experimentation
shows that all magnets have two poles. If freely suspe nded, one pole will point toward the north. The two pol es are thus named the
north magnetic pole and the south magnetic pole (or more properly, north-seeking and south-seeking pole s, for the attractions in
those directions).
UNIVERSAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MAGNETS AND MAGNET POLES
It is a universal characteristic of all magnets that like poles repel and unlike poles attract. (Note the similarity with electrostatics:
unlike charges attract and like charges repel.)
Further experimentation shows that it is impossible to separate north and south poles in the manner that + and − charges can be
separated.
Figure: One end of a bar magnet is suspended from a th read that points toward north. The magnet’s two poles are labeled N
and S for north-seeking and south-seeking poles, respecti vely.
MISCONCEPTION ALERT: EARTH'S GEOGRAPHIC NORTH POLE HIDES AN S
The Earth acts like a very large bar magnet with its south- seeking pole near the geographic North Pole. That is why the n orth pole
of your compass is attracted toward the geographic nort h pole of the Earth—because the magnetic pole that is near the geographic
North Pole is actually a south magnetic pole! Confusion arise s because the geographic term “North Pole” has come to be used
(incorrectly) for the magnetic pole that is near the Nor th Pole. Thus, “North magnetic pole” is actually a misnome r—it should be
called the South magnetic pole.Learning Objectives

7.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84002
Figure: Unlike poles attract, whereas like poles repel.
Figure: North and south poles always occur in pairs. At tempts to separate them result in more pairs of poles. I f we continue to
split the magnet, we will eventually get down to an iron atom with a north pole and a south pole—these, t oo, cannot be separated.
The fact that magnetic poles always occur in pairs o f north and south is true from the very large scale—f or example, sunspots
always occur in pairs that are north and south magneti c poles—all the way down to the very small scale. Magn etic atoms have both
a north pole and a south pole, as do many types of subatomic particles, such as electrons, protons, and neutrons.
We know that like magnetic poles repel and unlike po les attract. See if you can show this for two refrigera tor magnets. Will the
magnets stick if you turn them over? Why do they sti ck to the door anyway? What can you say about the ma gnetic properties
of the door next to the magnet? Do refrigerator magnets st ick to metal or plastic spoons? Do they stick to all types of metal?
Summary
Magnetism is a subject that includes the properties of mag nets, the effect of the magnetic force on moving charge s and currents,
and the creation of magnetic fields by currents.
There are two types of magnetic poles, called the north ma gnetic pole and south magnetic pole.
North magnetic poles are those that are attracted toward the E arth’s geographic north pole.
Like poles repel and unlike poles attract.
Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and south—it is not possible to isolate north and south poles.
Glossary
north magnetic pole
the end or the side of a magnet that is attracted toward Earth’ s geographic north pole
south magnetic poleMAKING CONNECTIONS: TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT -- REFRIGERATOR MAGNETS

7.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84002the end or the side of a magnet that is attracted toward Earth’ s geographic south pole
This page titled 7.2: Magnets is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
22.1: Magnets by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840037.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define ferromagnet.
Describe the role of magnetic domains in magnetization.
Explain the significance of the Curie temperature.
Describe the relationship between electricity and magnet ism.
Ferromagnets
Only certain materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, and gadolinium, exhibit strong magnetic effects. Such materials are called
ferromagnetic, after the Latin word for iron, ferrum. A group of materials made from the alloys of the r are earth elements are also
used as strong and permanent magnets; a popular one is neodymium. Other materials exhibit weak magnetic ef fects, which are
detectable only with sensitive instruments. Not only do ferromagnetic materials respond strongly to magnet s (the way iron is
attracted to magnets), they can also be magnetized themselves—that is, they can be induced to be magnet ic or made into permanent
magnets.
Figure: An unmagnetized piece of iron is placed betw een two magnets, heated, and then cooled, or simply t apped when cold.
The iron becomes a permanent magnet with the poles al igned as shown: its south pole is adjacent to the north pole of the original
magnet, and its north pole is adjacent to the south po le of the original magnet. Note that there are attr active forces between the
magnets.
When a magnet is brought near a previously unmagneti zed ferromagnetic material, it causes local magnetizat ion of the material
with unlike poles closest, as in Figure. (This results in the attraction of the previously unmagnetized mat erial to the magnet.)
What happens on a microscopic scale is illustrated i n Figure. The regions within the material called dom ains act like small bar
magnets. Within domains, the poles of individual atom s are aligned. Each atom acts like a tiny bar magnet. Domains are small and
randomly oriented in an unmagnetized ferromagnetic object. In response to an external magnetic field, the domains may grow to
millimeter size, aligning themselves as shown in Figure 2b. This induced magnetization can be made permanent if the material is
heated and then cooled, or simply tapped in the presence o f other magnets.
Figure: (a) An unmagnetized piece of iron (or other ferromagnetic material) has randomly oriented domai ns. (b) When
magnetized by an external field, the domains show gre ater alignment, and some grow at the expense of other s. Individual atoms are
aligned within domains; each atom acts like a tiny ba r magnet.Learning Objectives

7.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84003Conversely, a permanent magnet can be demagnetized by hard blows or by heating it in the absence of ano ther magnet. Increased
thermal motion at higher temperature can disrupt and randomize the orientation and the size of the domai ns. There is a well-defined
temperature for ferromagnetic materials, which is call ed the Curie temperature, above which they cannot be magnetized. The Curie
temperature for iron is 1043 K, which is well above ro om temperature. There are several elements and alloys that have
Curie temperatures much lower than room temperature and ar e ferromagnetic only below those temperatures.
Electromagnets
Early in the 19th century, it was discovered that el ectrical currents cause magnetic effects. The first sig nificant observation was by
the Danish scientist Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851), who found that a compass needle was deflected by a curre nt-carrying
wire. This was the first significant evidence that the mo vement of charges had any connection with magnets. Ele ctromagnetism is
the use of electric current to make magnets. These t emporarily induced magnets are called electromagnets. Electromagnets are
employed for everything from a wrecking yard crane t hat lifts scrapped cars to controlling the beam of a 90-km-circumference
particle accelerator to the magnets in medical imaging mac hines (Figure).
Figure: Instrument for magnetic resonance imaging (MR I). The device uses a superconducting cylindrical coil for the main
magnetic field. The patient goes into this “tunnel” o n the gurney. (credit: Bill McChesney, Flickr)
Figure shows that the response of iron filings to a c urrent-carrying coil and to a permanent bar magnet. The patterns are
similar. In fact, electromagnets and ferromagnets hav e the same basic characteristics—for example, they hav e north and south poles
that cannot be separated and for which like poles repel an d unlike poles attract.
Figure: Iron filings near (a) a current-carrying coi l and (b) a magnet act like tiny compass needles, showi ng the shape of their
fields. Their response to a current-carrying coil and a permanent magnet is seen to be very similar, especial ly near the ends of the
coil and the magnet.

7.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84003Combining a ferromagnet with an electromagnet can pr oduce particularly strong magnetic effects (Figure). Whenever strong
magnetic effects are needed, such as lifting scrap m etal, or in particle accelerators, electromagnets are enhanced by ferromagnetic
materials. Limits to how strong the magnets can be mad e are imposed by coil resistance (it will overheat an d melt at sufficiently
high current), and so superconducting magnets may be employed. These are still limited, because supercon ducting properties are
destroyed by too great a magnetic field.
Figure: An electromagnet with a ferromagnetic core can produce very strong magnetic effects. Alignment o f domains in the
core produces a magnet, the poles of which are aligne d with the electromagnet.
Figure shows a few uses of combinations of electromagn ets and ferromagnets. Ferromagnetic materials can act as memory
devices, because the orientation of the magnetic fie lds of small domains can be reversed or erased. Magne tic information storage
on videotapes and computer hard drives are among the m ost common applications. This property is vital in our dig ital world.

7.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84003
Figure: An electromagnet induces regions of permanent magnetism on a floppy disk coated with a ferromagnet ic material. The
information stored here is digital (a region is either magnetic or not); in other applications, it can be analog (with a varying
strength), such as on audiotapes.
Current: The Source of All Magnetism
An electromagnet creates magnetism with an electric cu rrent. In later sections we explore this more quantitat ively, finding the
strength and direction of magnetic fields created b y various currents. But what about ferromagnets? Figure shows models of
how electric currents create magnetism at the submicr oscopic level. (Note that we cannot directly observe th e paths of individual
electrons about atoms, and so a model or visual image, consistent with all direct observations, is made. We can directly observe the
electron’s orbital angular momentum, its spin moment um, and subsequent magnetic moments, all of which are e xplained with
electric-current-creating subatomic magnetism.) Curr ents, including those associated with other submicros copic particles like
protons, allow us to explain ferromagnetism and all o ther magnetic effects. Ferromagnetism, for example, results from an internal
cooperative alignment of electron spins, possible in some materials but not in others.
Crucial to the statement that electric current is th e source of all magnetism is the fact that it is impo ssible to separate north and
south magnetic poles. (This is far different from th e case of positive and negative charges, which are e asily separated.) A current
loop always produces a magnetic dipole—that is, a ma gnetic field that acts like a north pole and south p ole pair. Since isolated
north and south magnetic poles, called magnetic monop oles, are not observed, currents are used to explain all magnetic effects. If
magnetic monopoles did exist, then we would have to mo dify this underlying connection that all magnetism is due to electrical
current. There is no known reason that magnetic monopo les should not exist—they are simply never observed— and so searches at

7.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84003the subnuclear level continue. If they do not exist, we would like to find out why not. If they do exist, we would like to see
evidence of them.
Electric current is the source of all magnetism.
Figure: (a) In the planetary model of the atom, an electron orbits a nucleus, forming a closed-current lo op and producing a
magnetic field with a north pole and a south pole. (b) Electrons have spin and can be crudely pictured as rotating charge, forming a
current that produces a magnetic field with a north pole and a south pole. Neither the planetary model n or the image of a spinning
electron is completely consistent with modern physics. H owever, they do provide a useful way of understanding phenomena.
Explore the interactions between a compass and bar magnet. Discover how you can use a battery and wire to make a magnet!
Can you make it a stronger magnet? Can you make the magne tic field reverse?
Summary
Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and south—it is not possible to isolate north and south poles.
All magnetism is created by electric current.
Ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, are those that exhibi t strong magnetic effects.
The atoms in ferromagnetic materials act like small ma gnets (due to currents within the atoms) and can be aligne d, usually in
millimeter-sized regions called domains.
Domains can grow and align on a larger scale, producing perm anent magnets. Such a material is magnetized, or induced to be
magnetic.
Above a material’s Curie temperature, thermal agitation destroys the alignment of atoms, and ferromagnetism dis appears.
Electromagnets employ electric currents to make magnet ic fields, often aided by induced fields in ferromagnetic materials.
Glossary
ferromagnetic
materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, and gadolinium, that exhibit strong magnetic effects
magnetized
to be turned into a magnet; to be induced to be magnetic
domains
regions within a material that behave like small bar magnet s
Curie temperature
the temperature above which a ferromagnetic material cannot be magnetized
electromagnetism
the use of electrical currents to induce magnetismELECTRIC CURRENTS AND MAGNETISM
PHET EXPLORATIONS: MAGNETS AND ELECTROMAGNETS

7.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84003electromagnet
an object that is temporarily magnetic when an electrical current is passed through it
magnetic monopoles
an isolated magnetic pole; a south pole without a north pol e, or vice versa (no magnetic monopole has ever been obser ved)
This page titled 7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.2: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

7.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840047.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Define magnetic field and describe the magnetic field li nes of various magnetic fields.
Einstein is said to have been fascinated by a compas s as a child, perhaps musing on how the needle felt a force without direct
physical contact. His ability to think deeply and cle arly about action at a distance, particularly for gr avitational, electric, and
magnetic forces, later enabled him to create his re volutionary theory of relativity. Since magnetic for ces act at a distance, we define
a magnetic field to represent magnetic forces. The pi ctorial representation of magnetic field lines is ve ry useful in visualizing the
strength and direction of the magnetic field. As shown in Figure, the direction of magnetic field lines i s defined to be the
direction in which the north end of a compass needle p oints. The magnetic field is traditionally called the B-field.
Figure: Magnetic field lines are defined to have the direction that a small compass points when placed at a location. (a) If
small compasses are used to map the magnetic field aroun d a bar magnet, they will point in the directions sho wn: away from the
north pole of the magnet, toward the south pole of t he magnet. (Recall that the Earth’s north magnetic p ole is really a south pole in
terms of definitions of poles on a bar magnet.) (b) Co nnecting the arrows gives continuous magnetic field li nes. The strength of the
field is proportional to the closeness (or density) of t he lines. (c) If the interior of the magnet could be probed, the field lines would
be found to form continuous closed loops.
Small compasses used to test a magnetic field will not d isturb it. (This is analogous to the way we tested elect ric fields with a small
test charge. In both cases, the fields represent only the object creating them and not the probe testing them.) Figure shows how
the magnetic field appears for a current loop and a long straight wire, as could be explored with small compasses. A small compass
placed in these fields will align itself parallel to the field line at its location, with its north pole po inting in the direction of B. Note
the symbols used for field into and out of the paper.
Figure: Small compasses could be used to map the fields sh own here. (a) The magnetic field of a circular curr ent loop is
similar to that of a bar magnet. (b) A long and strai ght wire creates a field with magnetic field lines fo rming circular loops. (c)
When the wire is in the plane of the paper, the fiel d is perpendicular to the paper. Note that the symbol s used for the field pointing
inward (like the tail of an arrow) and the field po inting outward (like the tip of an arrow).
A field is a way of mapping forces surrounding any ob ject that can act on another object at a distance wi thout apparent physical
connection. The field represents the object generati ng it. Gravitational fields map gravitational forces, electric fields map
electrical forces, and magnetic fields map magnetic forces.
Extensive exploration of magnetic fields has reveale d a number of hard-and-fast rules. We use magnetic fi eld lines to represent the
field (the lines are a pictorial tool, not a physical entity in and of themselves). The properties of mag netic field lines can be
summarized by these rules:Learning Objectives
MAKING CONNECTIONS: CONCEPT OF A FIELD

7.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840041. The direction of the magnetic field is tangent to the fi eld line at any point in space. A small compass will poin t in the direction
of the field line.
2. The strength of the field is proportional to the clo seness of the lines. It is exactly proportional to the nu mber of lines per unit
area perpendicular to the lines (called the areal densi ty).
3. Magnetic field lines can never cross, meaning that the f ield is unique at any point in space.
4. Magnetic field lines are continuous, forming closed loops without beginning or end. They go from the north pole to the south
pole.
The last property is related to the fact that the n orth and south poles cannot be separated. It is a dis tinct difference from electric
field lines, which begin and end on the positive and negative charges. If magnetic monopoles existed, then magnetic field lines
would begin and end on them.
Summary
Magnetic fields can be pictorially represented by magn etic field lines, the properties of which are as follows:
The field is tangent to the magnetic field line.
Field strength is proportional to the line density.
Field lines cannot cross.
Field lines are continuous loops.
Glossary
magnetic field
the representation of magnetic forces
B-field
another term for magnetic field
magnetic field lines
the pictorial representation of the strength and the direction of a magnetic field
direction of magnetic field lines
the direction that the north end of a compass needle points
This page titled 7.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.3: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840057.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the effects of magnetic fields on moving char ges.
Use the right hand rule 1 to determine the velocity of a ch arge, the direction of the magnetic field, and the direc tion of the
magnetic force on a moving charge.
Calculate the magnetic force on a moving charge.
What is the mechanism by which one magnet exerts a fo rce on another? The answer is related to the fact th at all magnetism is
caused by current, the flow of charge. Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges, and so they exert forces on other magnets,
all of which have moving charges.
Right Hand Rule 1
The magnetic force on a moving charge is one of the most fundamental known. Magnetic force is as important as the electrostatic
or Coulomb force. Yet the magnetic force is more co mplex, in both the number of factors that affects it and in its direction, than the
relatively simple Coulomb force. The magnitude of th e magnetic force on a charge moving at a speed in a magnetic field of
strength is given by
where is the angle between the directions of and. This force is often called the Lorentz force. In fact, this is how we define
the magnetic field strength --in in terms of the forc e on a charged particle moving in a magnetic field. The SI unit for magnetic
field strength is called the tesla (T) after the eccentric but brilliant inventor Niko la Tesla (1856–1943). To determine how the
tesla relates to other SI units, we solve
Because is unitless, the tesla is
(note that C/s = A).
Another smaller unit, called the gauss (G), where, is sometimes used. The strongest permanent magnets have fields
near 2 T; superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or more. The Earth’s magnetic field on its sur face is only about
, or 0.5 G.
The direction of the magnetic force is perpendicular to the plan e formed by and, as determined by the right hand rule 1 (or
RHR-1), which is illustrated in Figure. RHR-1 states th at, to determine the direction of the magnetic force on a positive
moving charge, you point the thumb of the right hand in the direction of, the fingers in the direction of, and a perpendicular to
the palm points in the direction of. One way to remem ber this is that there is one velocity, and so the t humb represents it. There
are many field lines, and so the fingers represent them. The force is in the direction you would push with y our palm. The force on a
negative charge is in exactly the opposite direction to that on a positive charge.Learning Objectives

7.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84005
Figure: Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charge s. This force is one of the most basic known. The direct ion of the
magnetic force on a moving charge is perpendicular t o the plane formed by and and follows right hand r ule–1 (RHR-1) as
shown. The magnitude of the force is proportional to,,, and the sine of the angle between and.
There is no magnetic force on static charges. However, there is a magnetic force on moving charges. When c harges are
stationary, their electric fields do not affect magn ets. But, when charges move, they produce magnetic fie lds that exert forces
on other magnets. When there is relative motion, a connection between electric and magnetic fields emer ges—each affects the
other.
With the exception of compasses, you seldom see or per sonally experience forces due to the Earth’s small m agnetic field. To
illustrate this, suppose that in a physics lab you rub a glass rod with silk, placing a 20-nC positive charg e on it. Calculate the
force on the rod due to the Earth’s magnetic field, if you throw it with a horizontal velocity of 10 m/s due west in a place where
the Earth’s field is due north parallel to the groun d. (The direction of the force is determined with rig ht hand rule 1 as shown in
Figure).
Figure: A positively charged object moving due west i n a region where the Earth’s magnetic field is due no rth experiences
a force that is straight down as shown. A negative char ge moving in the same direction would feel a force st raight up.
Strategy
We are given the charge, its velocity, and the magnet ic field strength and direction. We can thus use the equation
to find the force.
Solution
The magnetic force isMAKING CONNECTIONS: CHARGES AND MAGNETS
Example: Calculating Magnetic Force: Earth's Magnetic Field on a Charged Glass Rod

7.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84005We see that, since the angle between the velocity a nd the direction of the field is. Entering the othe r given
quantities yields
Discussion
This force is completely negligible on any macroscop ic object, consistent with experience. (It is calculate d to only one digit,
since the Earth’s field varies with location and is g iven to only one digit.) The Earth’s magnetic field, however, does produce
very important effects, particularly on submicroscopic pa rticles. Some of these are explored in the next section.
Summary
Magnetic fields exert a force on a moving charge q, the magnitude of which is
where is the angle between the directions of and.
The SI unit for magnetic field strength is the tesla (T), which is related to other units by
The direction of the force on a moving charge is given by right hand rul e 1 (RHR-1): Point the thumb of the right hand in the
direction of, the fingers in the direction of, and a p erpendicular to the palm points in the direction of.
The force is perpendicular to the plane formed by and. Since the force is zero if is parallel to, charged part icles often
follow magnetic field lines rather than cross them.
Glossary
right hand rule 1 (RHR-1)
the rule to determine the direction of the magnetic for ce on a positive moving charge: when the thumb of the right hand points
in the direction of the charge’s velocity and the fing ers point in the direction of the magnetic field then th e force on the
charge is perpendicular and away from the palm; the forc e on a negative charge is perpendicular and into the p alm
Lorentz force
the force on a charge moving in a magnetic field
tesla
T, the SI unit of the magnetic field strength;
magnetic force
the force on a charge produced by its motion through a m agnetic field; the Lorentz force
gauss
G, the unit of the magnetic field strength; 10–4T
This page titled 7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving Charg e in a Magnetic Field is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.4: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving Char ge in a Magnetic Field by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840067.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field- Examples and Applications
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the effects of a magnetic field on a moving ch arge.
Calculate the radius of curvature of the path of a charg e that is moving in a magnetic field.
Magnetic force can cause a charged particle to move in a circular or spiral path. Cosmic rays are energe tic charged particles in
outer space, some of which approach the Earth. They c an be forced into spiral paths by the Earth’s magne tic field. Protons in giant
accelerators are kept in a circular path by magnetic force. The bubble chamber photograph in Figure shows charged particles
moving in such curved paths. The curved paths of cha rged particles in magnetic fields are the basis of a number of phenomena and
can even be used analytically, such as in a mass spectrom eter.
Figure:Trails of bubbles are produced by high-energy charged particles moving through the superheated liqu id hydrogen in
this artist’s rendition of a bubble chamber. There is a strong magnetic field perpendicular to the page tha t causes the curved paths of
the particles. The radius of the path can be used to f ind the mass, charge, and energy of the particle.
So does the magnetic force cause circular motion? Magn etic force is always perpendicular to velocity, so that it does no work on
the charged particle. The particle’s kinetic energy and speed thus remain constant. The direction of moti on is affected, but not the
speed. This is typical of uniform circular motion. The simplest case occurs when a charged particle moves p erpendicular to a
uniform -field, such as shown in Figure 2. (If this tak es place in a vacuum, the magnetic field is the domina nt factor determining
the motion.) Here, the magnetic force supplies the centripe tal force. Noting that, we see that.
Figure: A negatively charged particle moves in the p lane of the page in a region where the magnetic fie ld is perpendicular into
the page (represented by the small circles with x’s—lik e the tails of arrows). The magnetic force is perpendi cular to the velocity,
and so velocity changes in direction but not magnitud e. Uniform circular motion results.
Because the magnetic force supplies the centripetal fo rce, we have
Solving for yieldsLearning Objectives

7.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84006Here, is the radius of curvature of the path of a ch arged particle with mass and charge, moving at speed perpendicular to a
magnetic field of strength. If the velocity is not perpendicular to the magnetic field, then is the c omponent of the velocity
perpendicular to the field. The component of the vel ocity parallel to the field is unaffected, since the magnetic force is zero for
motion parallel to the field. This produces a spiral mo tion rather than a circular one.
A magnet brought near an old-fashioned TV screen su ch as in Figure 3 (TV sets with cathode ray tubes instea d of LCD
screens) severely distorts its picture by altering th e path of the electrons that make its phosphors glow. (Don't try this at home,
as it will permanently magnetize and ruin the TV.) To illustrate this, calculate the radius of curvatu re of the path of an electron
having a velocity of (corresponding to the accelera ting voltage of about 10.0 kV used in some TVs)
perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength (obtaina ble with permanent magnets).
Figure: Side view showing what happens when a magnet c omes in contact with a computer monitor or TV screen.
Electrons moving toward the screen spiral about magnet ic field lines, maintaining the component of their v elocity parallel to
the field lines. This distorts the image on the screen.
Strategy:
We can find the radius of curvature directly from the equation, since all other quantities in it are given or known.
Solution:
Using known values for the mass and charge of an electron, al ong with the given values of and gives us
or
Discussion:
The small radius indicates a large effect. The electr ons in the TV picture tube are made to move in very tight circles,
greatly altering their paths and distorting the image.
Figure shows how electrons not moving perpendicular to magnetic field lines follow the field lines. The comp onent of
velocity parallel to the lines is unaffected, and so the charges spiral along the field lines. If field strength increases in the direction
of motion, the field will exert a force to slow the charge s, forming a kind of magnetic mirror, as shown below.Example: Calculating the Curvature of the Path of an Electron Moving in a Magnetic Field: A magnet on aTV Screen

7.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84006
Figure: When a charged particle moves along a magnet ic field line into a region where the field becomes stronger, the particle
experiences a force that reduces the component of vel ocity parallel to the field. This force slows the moti on along the field line and
here reverses it, forming a “magnetic mirror.”
The properties of charged particles in magnetic fie lds are related to such different things as the Auror a Australis or Aurora Borealis
and particle accelerators. Charged particles approaching magnetic field lines ma y get trapped in spiral orbits about the lines rather
than crossing them, as seen above. Some cosmic rays, for example, follow t he Earth’s magnetic field lines, entering the atmosp here
near the magnetic poles and causing the southern or northern lights through their ionization of molecul es in the atmosphere. Those
particles that approach middle latitudes must cross magnetic field lines, and many are prevented from pen etrating the atmosphere.
Cosmic rays are a component of background radiation; consequently, they give a higher radiation dose at the poles than at the
equator.
Figure: Energetic electrons and protons, components of cosmic rays, from the Sun and deep outer space often f ollow the
Earth’s magnetic field lines rather than cross them. (R ecall that the Earth’s north magnetic pole is really a south pole in terms of a
bar magnet.)
Some incoming charged particles become trapped in th e Earth’s magnetic field, forming two belts above the atmosphere known as
the Van Allen radiation belts after the discoverer J ames A. Van Allen, an American astrophysicist (Figure). Part icles trapped in
these belts form radiation fields (similar to nuclear radiation) so intense that manned space flights avo id them and satellites with
sensitive electronics are kept out of them. In the f ew minutes it took lunar missions to cross the Van Allen radiation belts, astronauts
received radiation doses more than twice the allowed annual exposure for radiation workers. Other planets hav e similar belts,
especially those having strong magnetic fields like Jupite r.
Figure:The Van Allen radiation belts are two regions in which energetic charged particles are trapped in the Earth’s magnetic
field. One belt lies about 300 km above the Earth’s su rface, the other about 16,000 km. Charged particles in these belts migrate
along magnetic field lines and are partially reflect ed away from the poles by the stronger fields there. T he charged particles that
enter the atmosphere are replenished by the Sun and sou rces in deep outer space.

7.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84006Back on Earth, we have devices that employ magnetic f ields to contain charged particles. Among them are the giant particle
accelerators that have been used to explore the subst ructure of matter (Figure). Magnetic fields not only c ontrol the direction
of the charged particles, they also are used to focus p articles into beams and overcome the repulsion of like char ges in these beams.
Figure:The Fermilab facility in Illinois has a large p article accelerator (the most powerful in the world until 2008) that
employs magnetic fields (magnets seen here in orange) t o contain and direct its beam. This and other acceler ators have been in use
for several decades and have allowed us to discover some of the laws underlying all matter. (credit: ammcrim, Flickr)
Thermonuclear fusion (like that occurring in the Sun) is a hope for a future clean energy source. One of th e most promising devices
is the tokamak, which uses magnetic fields to contain (or trap) and direct the reactive charged particles (Figure). Less exotic,
but more immediately practical, amplifiers in microwa ve ovens use a magnetic field to contain oscillating electrons. These
oscillating electrons generate the microwaves sent into the oven.
Figure: Tokamaks such as the one shown in the figure ar e being studied with the goal of economical producti on of energy by
nuclear fusion. Magnetic fields in the doughnut-shaped device contain and direct the reactive charged par ticles. (credit: David
Mellis, Flickr)
Mass spectrometers have a variety of designs, and many use magnetic fi elds to measure mass. The curvature of a charged part icle’s
path in the field is related to its mass and is meas ured to obtain mass information. Historically, such tec hniques were employed in
the first direct observations of electron charge and m ass. Today, mass spectrometers (sometimes coupled with ga s chromatographs)
are used to determine the make-up and sequencing of large biological molecules.
Summary
Magnetic force can supply centripetal force and cause a charged particle to move in a circular path of radi us
where is the component of the velocity perpendicular t o for a charged particle with mass and charge.
This page titled 7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field- Examples and Applications is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.5: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field- Examples and Applications by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840077.7: The Hall Effect
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the Hall effect.
Calculate the Hall emf across a current-carrying conduct or.
We have seen effects of a magnetic field on free-mo ving charges. The magnetic field also affects charges moving in a conductor.
One result is the Hall effect, which has important implicatio ns and applications.
Figure shows what happens to charges moving through a conductor in a magnetic field. The field is perpendi cular to the
electron drift velocity and to the width of the cond uctor. Note that conventional current is to the right in both parts of the figure. In
part (a), electrons carry the current and move to t he left. In part (b), positive charges carry the cur rent and move to the right.
Moving electrons feel a magnetic force toward one sid e of the conductor, leaving a net positive charge on the other side. This
separation of charge creates a voltage, known as the Hall emf, across the conductor. the creation of a voltage across a currentcarrying conductor by a magnetic field is known as t he Hall effect, after Edwin Hall, the American physicist who discovere d it in
1879.
Figure: The Hall effect. (a) Electrons move to the l eft in this flat conductor (conventional current to the right). The magnetic
field is directly out of the page, represented by cir cled dots; it exerts a force on the moving charges, ca using a voltage, the Hall
emf, across the conductor. (b) Positive charges moving t o the right (conventional current also to the right) are moved to the side,
producing a Hall emf of the opposite sign,. Thus, if the direction of the field and current are known, t he sign of the charge
carriers can be determined from the Hall effect.
One very important use of the Hall effect is to deter mine whether positive or negative charges carries the current. Note that in
Figure 1b, where positive charges carry the current, the Hall emf has the sign opposite to when negative char ges carry the current.
Historically, the Hall effect was used to show that elec trons carry current in metals and it also shows that positive charges carry
current in some semiconductors. The Hall effect is u sed today as a research tool to probe the movement of charges, their drift
velocities and densities, and so on, in materials. In 1980, it was discovered that the Hall effect is qua ntized, an example of quantum
behavior in a macroscopic object.
The Hall effect has other uses that range from the det ermination of blood flow rate to precision measurement of magnetic field
strength. To examine these quantitatively, we need an expression for the Hall emf,, across a conductor. C onsider the balance of
forces on a moving charge in a situation where,, an d are mutually perpendicular, such as shown in Figure. Although the
magnetic force moves negative charges to one side, t hey cannot build up without limit. The electric fiel d caused by their separation
opposes the magnetic force,, and the electric force,, eventually grows to equal it. That is,Learning Objectives

7.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84007or
Note that the electric field is uniform across the conductor because the magnetic field is uniform, as is the conductor. For a
uniform electric field, the relationship between ele ctric field and voltage is, where is the width of th e conductor and is
the Hall emf. Entering this into the last expression giv es
Solving this for the Hall emf yields
if,, and are mutually perpendicular.
where is the Hall effect voltage across a conductor of wi dth through which charges move at a speed.
Figure: The Hall emf produces an electric force tha t balances the magnetic force on the moving charges. The magnetic force
produces charge separation, which builds up until it i s balanced by the electric force, an equilibrium tha t is quickly reached.
One of the most common uses of the Hall effect is in the measurement of magnetic field strength. Such device s, called Hall
probes, can be made very small, allowing fine position mapp ing. Hall probes can also be made very accurate, usually accomplished
by careful calibration. Another application of the Hal l effect is to measure fluid flow in any fluid that has free charges (most do)
(Figure). A magnetic field applied perpendicular to the flow direction produces a Hall emf as shown. Note that the sign of
depends not on the sign of the charges, but only on th e directions of and. The magnitude of the Hall emf is, where is
the pipe diameter, so that the average velocity can b e determined from providing the other factors are known.

7.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84007
Figure: The Hall effect can be used to measure fluid flow in any fluid having free charges, such as blood. The Hall emf is
measured across the tube perpendicular to the applied magnetic field and is proportional to the average ve locity.
A Hall effect flow probe is placed on an artery, appl ying a 0.100-T magnetic field across it, in a setup similar to that in Figure
. What is the Hall emf, given the vessel’s inside diameter is 4.00 mm and the average blood velocity is 20.0 cm/s?
Strategy:
Because,, and are mutually perpendicular, the Equati on can be used to find.
Solution:
Entering the given values for,, and gives
Discussion:
This is the average voltage output. Instantaneous volt age varies with pulsating blood flow. The voltage is sm all in this type of
measurement. is particularly difficult to measure, be cause there are voltages associated with heart action (ECG voltages) that
are on the order of millivolts. In practice, this di fficulty is overcome by applying an AC magnetic fiel d, so that the Hall emf is
AC with the same frequency. An amplifier can be very se lective in picking out only the appropriate frequen cy, eliminating
signals and noise at other frequencies.
Summary
The Hall effect is the creation of voltage, known as the Hal l emf, across a current-carrying conductor by a magnetic f ield.
The Hall emf is given by
with,, and all mutually perpendicular for a conduct or of width through which charges move at a speed.
Glossary
Hall effect
the creation of voltage across a current-carrying condu ctor by a magnetic field
Hall emf
the electromotive force created by a current-carrying conductor by a magnetic field,
This page titled 7.7: The Hall Effect is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Example: Calculating the Hall emf - Hall Effect for Blood Flow

7.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8400722.6: The Hall Effect by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840087.8: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the effects of a magnetic force on a current-c arrying conductor.
Calculate the magnetic force on a current-carrying cond uctor.
Because charges ordinarily cannot escape a conductor, the magnetic force on charges moving in a conducto r is transmitted to the
conductor itself.
Figure: The magnetic field exerts a force on a curre nt-carrying wire in a direction given by the right hand rule 1 (the same
direction as that on the individual moving charges). This force can easily be large enough to move the wir e, since typical currents
consist of very large numbers of moving charges.
We can derive an expression for the magnetic force o n a current by taking a sum of the magnetic forces o n individual charges. (The
forces add because they are in the same direction.) T he force on an individual charge moving at the drif t velocity is given by
. Taking to be uniform over a length of wire and z ero elsewhere, the total magnetic force on the wire is then
, where is the number of charge carriers in the sec tion of wire of length. Now,, where is the number
of charge carriers per unit volume and is the volum e of wire in the field. Noting that, where is the cro ss-sectional area
of the wire, then the force on the wire is. Gathering terms,
Because (see Current),
is the equation for magnetic force on a length of wire carrying a current in a uniform magnetic field, as shown in Figure.
If we divide both sides of this expression by, we find that the magnetic force per unit length of wire in a uniform field is
. The direction of this force is given by RHR-1, with t he thumb in the direction of the current. Then, with the fingers in
the direction of, a perpendicular to the palm points in the direction of, as in Figure 2.
Figure: The force on a current-carrying wire in a m agnetic field is. Its direction is given by RHR-1.Learning Objectives

7.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84008Calculate the force on the wire shown in Figure, given,, a nd.
Strategy
The force can be found with the given information by using and noting that the angle between and is, so
that.
Solution
Entering the given values into yields
The units for tesla are; thus,
Discussion
This large magnetic field creates a significant force on a small length of wire.
Magnetic force on current-carrying conductors is use d to convert electric energy to work. (Motors are a pr ime example—they
employ loops of wire and are considered in the next se ction.) Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) is the technical na me given to a
clever application where magnetic force pumps fluids withou t moving mechanical parts (Figure).
Figure: Magnetohydrodynamics. The magnetic force on the current passed through this fluid can be used as a n onmechanical
pump.
A strong magnetic field is applied across a tube an d a current is passed through the fluid at right ang les to the field, resulting in a
force on the fluid parallel to the tube axis as sho wn. The absence of moving parts makes this attractive for moving a hot,
chemically active substance, such as the liquid sodium employed in some nuclear reactors. Experimental art ificial hearts are testing
with this technique for pumping blood, perhaps circumve nting the adverse effects of mechanical pumps. (Cell membranes,
however, are affected by the large fields needed in M HD, delaying its practical application in humans.) MHD p ropulsion for
nuclear submarines has been proposed, because it could be considerably quieter than conventional propeller drives. The deterrent
value of nuclear submarines is based on their ability to hide and survive a first or second nuclear strike. As we slowly disassemble
our nuclear weapons arsenals, the submarine branch wil l be the last to be decommissioned because of this a bility (Figure).
Existing MHD drives are heavy and inefficient—much develop ment work is needed.
Figure:An MHD propulsion system in a nuclear submarine could produce significantly less turbulence than prope llers and
allow it to run more silently. The development of a silent drive submarine was dramatized in the book and the film The Hunt for
Red October.Example: Calculating Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire: A Strong Magnetic Field

7.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84008Summary
The magnetic force on current-carrying conductors is gi ven by
where is the current, is the length of a straight con ductor in a uniform magnetic field, and is the angle between and.
The force follows RHR-1 with the thumb in the direction o f.
This page titled 7.8: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.7: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840097.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how motors and meters work in terms of torque on a current loop.
Calculate the torque on a current-carrying loop in a mag netic field.
Motors are the most common application of magnetic force on current-carrying wires. Motors have loops of wire i n a magnetic
field. When current is passed through the loops, the m agnetic field exerts torque on the loops, which rotate s a shaft. Electrical
energy is converted to mechanical work in the process (Figure).
Figure: Torque on a current loop. A current-carryin g loop of wire attached to a vertically rotating sha ft feels magnetic forces
that produce a clockwise torque as viewed from above.
Let us examine the force on each segment of the loo p in Figure 1 to find the torques produced about the axis of the vertical shaft.
(This will lead to a useful equation for the torque o n the loop.) We take the magnetic field to be unifor m over the rectangular loop,
which has width and height. First, we note that the fo rces on the top and bottom segments are vertical and, therefore, parallel to
the shaft, producing no torque. Those vertical forc es are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, so that they also produce no
net force on the loop. Figure shows views of the loop from above. Torque is defined as, where is the for ce, is
the distance from the pivot that the force is appli ed, and is the angle between and. As seen in Figure, right hand rule 1
gives the forces on the sides to be equal in magnitu de and opposite in direction, so that the net force is again zero. However, each
force produces a clockwise torque. Since, the torque o n each vertical segment is, and the two add to give a
total torqueLearning Objectives

7.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84009
Figure: Top views of a current-carrying loop in a ma gnetic field. (a) The equation for torque is derived using this view. Note
that the perpendicular to the loop makes an angle w ith the field that is the same as the angle between a nd. (b) The
maximum torque occurs when is a right angle and. (c) Zero (minimum) torque occurs when is zero and. (d)
The torque reverses once the loop rotates past.
Now, each vertical segment has a length that is perpe ndicular to, so that the force on each is. Enterin g into the
expression for torque yields
If we have a multiple loop of turns, we get times t he torque of one loop. Finally, note that the area o f the loop is; the
expression for the torque becomes
This is the torque on a current-carrying loop in a un iform magnetic field. This equation can be shown to be valid for a loop of any
shape. The loop carries a current, has turns, each of area, and the perpendicular to the loop makes an angle with the field.
The net force on the loop is zero.
Find the maximum torque on a 100-turn square loop of a wire of 10.0 cm on a side that carries 15.0 A of c urrent in a 2.00-T
field.
Strategy
Torque on the loop can be found using. Maximum torque occurs wh en and.
Solution
For, the maximum torque is
Entering known values yields
Discussion
This torque is large enough to be useful in a motor.Example: Calculating Torque on a Current-Carrying Loop in a Strong Magnetic Field

7.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84009The torque found in the preceding example is the ma ximum. As the coil rotates, the torque decreases to zer o at. The torque
then reverses its direction once the coil rotates past (Figure). T his means that, unless we do something, the coil will
oscillate back and forth about equilibrium at. Thi s means that, unless we do something, the coil will osc illate back and forth
about equilibrium at with automatic switches called brushes (Figure).
Figure: (a) As the angular momentum of the coil carr ies it through, the brushes reverse the current to kee p the torque
clockwise. (b) The coil will rotate continuously in t he clockwise direction, with the current reversing ea ch half revolution to
maintain the clockwise torque.
Meters, such as those in analog fuel gauges on a car, are another common application of magnetic torque on a current-carrying
loop. Figure shows that a meter is very similar in co nstruction to a motor. The meter in the figure has its magnets shaped to
limit the effect of by making perpendicular to th e loop over a large angular range. Thus the torque is proportional to and not.
A linear spring exerts a counter-torque that balanc es the current-produced torque. This makes the needl e deflection proportional to
. If an exact proportionality cannot be achieved, t he gauge reading can be calibrated. To produce a gal vanometer for use in analog
voltmeters and ammeters that have a low resistance a nd respond to small currents, we use a large loop area, high magnetic field
, and low-resistance coils.
Figure: Meters are very similar to motors but only rot ate through a part of a revolution. The magnetic po les of this meter are
shaped to keep the component of perpendicular to th e loop constant, so that the torque does not depend on and the deflection
against the return spring is proportional only to the current.
Summary
The torque on a current-carrying loop of any shape in a uniform magnetic field. is
where is the number of turns, is the current, is th e area of the loop, is the magnetic field strength, and is the angle
between the perpendicular to the loop and the magnetic field.
Glossary
motor
loop of wire in a magnetic field; when current is passed th rough the loops, the magnetic field exerts torque on th e loops, which
rotates a shaft; electrical energy is converted to mecha nical work in the process
meter

7.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84009common application of magnetic torque on a current-carr ying loop that is very similar in construction to a motor; by design, the
torque is proportional to and not, so the needle deflecti on is proportional to the current
This page titled 7.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.8: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840107.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents- Ampere’s Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate current that produces a magnetic field.
Use the right hand rule 2 to determine the direction of cur rent or the direction of magnetic field loops.
How much current is needed to produce a significant m agnetic field, perhaps as strong as the Earth’s field? Surveyors will tell you
that overhead electric power lines create magnetic fi elds that interfere with their compass readings. Ind eed, when Oersted
discovered in 1820 that a current in a wire affected a compass needle, he was not dealing with extremely l arge currents. How does
the shape of wires carrying current affect the shape of the magnetic field created? We noted earlier th at a current loop created a
magnetic field similar to that of a bar magnet, but what about a straight wire or a toroid (doughnut)? How i s the direction of a
current-created field related to the direction of t he current? Answers to these questions are explored in this section, together with a
brief discussion of the law governing the fields created by currents.
Magnetic Field Created by a Long Straight Current-Carrying Wire: Right Hand Rule 2
Magnetic fields have both direction and magnitude. As no ted before, one way to explore the direction of a ma gnetic field is with
compasses, as shown for a long straight current-carrying wi re in Figure. Hall probes can determine the magnitud e of the
field. The field around a long straight wire is found to be in circular loops. The right hand rule 2 (RHR-2) emerges from this
exploration and is valid for any current segment— point the thumb in the direction of the current, and the fingers curl in the
direction of the magnetic field loops created by it.
Figure: (a) Compasses placed near a long straight curre nt-carrying wire indicate that field lines form circ ular loops centered
on the wire. (b) Right hand rule 2 states that, if th e right hand thumb points in the direction of the cu rrent, the fingers curl in the
direction of the field. This rule is consistent with th e field mapped for the long straight wire and is vali d for any current segment.
The magnetic field strength (magnitude) produced by a long straight curre nt-carrying wire is found by experiment to be
where is the current, is the shortest distance to t he wire, and the constant is the permeability of free
space. (is one of the basic constants in nature. We will see later that is related to the speed of light.) Sinc e the wire is very
long, the magnitude of the field depends only on distance from the wire, not on position along the wire.
Find the current in a long straight wire that would pr oduce a magnetic field twice the strength of the Ear th’s at a distance of 5.0
cm from the wire.
Strategy:
The Earth’s field is about, and so here due to the wi re is taken to be. The equation can be
used to find, since all other quantities are known.Learning Objectives
Example: Calculating Current that Produces a Magnetic Field

7.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84010Solution
Solving for and entering known values gives
Discussion:
So a moderately large current produces a significant magnetic field at a distance of 5.0 cm from a long s traight wire. Note that
the answer is stated to only two digits, since the Earth’s f ield is specified to only two digits in this example.
Ampere’s Law and Others
The magnetic field of a long straight wire has more implications than you might at first suspect. Each segment of current produces
a magnetic field like that of a long straight wire, and the total field of any shape current is the vec tor sum of the fields due to each
segment. The formal statement of the direction and magnitud e of the field due to each segment is called the Biot-Savart Law.
Integral calculus is needed to sum the field for an arbitrary shape current. This results in a more compl ete law, called Ampere's
Law, which relates magnetic field and current in a gene ral way. Ampere’s law in turn is a part of Maxwell's equations, which give
a complete theory of all electromagnetic phenomena. Considerations of how Maxwell’s equations appear to di fferent observers led
to the modern theory of relativity, and the realiza tion that electric and magnetic fields are differen t manifestations of the same
thing. Most of this is beyond the scope of this text in both mathematical level, requiring calculus, an d in the amount of space that
can be devoted to it. But for the interested student, and particularly for those who continue in physics, en gineering, or similar
pursuits, delving into these matters further will reve al descriptions of nature that are elegant as well a s profound. In this text, we
shall keep the general features in mind, such as RHR-2 and the rules for magnetic field lines listed in 22.4, while concentrating on
the fields created in certain important situations.
Hearing all we do about Einstein, we sometimes get the impression that he invented relativity out of noth ing. On the contrary,
one of Einstein’s motivations was to solve difficulties i n knowing how different observers see magnetic and electr ic fields.
Magnetic Field Produced by a Current-Carrying Circular Loop
The magnetic field near a current-carrying loop of wire is shown in Figure. Both the direction and the ma gnitude of the
magnetic field produced by a current-carrying loop are complex. RHR-2 can be used to give the direction of the field near the loop,
but mapping with compasses and the rules about field l ines given in Section 22.4 are needed for more detail. There is a simple
formula for the magnetic field strength at the center of a circular loop. It is
where is the radius of the loop. This equation is ve ry similar to that for a straight wire, but it is val id only at the center of a
circular loop of wire. The similarity of the equatio ns does indicate that similar field strength can be o btained at the center of a loop.
One way to get a larger field is to have loops; then, the field is. Note that the larger the loop, the s maller the field
at its center, because the current is farther away.MAKING CONNECTIONS: RELATIVITY:

7.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84010
Figure: (a) RHR-2 gives the direction of the magneti c field inside and outside a current-carrying loop. (b) More detailed
mapping with compasses or with a Hall probe completes t he picture. The field is similar to that of a bar mag net.
Magnetic Field Produced by a Current-Carrying Solenoid
A solenoid is a long coil of wire (with many turns or loops, as o pposed to a flat loop). Because of its shape, the field inside a
solenoid can be very uniform, and also very strong. T he field just outside the coils is nearly zero. Figure shows how the field
looks and how its direction is given by RHR-2.
Figure: (a) Because of its shape, the field inside a sol enoid of length is remarkably uniform in magnitude and direction, as
indicated by the straight and uniformly spaced field lines. The field outside the coils is nearly zero. (b) This cutaway shows the
magnetic field generated by the current in the solen oid.
The magnetic field inside of a current-carrying sol enoid is very uniform in direction and magnitude. On ly near the ends does it
begin to weaken and change direction. The field outsid e has similar complexities to flat loops and bar magne ts, but the magnetic
field strength inside a solenoid is simply
where is the number of loops per unit length of the solenoid (with being the number of loops and the length). Note
that is the field strength anywhere in the uniform re gion of the interior and not just at the center. Larg e uniform fields spread over
a large volume are possible with solenoids, as the example implies.
What is the field inside a 2.00-m-long solenoid that has 20 00 loops and carries a 1600-A current?
Strategy
To find the field strength inside a solenoid, we use. First, we note the number of loops per unit length is
Solution
Substituting known values gives
DiscussionExample:Calculating Field Strength inside a Solenoid

7.10.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84010This is a large field strength that could be establish ed over a large-diameter solenoid, such as in medica l uses of magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). The very large current is a n indication that the fields of this strength are no t easily achieved,
however. Such a large current through 1000 loops squeez ed into a meter’s length would produce significant h eating. Higher
currents can be achieved by using superconducting wir es, although this is expensive. There is an upper limit to the current,
since the superconducting state is disrupted by very l arge magnetic fields.
There are interesting variations of the flat coil a nd solenoid. For example, the toroidal coil used to confine the reactive particles in
tokamaks is much like a solenoid bent into a circle. The field inside a toroid is very strong but circula r. Charged particles travel in
circles, following the field lines, and collide with one another, perhaps inducing fusion. But the charged pa rticles do not cross field
lines and escape the toroid. A whole range of coil sh apes are used to produce all sorts of magnetic field sh apes. Adding
ferromagnetic materials produces greater field streng ths and can have a significant effect on the shape o f the field. Ferromagnetic
materials tend to trap magnetic fields (the field l ines bend into the ferromagnetic material, leaving weaker fields outside it) and are
used as shields for devices that are adversely affected by magnetic fields, including the Earth’s magnetic field.
Generate electricity with a bar magnet! Discover the ph ysics behind the phenomena by exploring magnets and h ow you can
use them to make a bulb light.
Summary
The strength of the magnetic field created by current i n a long straight wire is given by
where is the current, is the shortest distance to the wire, and the constant is the permeability of free
space.
The direction of the magnetic field created by a long str aight wire is given by right hand rule 2 (RHR-2): Point the thumb of the
right hand in the direction of current, and the finger s curl in the direction of the magnetic field loops created by it.
The magnetic field created by current following any path i s the sum (or integral) of the fields due to segments along the path
(magnitude and direction as for a straight wire), resulti ng in a general relationship between current and field kn own as Ampere’s
law.
The magnetic field strength at the center of a circular loop is given by
where is the radius of the loop. This equation becomes for a flat coil of loops. RHR-2 gives the direction of
the field about the loop. A long coil is called a solenoid.
The magnetic field strength inside a solenoid is
where is the number of loops per unit length of the sole noid. The field inside is very uniform in magnitude and dire ction.
Glossary
right hand rule 2 (RHR-2)
a rule to determine the direction of the magnetic field i nduced by a current-carrying wire: Point the thumb of the ri ght hand in
the direction of current, and the fingers curl in the di rection of the magnetic field loops
magnetic field strength (magnitude) produced by a long straight curre nt-carrying wire
defined as, where I is the current, is the shortest dista nce to the wire, and is the permeability of free space
permeability of free space
the measure of the ability of a material, in this case free space, to support a magnetic field; the constant PHET EXPLORATIONS: GENERATOR

7.10.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84010magnetic field strength at the center of a circular loop
defined as where is the radius of the loop
solenoid
a thin wire wound into a coil that produces a magnetic fie ld when an electric current is passed through it
magnetic field strength inside a solenoid
defined as where is the number of loops per unit len gth of the solenoid (, with being the number of loops
and the length)
Biot-Savart law
a physical law that describes the magnetic field genera ted by an electric current in terms of a specific equatio n
Ampere’s law
the physical law that states that the magnetic field aro und an electric current is proportional to the curren t; each segment of
current produces a magnetic field like that of a long stra ight wire, and the total field of any shape current is the v ector sum of
the fields due to each segment
Maxwell’s equations
a set of four equations that describe electromagnetic ph enomena
This page titled 7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents- Ampere’s L aw is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.9: Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents- Ampere’s Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

7.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840117.11: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the effects of the magnetic force between two con ductors.
Calculate the force between two parallel conductors.
You might expect that there are significant forces between current-carrying wires, since ordinary currents produce significant
magnetic fields and these fields exert significant fo rces on ordinary currents. But you might not expect th at the force between wires
is used to define the ampere. It might also surprise you to learn tha t this force has something to do with why large circui t breakers
burn up when they attempt to interrupt large currents.
The force between two long straight and parallel condu ctors separated by a distance can be found by appl ying what we have
developed in preceding sections. Figure shows the wire s, their currents, the fields they create, and the subse quent forces they
exert on one another. Let us consider the field pro duced by wire 1 and the force it exerts on wire 2 (ca ll the force). The field due
to at a distance is given to be
Figure: (a) The magnetic field produced by a long st raight conductor is perpendicular to a parallel cond uctor, as indicated by
RHR-2. (b) A view from above of the two wires shown i n (a), with one magnetic field line shown for each w ire. RHR-1 shows that
the force between the parallel conductors is attracti ve when the currents are in the same direction. A simi lar analysis shows that the
force is repulsive between currents in opposite directi ons.
This field is uniform along wire 2 and perpendicular to it, and so the force it exerts on wire 2 is given b y with
By Newton’s third law, the forces on the wires are equa l in magnitude, and so we just write for the magnitude of. (Note that
.) Since the wires are very long, it is convenient to t hink in terms of, the force per unit length. Substi tuting the expression
for into the last equation and rearranging terms gives
is the force per unit length between two parallel cu rrents and separated by a distance. The force is attractive if the
currents are in the same direction and repulsive if the y are in opposite directions.
This force is responsible for the pinch effect in electric arcs and plasmas. The force exists whether th e currents are in wires or not.
In an electric arc, where currents are moving parall el to one another, there is an attraction that squee zes currents into a smaller tube.
In large circuit breakers, like those used in neighb orhood power distribution systems, the pinch effect c an concentrate an arc
between plates of a switch trying to break a large curr ent, burn holes, and even ignite the equipment. Anoth er example of the pinch
effect is found in the solar plasma, where jets of ionized ma terial, such as solar flares, are shaped by magnetic forces.Learning Objectives

7.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84011The operational definition of the ampere is based on the force between current-carrying wires. Note that for parallel wires
separated by 1 meter with each carrying 1 ampere, the force per meter is
Since is exactly by definition, and because, the f orce per meter is exaclty. This
is the basis of the operational definition of the ampere.
One ampere of current through each of two parallel co nductors of infinite length, separated by one meter in empty space free of
other magnetic fields, causes a force of exactly on ea ch conductor.
Infinite-length straight wires are impractical and so, in practice, a current balance is constructed with c oils of wire separated by a
few centimeters. Force is measured to determine curren t. This also provides us with a method for measuring the coulomb. We
measure the charge that flows for a current of one a mpere in one second. That is,. For both the ampere a nd the coulomb,
the method of measuring force between conductors is the mo st accurate in practice.
Summary
The force between two parallel currents and separated by a distance, has a magnitude per unit length given by
The force is attractive if the currents are in the same dir ection, repulsive if they are in opposite directions.
This page titled 7.11: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductor s is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.10: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.Definition: THE AMPERE

7.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840127.12: More Applications of Magnetism
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe some applications of magnetism.
Mass Spectrometry
The curved paths followed by charged particles in ma gnetic fields can be put to use. A charged particle moving perpendicular to a
magnetic field travels in a circular path having a radius.
It was noted that this relationship could be used to measure the mass of charged particles such as ions. A mass spectrometer is a
device that measures such masses. Most mass spectromet ers use magnetic fields for this purpose, although som e of them have
extremely sophisticated designs. Since there are five va riables in the relationship, there are many possibil ities. However, if,, and
can be fixed, then the radius of the path is simply proportional to the mass of the charged particle. Let us examine one such
mass spectrometer that has a relatively simple design (Figure). The process begins with an ion source, a devic e like an
electron gun. The ion source gives ions their charge, a ccelerates them to some velocity, and directs a be am of them into the next
stage of the spectrometer. This next region is a velocity selector that only allows particles with a particular value of to get through.
Figure: This mass spectrometer uses a velocity selector to fix so that the radius of the path is proportional t o mass.
The velocity selector has both an electric field and a magnetic field, perpendicular to one another, pro ducing forces in opposite
directions on the ions. Only those ions for which the f orces balance travel in a straight line into the nex t region. If the forces
balance, then the electric force equals the magnetic forc e, so that. Noting that cancels, we see that
is the velocity particles must have to make it throu gh the velocity selector, and further, that can be se lected by varying and. In
the final region, there is only a uniform magnetic f ield, and so the charged particles move in circular a rcs with radii proportional to
particle mass. The paths also depend on charge, but since is in multiples of electron charges, it is ea sy to determine and to
discriminate between ions in different charge states.
Mass spectrometry today is used extensively in chemist ry and biology laboratories to identify chemical an d biological substances
according to their mass-to-charge ratios. In medicine, mass spectrometers are used to measure the concentr ation of isotopes used as
tracers. Usually, biological molecules such as protein s are very large, so they are broken down into smalle r fragments before
analyzing. Recently, large virus particles have been analyzed as a whole on mass spectrometers. Sometimes a g as chromatograph or
high-performance liquid chromatograph provides an in itial separation of the large molecules, which are th en input into the mass
spectrometer.Learning Objectives

7.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84012Cathode Ray Tubes—CRTs—and the Like
What do non-flat-screen TVs, old computer monitors, x -ray machines, and the 2-mile-long Stanford Linear Ac celerator have in
common? All of them accelerate electrons, making the m different versions of the electron gun. Many of th ese devices use magnetic
fields to steer the accelerated electrons. Figure s hows the construction of the type of cathode ray tube (CRT) found in some
TVs, oscilloscopes, and old computer monitors. Two pairs of coils are used to steer the electrons, one vertic ally and the other
horizontally, to their desired destination.
Figure: The cathode ray tube (CRT) is so named because rays of electrons originate at the cathode in the el ectron gun.
Magnetic coils are used to steer the beam in many CRTs. In this case, the beam is moved down. Another pair of horizontal coils
would steer the beam horizontally.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is one of the most useful and rapidly growing medical imaging tools. It non-invasively
produces two-dimensional and three-dimensional images o f the body that provide important medical informati on with none of the
hazards of x-rays. MRI is based on an effect called nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) in which an externally applied magnetic
field interacts with the nuclei of certain atoms, pa rticularly those of hydrogen (protons). These nuclei possess their own small
magnetic fields, similar to those of electrons and the current loops discussed earlier in this chapter.
When placed in an external magnetic field, such nucl ei experience a torque that pushes or aligns the nucle i into one of two new
energy states—depending on the orientation of its spin (analogous to the N pole and S pole in a bar magnet). Transitions from the
lower to higher energy state can be achieved by using an external radio frequency signal to “flip” the or ientation of the small
magnets. (This is actually a quantum mechanical proc ess. The direction of the nuclear magnetic field is q uantized as is energy in
the radio waves. We will return to these topics in later chapters.) The specific frequency of the radio waves that are absorbed and
reemitted depends sensitively on the type of nucleus, the chemical environment, and the external magnetic field strength.
Therefore, this is a resonance phenomenon in which nuclei in a magnetic field act like resonators (analogous to those discuss ed in
the treatment of sound in "Oscillatory Motion and Wav es") that absorb and reemit only certain frequencie s. Hence, the
phenomenon is named nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).
NMR has been used for more than 50 years as an analyti cal tool. It was formulated in 1946 by F. Bloch and E. Purcell, with the
1952 Nobel Prize in Physics going to them for their work. Over the past two decades, NMR has been developed to produce detailed
images in a process now called magnetic resonance ima ging (MRI), a name coined to avoid the use of the word “nuclear” and the
concomitant implication that nuclear radiation is i nvolved. (It is not.) The 2003 Nobel Prize in Medicine went to P. Lauterbur and P.
Mansfield for their work with MRI applications.
The largest part of the MRI unit is a superconducti ng magnet that creates a magnetic field, typically between 1 and 2 T in strength,
over a relatively large volume. MRI images can be bot h highly detailed and informative about structures an d organ functions. It is
helpful that normal and non-normal tissues respond di fferently for slight changes in the magnetic field. I n most medical images, the
protons that are hydrogen nuclei are imaged. (About 2/3 of the atoms in the body are hydrogen.) Their lo cation and density give a
variety of medically useful information, such as org an function, the condition of tissue (as in the brain), and the shape of structures,
such as vertebral disks and knee-joint surfaces. MRI ca n also be used to follow the movement of certain ion s across membranes,
yielding information on active transport, osmosis, dialy sis, and other phenomena. With excellent spatial res olution, MRI can
provide information about tumors, strokes, shoulder inj uries, infections, etc.

7.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84012An image requires position information as well as the density of a nuclear type (usually protons). By varyi ng the magnetic field
slightly over the volume to be imaged, the resonant f requency of the protons is made to vary with positio n. Broadcast radio
frequencies are swept over an appropriate range and n uclei absorb and reemit them only if the nuclei are in a magnetic field with
the correct strength. The imaging receiver gathers information through the body almost point by point, b uilding up a tissue map.
The reception of reemitted radio waves as a function o f frequency thus gives position information. These “ slices” or cross sections
through the body are only several mm thick. The inte nsity of the reemitted radio waves is proportional to the concentration of the
nuclear type being flipped, as well as information on the chemical environment in that area of the body. V arious techniques are
available for enhancing contrast in images and for obtaining more information. Scans called T1, T2, or proton density scans rely on
different relaxation mechanisms of nuclei. Relaxatio n refers to the time it takes for the protons to retu rn to equilibrium after the
external field is turned off. This time depends upon t issue type and status (such as inflammation).
While MRI images are superior to x rays for certain ty pes of tissue and have none of the hazards of x rays, they do not completely
supplant x-ray images. MRI is less effective than x rays for detecting breaks in bone, for example, and in imaging breast tissue, so
the two diagnostic tools complement each other. MRI i mages are also expensive compared to simple x-ray ima ges and tend to be
used most often where they supply information not re adily obtained from x rays. Another disadvantage of MRI is that the patient is
totally enclosed with detectors close to the body fo r about 30 minutes or more, leading to claustrophobi a. It is also difficult for the
obese patient to be in the magnet tunnel. New “open-MRI ” machines are now available in which the magnet does not completely
surround the patient.
Over the last decade, the development of much faster sc ans, called “functional MRI” (fMRI), has allowed us to map the
functioning of various regions in the brain responsibl e for thought and motor control. This technique measu res the change in blood
flow for activities (thought, experiences, action) in the brain. The nerve cells increase their consumptio n of oxygen when active.
Blood hemoglobin releases oxygen to active nerve ce lls and has somewhat different magnetic properties wh en oxygenated than
when deoxygenated. With MRI, we can measure this and d etect a blood oxygen-dependent signal. Most of the brai n scans today
use fMRI.
Currents in nerve cells and the heart create magneti c fields like any other currents. These can be measur ed but with some
difficulty since their strengths are about to less than the Earth’s magnetic field. Recording of the heart’s magnetic
field as it beats is called a magnetocardiogram (MCG), while measurements of the brain's magnetic field is called a
magnetoencephalogram (MEG). Both give information that differs from that obtai ned by measuring the electric fields of
these organs (ECGs and EEGs), but they are not yet of sufficient i mportance to make these difficult measurements common.
In both of these techniques, the sensors do not touc h the body. MCG can be used in fetal studies, and is pro bably more
sensitive than echocardiography. MCG also looks at the heart’s electrical activity whose voltage output is too small to be
recorded by surface electrodes as in EKG. It has the potential of being a rapid scan for early diagnosis of cardiac ischemia
(obstruction of blood flow to the heart) or problems with t he fetus.
MEG can be used to identify abnormal electrical disch arges in the brain that produce weak magnetic signal s. Therefore, it
looks at brain activity, not just brain structure. I t has been used for studies of Alzheimer’s disease and epilepsy. Advances in
instrumentation to measure very small magnetic fiel ds have allowed these two techniques to be used more in recent years.
What is used is a sensor called a SQUID, for superconducti ng quantum interference device. This operates at li quid helium
temperatures and can measure magnetic fields thousands o f times smaller than the Earth’s.
Finally, there is a burgeoning market for magnetic cur es in which magnets are applied in a variety of ways to the body, from
magnetic bracelets to magnetic mattresses. The best t hat can be said for such practices is that they are apparently harmless,
unless the magnets get close to the patient’s comput er or magnetic storage disks. Claims are made for a broad spectrum of
benefits from cleansing the blood to giving the pat ient more energy, but clinical studies have not ver ified these claims, nor is
there an identifiable mechanism by which such benefits m ight occur.Other Medical Uses of Magnetic Fields

7.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84012Ever wonder how a compass worked to point you to the Arc tic? Explore the interactions between a compass and b ar magnet,
and then add the Earth and find the surprising answe r! Vary the magnet's strength, and see how things cha nge both inside and
outside. Use the field meter to measure how the magnetic f ield changes.
Summary
Crossed (perpendicular) electric and magnetic fields ac t as a velocity filter, giving equal and opposite forces on any charge with
velocity perpendicular to the fields and of magnitude

Glossary
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
a medical imaging technique that uses magnetic fields create detailed images of internal tissues and organs
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
a phenomenon in which an externally applied magnetic fi eld interacts with the nuclei of certain atoms
magnetocardiogram (MCG)
a recording of the heart’s magnetic field as it beats
magnetoencephalogram (MEG)
a measurement of the brain’s magnetic field
This page titled 7.12: More Applications of Magnetism is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.11: More Applications of Magnetism by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.PHET EXPLORATIONS: MAGNET AND COMPASS

7.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840137.E: Magnetism (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
22.1: Magnets
1. V olcanic and other such activity at the mid-Atlanti c ridge extrudes material to fill the gap between sep arating tectonic
plates associated with continental drift. The magneti zation of rocks is found to reverse in a coordinate d manner with distance
from the ridge. What does this imply about the Earth’ s magnetic field and how could the knowledge of the s preading rate be
used to give its historical record?
22.3: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
2. Explain why the magnetic field would not be unique (that is, not have a single value) at a point in spa ce where magnetic
field lines might cross. (Consider the direction of the fi eld at such a point.)
3. List the ways in which magnetic field lines and elec tric field lines are similar. For example, the field dir ection is tangent to
the line at any point in space. Also list the ways in which they differ. For example, electric force is para llel to electric field
lines, whereas magnetic force on moving charges is perpen dicular to magnetic field lines.
4. Noting that the magnetic field lines of a bar magne t resemble the electric field lines of a pair of eq ual and opposite
charges, do you expect the magnetic field to rapidl y decrease in strength with distance from the magnet? Is this consistent
with your experience with magnets?
5. Is the Earth’s magnetic field parallel to the groun d at all locations? If not, where is it parallel to the surface? Is its strength
the same at all locations? If not, where is it greatest?
6. If a charged particle moves in a straight line thro ugh some region of space, can you say that the magne tic field in that
region is necessarily zero?
22.4: Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field
7. If a charged particle moves in a straight line thro ugh some region of space, can you say that the magne tic field in that
region is necessarily zero?
22.5: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications
8. How can the motion of a charged particle be used to disting uish between a magnetic and an electric field?
9. High-velocity charged particles can damage biologic al cells and are a component of radiation exposure i n a variety of
locations ranging from research facilities to natura l background. Describe how you could use a magnetic fie ld to shield
yourself.
10. If a cosmic ray proton approaches the Earth from out er space along a line toward the center of the Earth that lies in the
plane of the equator, in what direction will it be deflect ed by the Earth’s magnetic field? What about an electr on? A neutron?
11. What are the signs of the charges on the particles in Figure?
12. Which of the particles in Figure has the greatest veloci ty, assuming they have identical charges and masses?

7.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013
13. Which of the particles in Figure has the greatest mass, a ssuming all have identical charges and velocities?
14. While operating, a high-precision TV monitor is pl aced on its side during maintenance. The image on t he monitor
changes color and blurs slightly. Discuss the possible relati on of these effects to the Earth’s magnetic field.
22.6: The Hall Effect
15. Discuss how the Hall effect could be used to obtain inf ormation on free charge density in a conductor. (Hin t: Consider
how drift velocity and current are related.)
22.7: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
16. Draw a sketch of the situation in Figure showing the di rection of electrons carrying the current, and use R HR-1 to verify
the direction of the force on the wire.
17. Verify that the direction of the force in an MHD driv e, such as that in Figure, does not depend on the sign o f the charges
carrying the current across the fluid.
18. Why would a magnetohydrodynamic drive work better in ocean water than in fresh water? Also, why would
superconducting magnets be desirable?
19. Which is more likely to interfere with compass readi ngs, AC current in your refrigerator or DC current when you start
your car? Explain.
22.8: Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters
20. Draw a diagram and use RHR-1 to show that the forces on the top and bottom segments of the motor’s current lo op in
Figure are vertical and produce no torque about the axis of rotation.
22.9: Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law
21. Make a drawing and use RHR-2 to find the direction of the magnetic field of a current loop in a motor (s uch as in [link]).
Then show that the direction of the torque on the lo op is the same as produced by like poles repelling an d unlike poles
attracting.
22.10: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors
22. Is the force attractive or repulsive between the hot and n eutral lines hung from power poles? Why?
23. If you have three parallel wires in the same plane, as in Figure, with currents in the outer two running in opposite
directions, is it possible for the middle wire to be repelle d by both? Attracted by both? Explain.

7.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013
Three parallel coplanar wires with currents in the outer two in opposite directions.
24. Suppose two long straight wires run perpendicular to on e another without touching. Does one exert a net forc e on the
other? If so, what is its direction? Does one exert a n et torque on the other? If so, what is its direction? Justify your responses
by using the right hand rules.
25. Use the right hand rules to show that the force between the two loops in Figure is attractive if the currents are in the same
direction and repulsive if they are in opposite dire ctions. Is this consistent with like poles of the loop s repelling and unlike
poles of the loops attracting? Draw sketches to justify your an swers.
Two loops of wire carrying currents can exert forces and torq ues on one another.
26. f one of the loops in Figure is tilted slightly relat ive to the other and their currents are in the same d irection, what are the
directions of the torques they exert on each other? Do es this imply that the poles of the bar magnet-like fields they create will
line up with each other if the loops are allowed to rotate?
27. Electric field lines can be shielded by the Faraday c age effect. Can we have magnetic shielding? Can we hav e
gravitational shielding?
22.11 More Applications of Magnetism
28. Measurements of the weak and fluctuating magnetic fiel ds associated with brain activity are called
magnetoencephalograms (MEGs). Do the brain’s magnetic fi elds imply coordinated or uncoordinated nerve impul ses?
Explain.
29. Discuss the possibility that a Hall voltage would be gen erated on the moving heart of a patient during MRI imaging. Also
discuss the same effect on the wires of a pacemaker. (The fact that patients with pacemakers are not given MRIs is
significant.)
30. A patient in an MRI unit turns his head quickly to o ne side and experiences momentary dizziness and a str ange taste in
his mouth. Discuss the possible causes.

7.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8401331. You are told that in a certain region there is eit her a uniform electric or magnetic field. What meas urement or observation
could you make to determine the type? (Ignore the Eart h’s magnetic field.)
32. An example of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) comes from the flow of a river (salty water). This fluid interac ts with the
Earth’s magnetic field to produce a potential diffe rence between the two river banks. How would you go abou t calculating
the potential difference?
33. Draw gravitational field lines between 2 masses, electr ic field lines between a positive and a negative char ge, electric
field lines between 2 positive charges and magnetic f ield lines around a magnet. Qualitatively describe the differences
between the fields and the entities responsible for the f ield lines.
Problems & Exercises
22.4: Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field
34. What is the direction of the magnetic force on a po sitive charge that moves as shown in each of the six c ases shown in
Figure?
Solution
(a) Left (West)
(b) Into the page
(c) Up (North)
(d) No force
(e) Right (East)
(f) Down (South)
35. Repeat Exercise 34 for a negative charge.
36. What is the direction of the velocity of a negative charge that experiences the magnetic force shown in e ach of the three
cases in Figure, assuming it moves perpendicular to?
Solution
(a) East (right)

7.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013(b) Into page
(c) South (down)
37. Repeat Exercise 36 for a positive charge.
38. What is the direction of the magnetic field that p roduces the magnetic force on a positive charge as sho wn in each of the
three cases in the figure below, assuming is perpendic ular to?
Solution
(a) Into page
(b) West (left)
(c) Out of page
39. Repeat Exercise 38 for a negative charge.
40. What is the maximum force on an aluminum rod with a charge that you pass between the poles of a 1.50-T
permanent magnet at a speed of 5.00 m/s? In what direct ion is the force?
Solution
perpendicular to both the magnetic field lines and the velocity
41. (a) Aircraft sometimes acquire small static charges. Suppose a supersonic jet has a charge and flies due west at
a speed of 660 m/s over the Earth’s south magnetic pol e, where the magnetic field points straight up. What
are the direction and the magnitude of the magnetic for ce on the plane?
(b) Discuss whether the value obtained in part (a) implies this is a significant or negligible effect.
42. (a) A cosmic ray proton moving toward the Earth at experiences a magnetic force of. What is
the strength of the magnetic field if there is a angl e between it and the proton’s velocity?
(b) Is the value obtained in part (a) consistent with the known strength of the Earth’s magnetic field on its surface?
Discuss.
Solution
(a)
(b) This is slightly less then the magnetic field stren gth of at the surface of the Earth, so it is consistent.
43. An electron moving at in a 1.25-T magnetic field exp eriences a magnetic force of. What
angle does the velocity of the electron make with the m agnetic field? There are two answers.
44. (a) A physicist performing a sensitive measurement wants to limit the magnetic force on a moving charg e in her
equipment to less than. What is the greatest the ch arge can be if it moves at a maximum speed of 30.0 m /s in
the Earth’s field?
(b) Discuss whether it would be difficult to limit the charge to less than the value found in (a) by compa ring it with
typical static electricity and noting that static is oft en absent.
Solution
(a) (taking the Earth’s field to be)
(b) Less than typical static, therefore difficult

7.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8401322.5: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications
45. A cosmic ray electron moves at perpendicular to t he Earth’s magnetic field at an altitude where field
strength is. What is the radius of the circular path t he electron follows?
Solution
4.27 m
46. A proton moves at perpendicular to a magnetic field. The field causes the proton to travel in a circula r path
of radius 0.800 m. What is the field strength?
47. (a) Viewers of Star Trek hear of an antimatter drive on the Starship Enterprise. One possibility for such a futuristic
energy source is to store antimatter charged particl es in a vacuum chamber, circulating in a magnetic fie ld, and then extract
them as needed. Antimatter annihilates with normal mat ter, producing pure energy. What strength magnetic field is needed to
hold antiprotons, moving at in a circular path 2.00 m in radius? Antiprotons have the same mass as protons bu t
the opposite (negative) charge.
(b) Is this field strength obtainable with today’s technolo gy or is it a futuristic possibility?
Solution
(a) 0.261 T
(b) This strength is definitely obtainable with today ’s technology. Magnetic field strengths of 0.500 T are obtainable
with permanent magnets.
48. (a) An oxygen-16 ion with a mass of travels at perpe ndicular to a 1.20-T magnetic field, which
makes it move in a circular arc with a 0.231-m radius. What positive charge is on the ion?
(b) What is the ratio of this charge to the charge of an electron?
(c) Discuss why the ratio found in (b) should be an integer.
49. What radius circular path does an electron travel if it moves at the same speed and in the same magnetic field as the
proton in Exercise?
Solution
50. A velocity selector in a mass spectrometer uses a 0.100 -T magnetic field.
(a) What electric field strength is needed to select a speed of m/s?
(b) What is the voltage between the plates if they are s eparated by 1.00 cm?
51. An electron in a TV CRT moves with a speed of, in a direction perpendicular to the Earth’s field, which has
a strength of.
(a) What strength electric field must be applied per pendicular to the Earth’s field to make the electro n moves in a
straight line?
(b) If this is done between plates separated by 1.00 cm, what is the voltage applied? (Note that TVs are usua lly
surrounded by a ferromagnetic material to shield aga inst external magnetic fields and avoid the need fo r such a
correction.)
Solution
(a) 3.00 kV/m
(b) 30.0 V
52. (a) At what speed will a proton move in a circular path of the sam e radius as the electron in Exercise?
(b) What would the radius of the path be if the proton h ad the same speed as the electron?
(c) What would the radius be if the proton had the same kin etic energy as the electron?
(d) The same momentum?

7.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8401353. A mass spectrometer is being used to separate common oxygen-16 from the much rarer oxygen-18, taken from a sample
of old glacial ice. (The relative abundance of these oxygen isotopes is related to climatic temperature at the time the ice was
deposited.) The ratio of the masses of these two ions i s 16 to 18, the mass of oxygen-16 is, and they are s ingly
charged and travel at in a 1.20-T magnetic field. What is the separation between their paths when they h it a
target after traversing a semicircle?
Solution
0.173 m
54. (a) Triply charged uranium-235 and uranium-238 ion s are being separated in a mass spectrometer. (The m uch rarer
uranium-235 is used as reactor fuel.) The masses of t he ions are and, respectively, and they
travel at in a 0.250-T field. What is the separation b etween their paths when they hit a target after traver sing a
semicircle? (b) Discuss whether this distance between the ir paths seems to be big enough to be practical in t he separation of
uranium-235 from uranium-238.
22.6: The Hall Effect
55. A large water main is 2.50 m in diameter and the aver age water velocity is 6.00 m/s. Find the Hall voltage pr oduced if the
pipe runs perpendicular to the Earth’s field.
Solution
56. What Hall voltage is produced by a 0.200-T field appl ied across a 2.60-cm-diameter aorta when blood veloci ty is 60.0
cm/s?
57. (a) What is the speed of a supersonic aircraft with a 17.0-m wingspan, if it experiences a 1.60-V Hall v oltage between its
wing tips when in level flight over the north magnetic pol e, where the Earth’s field strength is?
(b) Explain why very little current flows as a result of thi s Hall voltage.
Solution
(a)
(b) Once established, the Hall emf pushes charges one di rection and the magnetic force acts in the opposite direction
resulting in no net force on the charges. Therefore, no current flows in the direction of the Hall emf. T his is the same as
in a current-carrying conductor—current does not flow in the direction of the Hall emf.
58. A nonmechanical water meter could utilize the Hall ef fect by applying a magnetic field across a metal pip e and
measuring the Hall voltage produced. What is the aver age fluid velocity in a 3.00-cm-diameter pipe, if a 0.500-T field across
it creates a 60.0-mV Hall voltage?
59. Calculate the Hall voltage induced on a patient’s h eart while being scanned by an MRI unit. Approximate t he conducting
path on the heart wall by a wire 7.50 cm long that moves at 10.0 cm/s perpendicular to a 1.50-T magnetic field.
Solution
11.3 mV
60. A Hall probe calibrated to read when placed in a 2.0 0-T field is placed in a 0.150-T field. What is its output
voltage?
61. Using information in [link], what would the Hall voltag e be if a 2.00-T field is applied across a 10-gauge co pper wire
(2.588 mm in diameter) carrying a 20.0-A current?
Solution
62. Show that the Hall voltage across wires made of the same material, carrying identical currents, and subjected to the same
magnetic field is inversely proportional to their diame ters. (Hint: Consider how drift velocity depends on wire diam eter.)

7.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8401363. A patient with a pacemaker is mistakenly being scann ed for an MRI image. A 10.0-cm-long section of pacema ker wire
moves at a speed of 10.0 cm/s perpendicular to the MRI unit’s magnetic field and a 20.0-mV Hall voltage is in duced. What is
the magnetic field strength?
Solution
2.00 T
22.7: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
64. What is the direction of the magnetic force on the curr ent in each of the six cases in Figure?
Solution
(a) west (left)
(b) into page
(c) north (up)
(d) no force
(e) east (right)
(f) south (down)
65. What is the direction of a current that experience s the magnetic force shown in each of the three cases in Figure,
assuming the current runs perpendicular to?
66. What is the direction of the magnetic field that pro duces the magnetic force shown on the currents in eac h of the three
cases in Figure, assuming is perpendicular to?

7.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013
Solution
(a) into page
(b) west (left)
(c) out of page
67. (a) What is the force per meter on a lightning bol t at the equator that carries 20,000 A perpendicula r to the Earth’s
field?
(b) What is the direction of the force if the curre nt is straight up and the Earth’s field direction i s due north, parallel to
the ground?
68. (a) A DC power line for a light-rail system carries 1 000 A at an angle of to the Earth’s field. What i s
the force on a 100-m section of this line?
(b) Discuss practical concerns this presents, if any.
Solution
(a) 2.50 N
(b) This is about half a pound of force per 100 m of wire, which is much less than the weight of the wire itsel f.
Therefore, it does not cause any special concerns.
69. What force is exerted on the water in an MHD drive ut ilizing a 25.0-cm-diameter tube, if 100-A current is p assed across
the tube that is perpendicular to a 2.00-T magnetic field? (The relatively small size of this force indi cates the need for very
large currents and magnetic fields to make practical MHD dri ves.)
70. A wire carrying a 30.0-A current passes between the pol es of a strong magnet that is perpendicular to its fi eld and
experiences a 2.16-N force on the 4.00 cm of wire in the fi eld. What is the average field strength?
Solution
1.80 T
71. (a) A 0.750-m-long section of cable carrying curren t to a car starter motor makes an angle of 60º with the Earth’s
field. What is the current when the wire experiences a force of?
(b) If you run the wire between the poles of a strong horseshoe magnet, subjecting 5.00 cm of it to a 1.75-T field, what
force is exerted on this segment of wire?
72. (a) What is the angle between a wire carrying an 8.00- A current and the 1.20-T field it is in if 50.0 cm of the wire
experiences a magnetic force of 2.40 N? (b) What is t he force on the wire if it is rotated to make an angl e of with the
field?
Solution
(a)
(b) 4.80 N
73. The force on the rectangular loop of wire in the ma gnetic field in Figure can be used to measure field s trength. The field
is uniform, and the plane of the loop is perpendicular to the field.
(a) What is the direction of the magnetic force on the loop? Justify the claim that the forces on the s ides of the loop are
equal and opposite, independent of how much of the loop is in the field and do not affect the net force on the lo op.
(b) If a current of 5.00 A is used, what is the force per tesla on the 20.0-cm-wide loop?

7.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013
A rectangular loop of wire carrying a current is perpendicul ar to a magnetic field. The field is uniform in the region sho wn
and is zero outside that region.
22.8: Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters
74. (a) By how many percent is the torque of a motor decreas ed if its permanent magnets lose 5.0% of their strength?
(b) How many percent would the current need to be increased to return the torque to original values?
Solution
(a) decreases by 5.00% if B decreases by 5.00%
(b) 5.26% increase
75. (a) What is the maximum torque on a 150-turn square loop of wire 18.0 cm on a side that carries a 50.0-A current in a
1.60-T field?
(b) What is the torque when is?
76. Find the current through a loop needed to create a m aximum torque of. The loop has 50 square turns tha t are
15.0 cm on a side and is in a uniform 0.800-T magnetic field.
Solution
10.0 A
77. Calculate the magnetic field strength needed on a 2 00-turn square loop 20.0 cm on a side to create a ma ximum torque of
if the loop is carrying 25.0 A.
78. Since the equation for torque on a current-carrying loop is, the units of must equal units of.
Verify this.
Solution
79. (a) At what angle is the torque on a current loop 90.0% of maximum?
(b) 50.0% of maximum?
(c) 10.0% of maximum?
80. A proton has a magnetic field due to its spin on i ts axis. The field is similar to that created by a c ircular current loop
in radius with a current of (no kidding). Find the ma ximum torque on a proton in a 2.50-T field. (This
is a significant torque on a small particle.)
Solution

7.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8401381. (a) A 200-turn circular loop of radius 50.0 cm is vertical, with its axis on an east-west line. A current of 100 A circulates
clockwise in the loop when viewed from the east. The Ea rth’s field here is due north, parallel to the ground, with a strength
of. What are the direction and magnitude of the torque on the loop?
(b) Does this device have any practical applications as a m otor?
82. Repeat Exercise, but with the loop lying flat on th e ground with its current circulating counterclockwis e (when viewed
from above) in a location where the Earth’s field is north, but at an angle below the horizontal and with a strength of
Solution
(a) west
(b) This is not a very significant torque, so practic al use would be limited. Also, the current would need to be alternated
to make the loop rotate (otherwise it would oscillate).
22.10: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors
83. (a) The hot and neutral wires supplying DC power to a light-rail commuter train carry 800 A and are separ ated by 75.0
cm. What is the magnitude and direction of the force be tween 50.0 m of these wires?
(b) Discuss the practical consequences of this force, if any.
Solution
(a) 8.53 N, repulsive
(b) This force is repulsive and therefore there is never a risk that the two wires will touch and short circuit.
84. The force per meter between the two wires of a jumper cable b eing used to start a stalled car is 0.225 N/m.
(a) What is the current in the wires, given they are separa ted by 2.00 cm?
(b) Is the force attractive or repulsive?
85. A 2.50-m segment of wire supplying current to the mo tor of a submerged submarine carries 1000 A and feels a 4.00-N
repulsive force from a parallel wire 5.00 cm away. What is th e direction and magnitude of the current in the other wir e?
Solution
400 A in the opposite direction
86. The wire carrying 400 A to the motor of a commuter train feels an attractive force of due to a paralle l
wire carrying 5.00 A to a headlight.
(a) How far apart are the wires?
(b) Are the currents in the same direction?
87. An AC appliance cord has its hot and neutral wires separat ed by 3.00 mm and carries a 5.00-A current.
(a) What is the average force per meter between the wires in the cord?
(b) What is the maximum force per meter between the wires?
(c) Are the forces attractive or repulsive?
(d) Do appliance cords need any special design features to compensate for these forces?
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c) Repulsive
(d) No, these are very small forces
88. Figure shows a long straight wire near a rectangular cu rrent loop. What is the direction and magnitude of t he total force
on the loop?

7.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013
89. Find the direction and magnitude of the force that e ach wire experiences in Figure(a) by, using vector addition.
Solution
(a) Top wire: s, to left of up
(b) Lower left wire: down from right
(c) Lower right wire: down from left
90. Find the direction and magnitude of the force that each wire e xperiences in Figure(b), using vector addition.
22.11 More Applications of Magnetism
91. Indicate whether the magnetic field created in each of the three situations shown in Figure is into or ou t of the page on
the left and right of the current.
Solution
(a) right-into page, left-out of page
(b) right-out of page, left-into page
(c) right-out of page, left-into page
92. What are the directions of the fields in the center of the loop and coils shown in Figure?
93. What are the directions of the currents in the loop and coils shown in Figure?

7.E.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013
Solution
a) clockwise
(b) clockwise as seen from the left
(c) clockwise as seen from the right
94. To see why an MRI utilizes iron to increase the magne tic field created by a coil, calculate the current n eeded in a 400loop-per-meter circular coil 0.660 m in radius to cre ate a 1.20-T field (typical of an MRI instrument) at its center with no iron
present. The magnetic field of a proton is approxima tely like that of a circular current loop in radiu s carrying
. What is the field at the center of such a loop?
Solution
95. Inside a motor, 30.0 A passes through a 250-turn circ ular loop that is 10.0 cm in radius. What is the ma gnetic field
strength created at its center?
96. Nonnuclear submarines use batteries for power when subme rged.
(a) Find the magnetic field 50.0 cm from a straight wi re carrying 1200 A from the batteries to the drive m echanism of a
submarine.
(b) What is the field if the wires to and from the drive mech anism are side by side?
(c) Discuss the effects this could have for a compass on the submarine that is not shielded.
Solution
(a)
(b) Zero
(c) If the wires are not paired, the field is about 1 0 times stronger than Earth’s magnetic field and so co uld severely
disrupt the use of a compass.
97. How strong is the magnetic field inside a solenoid with 10, 000 turns per meter that carries 20.0 A?
98. What current is needed in the solenoid described in Exercise to produce a magnetic field times the Ear th’s magnetic
field of?
Solution
39.8 A
99. How far from the starter cable of a car, carrying 15 0 A, must you be to experience a field less than the Earth’s (
)? Assume a long straight wire carries the current. (In pract ice, the body of your car shields the dashboard compass.)
100. Measurements affect the system being measured, such a s the current loop in [link].
(a) Estimate the field the loop creates by calculati ng the field at the center of a circular loop 20.0 c m in diameter
carrying 5.00 A.
(b) What is the smallest field strength this loop can be used to measure, if its field must alter the meas ured field by less
than 0.0100%?
Solution
(a)
(b) 0.314 T
101. Figure shows a long straight wire just touching a loop carr ying a current. Both lie in the same plane.

7.E.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013(a) What direction must the current in the straight wire have to create a field at the center of the lo op in the direction
opposite to that created by the loop?
(b) What is the ratio of that gives zero field strength a t the center of the loop?
(c) What is the direction of the field directly above th e loop under this circumstance?
102. Find the magnitude and direction of the magnetic fi eld at the point equidistant from the wires in [link] (a), using the rules
of vector addition to sum the contributions from each wire.
Solution
103. Find the magnitude and direction of the magnetic fi eld at the point equidistant from the wires in [link] (b), using the
rules of vector addition to sum the contributions from ea ch wire.
104. What current is needed in the top wire in [link](a) to produce a field of zero at the point equidistant from the wires, if
the currents in the bottom two wires are both 10.0 A in to the page?
Solution
10.0 A
105. Calculate the size of the magnetic field 20 m belo w a high voltage power line. The line carries 450 MW at a voltage of
300,000 V.
106. Integrated Concepts
(a) A pendulum is set up so that its bob (a thin cop per disk) swings between the poles of a permanent magn et as shown
in Figure. What is the magnitude and direction of th e magnetic force on the bob at the lowest point in i ts path, if it has
a positive charge and is released from a height of 30.0 cm above its lowest point? The magnetic field st rength
is 1.50 T.
(b) What is the acceleration of the bob at the botto m of its swing if its mass is 30.0 grams and it is hung from a flexible
string? Be certain to include a free-body diagram as part of your analysis.

7.E.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013Solution
(a) upward
(b)
107. Integrated Concepts
(a) What voltage will accelerate electrons to a speed of?
(b) Find the radius of curvature of the path of a pr oton accelerated through this potential in a 0.500-T field and
compare this with the radius of curvature of an electron acce lerated through the same potential.
108. Integrated Concepts
Find the radius of curvature of the path of a 25.0-Me V proton moving perpendicularly to the 1.20-T field of a
cyclotron.
Solution
60.2 cm
109. Integrated Concepts
To construct a nonmechanical water meter, a 0.500-T ma gnetic field is placed across the supply water pipe to a home
and the Hall voltage is recorded.
(a) Find the flow rate in liters per second through a 3.00-cm -diameter pipe if the Hall voltage is 60.0 mV.
(b) What would the Hall voltage be for the same flow r ate through a 10.0-cm-diameter pipe with the same fie ld
applied?
110. Integrated Concepts
(a) Using the values given for an MHD drive in Exercise, and assuming the force is uniformly applied to the fluid,
calculate the pressure created in.
(b) Is this a significant fraction of an atmosphere?
Solution
(a)
(b) Not a significant fraction of an atmosphere
111. Integrated Concepts
(a) Calculate the maximum torque on a 50-turn, 1.50 cm rad ius circular current loop carrying in a 0.500-T field.
(b) If this coil is to be used in a galvanometer that reads full scale, what force constant spring must be used, if it
is attached 1.00 cm from the axis of rotation and is str etched by the arc moved?
112. Integrated Concepts
A current balance used to define the ampere is desig ned so that the current through it is constant, as is the distance
between wires. Even so, if the wires change length with t emperature, the force between them will change. What
percent change in force per degree will occur if the wi res are copper?
Solution
113. Integrated Concepts
(a) Show that the period of the circular orbit of a c harged particle moving perpendicularly to a uniform magnetic field
is.
(b) What is the frequency?
(c) What is the angular velocity? Note that these re sults are independent of the velocity and radius of the orbit and,
hence, of the energy of the particle. (Figure.)

7.E.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013
Cyclotrons accelerate charged particles orbiting in a mag netic field by placing an AC voltage on the metal Dees, be tween
which the particles move, so that energy is added twice eac h orbit. The frequency is constant, since it is independen t of the
particle energy—the radius of the orbit simply increases with ene rgy until the particles approach the edge and are extract ed
for various experiments and applications.
114. Integrated Concepts
A cyclotron accelerates charged particles as shown in Fi gure. Using the results of the previous problem, calcu late the
frequency of the accelerating voltage needed for a proto n in a 1.20-T field.
Solution
18.3 MHz
115. Integrated Concepts
(a) A 0.140-kg baseball, pitched at 40.0 m/s horizont ally and perpendicular to the Earth’s horizontal fi eld,
has a 100-nC charge on it. What distance is it defle cted from its path by the magnetic force, after trave ling 30.0 m
horizontally?
(b) Would you suggest this as a secret technique for a p itcher to throw curve balls?
116. Integrated Concepts
(a) What is the direction of the force on a wire car rying a current due east in a location where the Ear th’s field is due
north? Both are parallel to the ground.
(b) Calculate the force per meter if the wire carries 20.0 A and the field strength is.
(c) What diameter copper wire would have its weight supporte d by this force?
(d) Calculate the resistance per meter and the voltage per meter needed.
Solution
(a) Straight up
(b)
(c)
(d)2.47 Ω/m, 49.4 V/m
117. Integrated Concepts
One long straight wire is to be held directly above a nother by repulsion between their currents. The lower wire carries
100 A and the wire 7.50 cm above it is 10-gauge (2.588 mm diame ter) copper wire.
(a) What current must flow in the upper wire, neglecting the Earth’s field?
(b) What is the smallest current if the Earth’s field i s parallel to the ground and is not neglected?

7.E.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013(c) Is the supported wire in a stable or unstable equilibri um if displaced vertically? If displaced horizontally?
118. Unreasonable Results
(a) Find the charge on a baseball, thrown at 35.0 m/s p erpendicular to the Earth’s field, that experience s a
1.00-N magnetic force.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
Solution
(a) 571 C
(b) Impossible to have such a large separated charge on such a small object.
(c) The 1.00-N force is much too great to be realistic in t he Earth’s field.
119. Unreasonable Results
A charged particle having mass (that of a helium a tom) moving at perpendicular to a 1.50T magnetic field travels in a circular path of radius 16.0 mm.
(a) What is the charge of the particle?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
120. Unreasonable Results
An inventor wants to generate 120-V power by moving a 1.0 0-m-long wire perpendicular to the Earth’s
field.
(a) Find the speed with which the wire must move.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption is responsible?
Solution
(a)
(b) The speed is too high to be practical ≤ 1% speed of light
(c) The assumption that you could reasonably generat e such a voltage with a single wire in the Earth’s fiel d is
unreasonable
121. Unreasonable Results
Frustrated by the small Hall voltage obtained in blood flow measurements, a medical physicist decides to incre ase the
applied magnetic field strength to get a 0.500-V outpu t for blood moving at 30.0 cm/s in a 1.50-cm-diameter vess el.
(a) What magnetic field strength is needed?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which premise is responsible?
122. Unreasonable Results
A surveyor 100 m from a long straight 200-kV DC power l ine suspects that its magnetic field may equal that o f the
Earth and affect compass readings.
(a) Calculate the current in the wire needed to create a fi eld at this distance.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?

7.E.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84013Solution
(a) 25.0 kA
(b) This current is unreasonably high. It implies a total power delivery in the line of 50.0x10^9 W, which is much too
high for standard transmission lines.
(c)100 meters is a long distance to obtain the requir ed field strength. Also coaxial cables are used for tr ansmission lines
so that there is virtually no field for DC power lines, because of cancellation from opposing currents. The surv eyor’s
concerns are not a problem for his magnetic field measu rements.
123. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a mass separator that applies a magnetic fi eld perpendicular to the velocity of ions and separ ates the ions
based on the radius of curvature of their paths in th e field. Construct a problem in which you calculate t he magnetic
field strength needed to separate two ions that diff er in mass, but not charge, and have the same initi al velocity. Among
the things to consider are the types of ions, the vel ocities they can be given before entering the magne tic field, and a
reasonable value for the radius of curvature of the p aths they follow. In addition, calculate the separa tion distance
between the ions at the point where they are detected.
124. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider using the torque on a current-carrying coil in a magnetic field to detect relatively small mag netic fields (less
than the field of the Earth, for example). Construct a problem i n which you calculate the maximum torque on a currentcarrying loop in a magnetic field. Among the things to be considered are the size of the coil, the number of loops it has,
the current you pass through the coil, and the size of the field you wish to detect. Discuss whether the to rque produced
is large enough to be effectively measured. Your ins tructor may also wish for you to consider the effects, if any, of the
field produced by the coil on the surroundings that could a ffect detection of the small field.
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State University of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univer sity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 7.E: Magnetism (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22: Magnetism (Exercises) has no license indicated. Original source: https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and -computerscience/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applications-spring- 2009.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
Historically, it was very shortly after Oersted discover ed currents cause magnetic fields that other scienti sts asked the following
question: Can magnetic fields cause currents? The an swer was soon found by experiment to be yes. In 1831, some 12 years after
Oersted’s discovery, the English scientist Michael Fa raday (1791–1862) and the American scientist Joseph He nry (1797–1878)
independently demonstrated that magnetic fields can produce currents. The basic process of generating em fs (electromotive force)
and, hence, currents with magnetic fields is known as induction; this process is also called magnetic induction to d istinguish it
from charging by induction, which utilizes the Coulomb fo rce.
8.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits an d Electrical Technologies
8.2: RL Circuits
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
8.4: RLC Series AC Circuits
8.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
8.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law
8.7: Motional Emf
8.8: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
8.9: Electric Generators
8.10: Back Emf
8.11: Transformers
8.12: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices
8.13: Inductance
8.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electri cal Technologies (Exercise)
This page titled 8: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Elect rical Technologies is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840348.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits and Electrical Technologies
Nature’s displays of symmetry are beautiful and allur ing. A butterfly’s wings exhibit an appealing symmetr y in a complex system.
(See Figure 2.) The laws of physics display symmetries at the most basic level—these symmetries are a sourc e of wonder and
imply deeper meaning. Since we place a high value on symmetry, we look for it when we explore nature. The re markable thing is
that we find it.
Figure: These wind turbines in the Thames Estuary in th e UK are an example of induction at work. Wind pushe s the blades of
the turbine, spinning a shaft attached to magnets. The magnets spin around a conductive coil, inducing an e lectric current in the
coil, and eventually feeding the electrical grid. (credit: modification of work by Petr Kratochvil)
Figure: Physics, like this butterfly, has inherent symmet ries. (credit: Thomas Bresson)
The hint of symmetry between electricity and magneti sm found in the preceding chapter will be elaborated upon in this chapter.
Specifically, we know that a current creates a magnetic field. If nature is symmetric here, then perhaps a m agnetic field can create a
current. The Hall effect is a voltage caused by a magn etic force. That voltage could drive a current. Histor ically, it was very shortly
after Oersted discovered currents cause magnetic fie lds that other scientists asked the following question: C an magnetic fields
cause currents? The answer was soon found by experiment to be yes. In 1831, some 12 years after Oersted’s disc overy, the English
scientist Michael Faraday (1791–1862) and the America n scientist Joseph Henry (1797–1878) independently de monstrated that
magnetic fields can produce currents. The basic pro cess of generating emfs (electromotive force) and, he nce, currents with
magnetic fields is known as induction; this process is also called magnetic induction to dis tinguish it from charging by induction,
which utilizes the Coulomb force.
Today, currents induced by magnetic fields are essent ial to our technological society. The ubiquitous gen erator—found in
automobiles, on bicycles, in nuclear power plants, and so on—uses magnetism to generate current. Other devices t hat use
magnetism to induce currents include pickup coils in electric guitars, transformers of every size, certain microphones, airport
security gates, and damping mechanisms on sensitive chemical balances. Not so familiar perhaps, but import ant nevertheless, is
that the behavior of AC circuits depends strongly on the effe ct of magnetic fields on currents.
Glossary
induction
(magnetic induction) the creation of emfs and hence cur rents by magnetic fields
This page titled 8.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circui ts and Electrical Technologies is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.0: Prelude to Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits and Electrical Technologies by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original
source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84034

8.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840358.2: RL Circuits
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the current in an RL circuit after a specifie d number of characteristic time steps.
Calculate the characteristic time of an RL circuit.
Sketch the current in an RL circuit over time.
We know that the current through an inductor cannot be turned on or off instantaneously. The change in current changes flux,
inducing an emf opposing the change (Lenz’s law). How l ong does the opposition last? Current will flow and can be turned off, but
how long does it take? Figure shows a switching circuit that can be used to examine current through an indu ctor as a function
of time.
Figure: (a) An RL circuit with a switch to turn curr ent on and off. When in position 1, the battery, resi stor, and inductor are in
series and a current is established. In position 2, the b attery is removed and the current eventually stops bec ause of energy loss in
the resistor. (b) A graph of current growth versus time when the switch is moved to position 1. (c) A graph o f current decay when
the switch is moved to position 2.
When the switch is first moved to position 1 (at), th e current is zero and it eventually rises to. where is the total
resistance of the circuit. The opposition of the indu ctor is greatest at the beginning, because the amou nt of change is greatest. The
opposition it poses is in the form of an induced emf, wh ich decreases to zero as the current approaches its final value. The opposing
emf is proportional to the amount of change left. Thi s is the hallmark of an exponential behavior, and it can be shown with calculus
that
is the current in an RL circuit when switched on (Note the similarity to the e xponential behavior of the voltage on a charging
capacitor). The initial current is zero and approaches with a characteristic time constant for an RL circuit, given by
where has units of seconds, since. In the first period of t ime, the current rises from zero to, since
The current will go 0.632 of the remainder in the nex t time. A well-known property of the exponential is t hat the final value is
never exactly reached, but 0.632 of the remainder to that value is achieved in every characteristic time. In just a few multiples of
the time, the final value is very nearly achieved, as the graph in Figure illustrates.
The characteristic time depends on only two factors, the inductance and the resistance. The greater th e inductance, the
greater is, which makes sense since a large inductan ce is very effective in opposing change. The smaller the resistance, the
greater is. Again this makes sense, since a small resi stance means a large final current and a greater cha nge to get there. In both
cases—large and small —more energy is stored in the i nductor and more time is required to get it in and out.Learning Objectives

8.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84035When the switch in Figure is moved to position 2 and cuts the battery out of the circuit, the current dr ops because of energy
dissipation by the resistor. But this is also not ins tantaneous, since the inductor opposes the decrease in c urrent by inducing an emf
in the same direction as the battery that drove the current. Furthermore, there is a certain amount of energy,, stored in the
inductor, and it is dissipated at a finite rate. As the current approaches zero, the rate of decrease slows, since the energy dissipation
rate is. Once again the behavior is exponential, and is f ound to be
(Figure) In the first period of time after the swit ch is closed, the current falls to 0.368 of its initi al value, since
. In each successive time the current falls to 0.368 of the preceding value, and in a few multiples of, the
current becomes very close to zero, as seen in the grap h in Figure.
a. What is the characteristic time constant for a 7.50 mH in ductor in series with a resistor?
b. Find the current 5.00 ms after the switch is moved to positi on 2 to disconnect the battery, if it is initially 10.0 A.
Strategy for (a)
The time constant for an RL circuit is defined by.
Solution for (a)
Entering known values into the expression for given in yields
Discussion for (a)
This is a small but definitely finite time. The coil wi ll be very close to its full current in about ten t ime constants, or about 25
ms.
Strategy for (b)
We can find the current by using, or by considering the decline in steps. Since the time is twice the cha racteristic
time, we consider the process in steps.
Solution for (b)
In the first 2.50 ms, the current declines to 0.368 of its initial value, which is
After another 2.50 ms, or a total of 5.00 ms, the current decli nes to 0.368 of the value just found. That is,
Discussion for (b)
After another 5.00 ms has passed, the current will be 0.183 A (see Exercise); so, although it does die out, the current certain ly
does not go to zero instantaneously.Example: Calculating Characteristic Time and Current in an RL Circuit

8.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84035In summary, when the voltage applied to an inductor is changed, the current also changes, but the change in current lags the
change in voltage in an RL circuit. In Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive, we explore how an RL circuit behaves when a
sinusoidal AC voltage is applied.
Summary
When a series connection of a resistor and an inductor— an RL circuit—is connected to a voltage source, the time variatio n of
the current is
where is the final current.
The characteristic time constant is, where is the ind uctance and is the resistance.
In the first time constant the current rises from zero to, and 0.632 of the remainder in every subsequent time interval.
When the inductor is shorted through a resistor, curr ent decreases as
Here is the initial current.
Current falls to in the first time interval, and 0.3 68 of the remainder toward zero in each subsequent time.
Glossary
characteristic time constant
denoted by, of a particular series RL circuit is calculated by, where is the inductance and is the resistance
This page titled 8.2: RL Circuits is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
23.1: RL Circuits by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840368.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Sketch voltage and current versus time in simple inductiv e, capacitive, and resistive circuits.
Calculate inductive and capacitive reactance.
Calculate current and/or voltage in simple inductive, c apacitive, and resistive circuits.
Many circuits also contain capacitors and inductors, in addition to resistors and an AC voltage source. W e have seen how capacitors
and inductors respond to DC voltage when it is switched on and off. We will now explore how inductors and capa citors react to
sinusoidal AC voltage.
Inductors and Inductive Reactance
Suppose an inductor is connected directly to an AC vol tage source, as shown in Figure. It is reasonable to assume negligible
resistance, since in practice we can make the resista nce of an inductor so small that it has a negligible effect on the circuit. Also
shown is a graph of voltage and current as functions of time.
Figure: (a) An AC voltage source in series with an ind uctor having negligible resistance. (b) Graph of curr ent and voltage
across the inductor as functions of time.
The graph in Figure (b) starts with voltage at a maximum. Note that the cu rrent starts at zero and rises to its peak after the voltage
that drives it, just as was the case when DC voltage was swi tched on in the preceding section. When the voltage b ecomes negative
at point a, the current begins to decrease; it beco mes zero at point b, where voltage is its most negative. The current then becomes
negative, again following the voltage. The voltage be comes positive at point c and begins to make the curr ent less negative. At
point d, the current goes through zero just as the v oltage reaches its positive peak to start another cy cle. This behavior is
summarized as follows:
When a sinusoidal voltage is applied to an inductor, th e voltage leads the current by one-fourth of a cycl e, or by a phase
angle.
Current lags behind voltage, since inductors oppose change in current. Changing current induces a back e mf. This
is considered to be an effective resistance of the in ductor to AC. The rms current through an inductor s given by a version of
Ohm’s law:vo
where is the rms voltage across the inductor and is de fined to beLearning Objectives
AC Voltage in an Inductor

8.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84036with the frequency of the AC voltage source in hertz (An analysis of the circuit using Kirchhoff’s loop rul e and calculus actually
produces this expression). is called the inductive r eactance, because the inductor reacts to impede the c urrent. has units of
ohms (, so that frequency times inductance has unit s of (cycles/s)), consistent with its role as an eff ective
resistance. It makes sense that is proportional to, since the greater the induction the greater its resi stance to change. It is also
reasonable that is proportional to frequency, sinc e greater frequency means greater change in current. That is, is large
for large frequencies (large, small). The greater the change, the greater the opposition of an inductor.
(a) Calculate the inductive reactance of a 3.00 mH i nductor when 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz AC voltages are applie d. (b) What is
the rms current at each frequency if the applied rms vol tage is 120 V?
Strategy
The inductive reactance is found directly from the expression. Once has been found at each frequency, Oh m’s
law as stated in the Equation can be used to find the curren t at each frequency.
Solution for (a)
Entering the frequency and inductance into Equation gives
Similarly, at 10 kHz,
Solution for (b)
The rms current is now found using the version of Ohm ’s law in Equation, given the applied rms voltage i s 120 V.
For the first frequency, this yields
Similarly, at 10 kHz,
Discussion
The inductor reacts very differently at the two diff erent frequencies. At the higher frequency, its reactan ce is large and the
current is small, consistent with how an inductor impede s rapid change. Thus high frequencies are impeded th e most. Inductors
can be used to filter out high frequencies; for exam ple, a large inductor can be put in series with a so und reproduction system
or in series with your home computer to reduce high-f requency sound output from your speakers or high-fre quency power
spikes into your computer.
Note that although the resistance in the circuit con sidered is negligible, the AC current is not extremely l arge because inductive
reactance impedes its flow. With AC, there is no time for t he current to become extremely large.
Capacitors and Capacitive Reactance
Consider the capacitor connected directly to an AC v oltage source as shown in Figure. The resistance of a circuit like this can be
made so small that it has a negligible effect compare d with the capacitor, and so we can assume negligible resistance. V oltage
across the capacitor and current are graphed as functions of time in the figure.Example: Calculating Inductive Reactance and then Current

8.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84036
Figure: (a) An AC voltage source in series with a capa citor C having negligible resistance. (b) Graph of cu rrent and voltage
across the capacitor as functions of time.
The graph in Figure starts with voltage across the capacitor at a maximum. The current is zero at this point, because the cap acitor is
fully charged and halts the flow. Then voltage drops and the current becomes negative as the capacitor di scharges. At point a, the
capacitor has fully discharged (on it) and the volt age across it is zero. The current remains negative b etween points a and b,
causing the voltage on the capacitor to reverse. This is complete at point b, where the current is zero an d the voltage has its most
negative value. The current becomes positive after point b, neutralizing the charge on the capacitor a nd bringing the voltage to zero
at point c, which allows the current to reach its maxi mum. Between points c and d, the current drops to zero as the voltage rises to
its peak, and the process starts to repeat. Throughou t the cycle, the voltage follows what the current is doing by one-fourth of a
cycle:
When a sinusoidal voltage is applied to a capacitor, t he voltage follows the current by one-fourth of a cyc le, or by a phase
angle.
The capacitor is affecting the current, having the ability to stop it altogether when fully charged. Sinc e an AC voltage is applied,
there is an rms current, but it is limited by the cap acitor. This is considered to be an effective resista nce of the capacitor to AC, and
so the rms current in the circuit containing only a capaci tor is given by another version of Ohm’s law to be
where is the rms voltage and is defined (As with, t his expression for results from an analysis of the c ircuit using
Kirchhoff’s rules and calculus) to be
where is called the capacitive reactance, because t he capacitor reacts to impede the current. has unit s of ohms (verification
left as an exercise for the reader). is inversely p roportional to the capacitance, the larger the cap acitor, the greater the charge
it can store and the greater the current that can f low. It is also inversely proportional to the frequen cy, the greater the frequency,
the less time there is to fully charge the capacitor, and so it impedes current less.
(a) Calculate the capacitive reactance of a 5.00 mF capacitor when 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz AC voltages are appl ied. (b) What is
the rms current if the applied rms voltage is 120 V?
Strategy
The capacitive reactance is found directly from the expression in. Once has been found at each frequenc y,
Ohm’s law stated as AC Voltage in a Capacitor
Example: Calculating Capacitive Reactance and then Current

8.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84036can be used to find the current at each frequency.
Solution for (a)
Entering the frequency and capacitance into gives
Similarly, at 10 kHz,
Solution for (b)
The rms current is now found using the version of Ohm ’s law in, given the applied rms voltage is 120 V. For the first
frequency, this yields
Similarly, at 10 kHz,
Discussion
The capacitor reacts very differently at the two dif ferent frequencies, and in exactly the opposite way an inductor reacts. At the
higher frequency, its reactance is small and the curr ent is large. Capacitors favor change, whereas inducto rs oppose change.
Capacitors impede low frequencies the most, since low f requency allows them time to become charged and stop the current.
Capacitors can be used to filter out low frequencies. Fo r example, a capacitor in series with a sound reprodu ction system rids it
of the 60 Hz hum.
Although a capacitor is basically an open circuit, th ere is an rms current in a circuit with an AC voltage a pplied to a capacitor. This
is because the voltage is continually reversing, charg ing and discharging the capacitor. If the frequency g oes to zero (DC), tends
to infinity, and the current is zero once the capac itor is charged. At very high frequencies, the capacitor ’s reactance tends to zero—
it has a negligible reactance and does not impede t he current (it acts like a simple wire). Capacitors have the opposite effect on AC
circuits that inductors have.
Resistors in an AC Circuit
Just as a reminder, consider Figure, which shows an AC voltage applied to a resistor and a graph of voltage and current versus time.
The voltage and current are exactly in phase in a resistor. There is no frequency dependence to the behavior of plain resistance in a
circuit:

8.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84036
Figure: (a) An AC voltage source in series with a resist or. (b) Graph of current and voltage across the resisto r as functions of
time, showing them to be exactly in phase.
When a sinusoidal voltage is applied to a resistor, the vo ltage is exactly in phase with the current—they have a p hase angle.
Summary
For inductors in AC circuits, we find that when a sinusoi dal voltage is applied to an inductor, the voltage leads the current by
one-fourth of a cycle, or by a phase angle.
The opposition of an inductor to a change in current is expressed as a type of AC resistance.
Ohm’s law for an inductor is
where is the rms voltage across the inductor.
is defined to be the inductive reactance, given by
with the frequency of the AC voltage source in hertz.
Inductive reactance has units of ohms and is greatest at high frequencies.
For capacitors, we find that when a sinusoidal voltage is a pplied to a capacitor, the voltage follows the current by o ne-fourth of
a cycle, or by a phase angle.
Since a capacitor can stop current when fully charged, it l imits current and offers another form of AC resistance; Ohm’s law for
a capacitor is
where is the rms voltage across the capacitor.
is defined to be the capacitive reactance, given by
has units of ohms and is greatest at low frequencies.
Glossary
inductive reactance
the opposition of an inductor to a change in current; calculated by AC Voltage in a Resistor

8.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84036capacitive reactance
the opposition of a capacitor to a change in current; calculated by
Contributors
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State Un iversity, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State Universit y of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univers ity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.2: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

8.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840378.4: RLC Series AC Circuits
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the impedance, phase angle, resonant frequency, power, power factor, voltage, and/or current in a RLC ser ies
circuit.
Draw the circuit diagram for an RLC series circuit.
Explain the significance of the resonant frequency.
Impedance
When alone in an AC circuit, inductors, capacitors, and resistors all impede current. How do they behave when al l three occur
together? Interestingly, their individual resistanc es in ohms do not simply add. Because inductors and c apacitors behave in opposite
ways, they partially to totally cancel each other’s e ffect. Figure shows an RLC series circuit with an AC voltage source, the
behavior of which is the subject of this section. The crux of the analysis of an RLC circuit is the frequency dependence of and
, and the effect they have on the phase of voltage versus current (established in the preceding section). These give rise to the
frequency dependence of the circuit, with important “resonance” features that are the basis of many applic ations, such as radio
tuners.
Figure: An RLC series circuit with an AC voltage sourc e.
The combined effect of resistance, inductive react ance, and capacitive reactance is defined to be impedance, an AC
analogue to resistance in a DC circuit. Current, volta ge, and impedance in an RLC circuit are related by an AC version of Ohm’s
law:
Here is the peak current, the peak source voltage, and is the impedance of the circuit. The units of i mpedance are ohms, and
its effect on the circuit is as you might expect: the greater the impedance, the smaller the current. To g et an expression for in
terms of,, and, we will now examine how the voltages across the various components are related to the so urce voltage.
Those voltages are labeled, and in Figure.
Conservation of charge requires current to be the sa me in each part of the circuit at all times, so that we can say the currents in,
, and are equal and in phase. But we know from the pr eceding section that the voltage across the inductor leads the current
by one-fourth of a cycle, the voltage across the cap acitor follows the current by one-fourth of a cycle, and the voltage across the
resistor is exactly in phase with the current. Figure shows these relationships in one graph, as well as sho wing the total voltage
around the circuit, where all four voltages are the instantaneous values. According to Kirchhoff’s loop r ule, the
total voltage around the circuit is also the voltage of t he source.Learning Objectives

8.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84037You can see from Figure that while is in phase with the current, leads by, and follows by. Thus and are
out of phase (crest to trough) and tend to cancel, al though not completely unless they have the same mag nitude. Since the peak
voltages are not aligned (not in phase), the peak vo ltage of the source does not equal the sum of the p eak voltages across,,
and. The actual relationship is
where,, and are the peak voltages across,, and, respectively. Now, using Ohm’s law and definitions from
Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive, we substitute into the above, as well as,, and,
yielding
cancels to yield an expression for:
which is the impedance of an RLC series AC circuit. For circuits without a resistor, take; for those without an inductor, take
; and for those without a capacitor, take.
Figure: This graph shows the relationships of the voltag es in an RLC circuit to the current. The voltages acr oss the circuit
elements add to equal the voltage of the source, whic h is seen to be out of phase with the current.
An RLC series circuit has a resistor, a 3.00 mH inductor, and a capacitor. (a) Find the circuit’s impedance at 60.0
Hz and 10.0 kHz, noting that these frequencies and the values for and are the same as in [link] and [link]. (b) If the voltage
source has, what is at each frequency?
Strategy
For each frequency, we use to find the impedance and then Ohm’s law to find current. We can take
advantage of the results of the previous two examples rather than calculate the reactances again.
Solution for (a)
At 60.0 Hz, the values of the reactances were found in [link] to be and in [link] to be. Entering these
and the given for resistance into yieldsExample: Calculating Impedance and Current

8.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84037Similarly, at 10.0 kHz, and, so that
Discussion for (a)
In both cases, the result is nearly the same as the la rgest value, and the impedance is definitely not the sum of the individual
values. It is clear that dominates at high frequency and dominates at low frequency.
Solution for (b)
The current can be found using the AC version of Ohm’s la w in Equation.
Finally, at 10.0 kHz we find
Discussion for (a)
The current at 60.0 Hz is the same (to three digits) as found for the capacitor alone in [link]. The capacitor dominates at low
frequency. The current at 10.0 kHz is only slightly d ifferent from that found for the inductor alone in [link]. The inductor
dominates at high frequency.
Resonance in RLC Series AC Circuits
How does an RLC circuit behave as a function of the frequency of t he driving voltage source? Combining Ohm’s law,
, and the expression for impedance from gives
The reactances vary with frequency, with large at hi gh frequencies and large at low frequencies, as we hav e seen in three
previous examples. At some intermediate frequency, t he reactances will be equal and cancel, giving —this is a minimum
value for impedance, and a maximum value for results. We can get an expression for by taking
Substituting the definitions of and,
Solving this expression for yields
where is the resonant frequency of an RLC series circuit. This is also the natural frequency at which the circuit would oscillate if
not driven by the voltage source. At, the effects of the ind uctor and capacitor cancel, so that, and is a maximum.
Resonance in AC circuits is analogous to mechanical re sonance, where resonance is defined to be a forced osci llation—in this case,
forced by the voltage source—at the natural frequen cy of the system. The receiver in a radio is an RLC circuit that oscillates best at
its. A variable capacitor is often used to adjust to receive a desired frequency and to reject others. Figure is a graph of current

8.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84037as a function of frequency, illustrating a resonant peak in at. The two curves are for two different c ircuits, which differ only
in the amount of resistance in them. The peak is lower and broader for the higher-resistance circuit. Thu s the higher-resistance
circuit does not resonate as strongly and would not be as sele ctive in a radio receiver, for example.
Figure: A graph of current versus frequency for two R LC series circuits differing only in the amount of resi stance. Both have a
resonance at but that for the higher resistance is low er and broader. The driving AC voltage source has a f ixed amplitude.
For the same RLC series circuit having a resistor, a 3.00 mH inductor, and a capacitor: (a) Find the resonant
frequency. (b) Calculate at resonance if is 120 V.
Strategy
The resonant frequency is found by using the expression i n.
The current at that frequency is the same as if the resist or alone were in the circuit.
Solution for (a)
Entering the given values for and into the expression g iven for in yields
Discussion for (a)
We see that the resonant frequency is between 60.0 Hz an d 10.0 kHz, the two frequencies chosen in earlier examp les. This was
to be expected, since the capacitor dominated at the low frequency and the inductor dominated at the hig h frequency. Their
effects are the same at this intermediate frequency.
Solution for (b)
The current is given by Ohm’s law. At resonance, the t wo reactances are equal and cancel, so that the impeda nce equals the
resistance alone. Thus,
Discussion for (b)Example: Calculating Resonant Frequency and Current

8.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84037At resonance, the current is greater than at the high er and lower frequencies considered for the same circu it in the preceding
example.
Power in RLC Series AC Circuits
If current varies with frequency in an RLC circuit, then the power delivered to it also varies with frequency. But the average power
is not simply current times voltage, as it is in pure ly resistive circuits. As was seen in Figure, voltage and current are out of phase in
an RLC circuit. There is a phase angle between the source voltage and the current, which ca n be found from
For example, at the resonant frequency or in a purely resistive circuit, so that. This implies that an d that
voltage and current are in phase, as expected for re sistors. At other frequencies, average power is less th an at resonance. This is
both because voltage and current are out of phase an d because is lower. The fact that source voltage and current are out of
phase affects the power delivered to the circuit. It can be shown that the average power is
thus is called the power factor, which can range from 0 to 1. Power factors near 1 are desirable when design ing an efficient
motor, for example. At the resonant frequency,.
For the same RLC series circuit having a resistor, a 3.00 mH inductor, a capacitor, and a voltage source with a
of 120 V: (a) Calculate the power factor and phase angle for
(b) What is the average power at 50.0 Hz? (c) Find the avera ge power at the circuit’s resonant frequency.
Strategy and Solution for (a)
The power factor at 60.0 Hz is found from
We know from Example, so that
This small value indicates the voltage and current are significantly out of phase. In fact, the phase angle is
Discussion for (a)
The phase angle is close to, consistent with the fa ct that the capacitor dominates the circuit at this low frequency (a pure RC
circuit has its voltage and current out of phase).
Strategy and Solution for (b)
The average power at 60.0 Hz is
was found to be 0.226 A in Example. Entering the known values gives
Strategy and Solution for (c)
At the resonant frequency, we know, and was found to be 6.00 A in Example. Thus,
\[P_{ave} = (3.00 \, A)(120 \, V)(1) = 360 \, W\)Example: Calculating the Power Factor and Power

8.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84037at resonance (1.30 kHz)
Discussion
Both the current and the power factor are greater at resonance, producing significantly greater power tha n at higher and lower
frequencies.
Power delivered to an RLC series AC circuit is dissipated by the resistance alo ne. The inductor and capacitor have energy input an d
output but do not dissipate it out of the circuit. R ather they transfer energy back and forth to one an other, with the resistor
dissipating exactly what the voltage source puts int o the circuit. This assumes no significant electromag netic radiation from the
inductor and capacitor, such as radio waves. Such radiat ion can happen and may even be desired, as we will see in the next chapter
on electromagnetic radiation, but it can also be supp ressed as is the case in this chapter. The circuit is analogous to the wheel of a
car driven over a corrugated road as shown in Figure. The regularly spaced bumps in the road are analog ous to the voltage source,
driving the wheel up and down. The shock absorber is an alogous to the resistance damping and limiting the a mplitude of the
oscillation. Energy within the system goes back and for th between kinetic (analogous to maximum current, an d energy stored in an
inductor) and potential energy stored in the car sp ring (analogous to no current, and energy stored in the electric field of a
capacitor). The amplitude of the wheels’ motion is a maxi mum if the bumps in the road are hit at the resonant fre quency.
Figure: The forced but damped motion of the wheel o n the car spring is analogous to an RLC series AC circui t. The shock
absorber damps the motion and dissipates energy, analogo us to the resistance in an RLC circuit. The mass and spri ng determine the
resonant frequency.
A pure LC circuit with negligible resistance oscillates at, th e same resonant frequency as an RLC circuit. It can serve as a
frequency standard or clock circuit—for example, in a digital wristwatch. With a very small resistance, onl y a very small energy
input is necessary to maintain the oscillations. The cir cuit is analogous to a car with no shock absorbers. Once it starts oscillating, it
continues at its natural frequency for some time. Figure shows the analogy between an LC circuit and a mass on a spring.

8.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84037
Figure: An LC circuit is analogous to a mass oscillating on a spring with no friction and no driving force. Energy moves back
and forth between the inductor and capacitor, just a s it moves from kinetic to potential in the mass-spring system.
Build circuits with capacitors, inductors, resistors an d AC or DC voltage sources, and inspect them using la b instruments such
as voltmeters and ammeters.PHET EXPLORATIONS: CIRCUIT CONSTRUCTION KIT (AC + DC), VIRTUAL LAB

8.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84037
Figure: Circuit Construction Kit (AC+DC), Virtual Lab
Summary
The AC analogy to resistance is impedance, the combined effect of resistors, inductors, and capacitors, defined b y the AC
version of Ohm’s law:
where is the peak current and is the peak source vo ltage.
Impedance has units of ohms and is given by.
The resonant frequency, at which, is
In an AC circuit, there is a phase angle between source v oltage and the current which can be found from
for a purely resistive circuit or an RLC circuit at resonance.
The average power delivered to an RLC circuit is affected by the phase angle and is given by
is called the power factor, which ranges from 0 to 1.
Glossary
impedance
the AC analogue to resistance in a DC circuit; it is the c ombined effect of resistance, inductive reactance, and c apacitive
reactance in the form
resonant frequency
the frequency at which the impedance in a circuit is at a minimum, and also the frequency at which the circuit would oscillate if
not driven by a voltage source; calculated by
phase angle
denoted by, the amount by which the voltage and curren t are out of phase with each other in a circuit
power factor
the amount by which the power delivered in the circuit i s less than the theoretical maximum of the circuit due to voltage and
current being out of phase; calculated by (cos ϕ\)
This page titled 8.4: RLC Series AC Circuits is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.3: RLC Series AC Circuits by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840388.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the flux of a uniform magnetic field through a loop of arbitrary orientation.
Describe methods to produce an electromotive force (e mf) with a magnetic field or magnet and a loop of wire.
The apparatus used by Faraday to demonstrate that ma gnetic fields can create currents is illustrated in Figure. When the
switch is closed, a magnetic field is produced in the coil on the top part of the iron ring and transmit ted to the coil on the bottom
part of the ring. The galvanometer is used to detec t any current induced in the coil on the bottom. It was found that each time the
switch is closed, the galvanometer detects a current i n one direction in the coil on the bottom. (You can also observe this in a
physics lab.) Each time the switch is opened, the gal vanometer detects a current in the opposite directi on. Interestingly, if the
switch remains closed or open for any length of time, there is no current through the galvanometer. Closing and opening the switch
induces the current. It is the change in magnetic field that creates the current. More ba sic than the current that flows is the emf that
causes it. The current is a result of an emf induced by a changing magnetic field, whether or not there is a path for current to flow.
Figure: Faraday’s apparatus for demonstrating that a m agnetic field can produce a current. A change in th e field produced by
the top coil induces an emf and, hence, a current in the bottom coil. When the switch is opened and closed, the galvanometer
registers currents in opposite directions. No current fl ows through the galvanometer when the switch remains c losed or open.
An experiment easily performed and often done in phy sics labs is illustrated in Figure. An emf is induced in the coil when a
bar magnet is pushed in and out of it. Emfs of opposi te signs are produced by motion in opposite directi ons, and the emfs are also
reversed by reversing poles. The same results are prod uced if the coil is moved rather than the magnet—it is the relative motion
that is important. The faster the motion, the greater t he emf, and there is no emf when the magnet is stationary r elative to the coil.
Figure: Movement of a magnet relative to a coil pro duces emfs as shown. The same emfs are produced if the co il is moved
relative to the magnet. The greater the speed, the g reater the magnitude of the emf, and the emf is zero when there is no motion.
The method of inducing an emf used in most electric g enerators is shown in Figure. A coil is rotated in a magnetic field,
producing an alternating current emf, which depends o n rotation rate and other factors that will be explo red in later sections. Note
that the generator is remarkably similar in constructio n to a motor (another symmetry).Learning Objectives

8.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84038
Figure: Rotation of a coil in a magnetic field prod uces an emf. This is the basic construction of a generat or, where work done
to turn the coil is converted to electric energy. No te the generator is very similar in construction to a motor.
So we see that changing the magnitude or direction of a magnetic field produces an emf. Experiments revea led that there is a
crucial quantity called the magnetic flux,, given by
where is the magnetic field strength over an area, at an angle with the perpendicular to the area as shown in Figure.
Any change in magnetic flux induces an emf. This process is defined to be electromagnetic induction. Units of magnetic flux
are. As seen in Figure 4,, which is the component of perpendicular to the area. Thus magnetic flux is
, the product of the area and the component of the magne tic field perpendicular to it.
Figure: Magnetic flux is related to the magnetic fi eld and the area over which it exists. The flux is re lated to
induction; any change in induces an emf.
All induction, including the examples given so far, ari ses from some change in magnetic flux. For example, Fa raday changed
and hence when opening and closing the switch in his ap paratus (shown in Figure). This is also true for the b ar magnet and
coil shown in Figure. When rotating the coil of a ge nerator, the angle and, hence, is changed. Just how gr eat an emf and
what direction it takes depend on the change in and ho w rapidly the change is made, as examined in the next secti on.
Summary
The crucial quantity in induction is magnetic flux, defined to be, where is the magnetic field strenth ov er an
area at an angle with the perpendicular to the area.
Units of the magnetic flux are.
Any change in magnetic flux induces an emf—the process i s defined to be electromagnetic induction.
Glossary
magnetic flux

8.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84038the amount of magnetic field going through a particula r area, calculated with where is the magnetic field str ength
over an area at an angle with the perpendicular to the area
electromagnetic induction
the process of inducing an emf (voltage) with a change in ma gnetic flux
This page titled 8.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.4: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

8.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840398.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate emf, current, and magnetic fields using Faraday ’s Law.
Explain the physical results of Lenz’s Law
Faraday’s and Lenz’s Law
Faraday’s experiments showed that the emf induced by a change in magnetic flux depends on only a few factor s. First, emf is
directly proportional to the change in flux. Second, emf is greatest when the change in time is smallest —that is, emf is
inversely proportional to. Finally, if a coil has tur ns, an emf will be produced that is times greater th an for a single coil, so
that emf is directly proportional to. The equation fo r the emf induced by a change in magnetic flux is
This relationship is known as Faraday's law of induction. The units for emf are volts, as is usual.
The minus sign in Faraday’s law of induction is very i mportant. The minus means that the emf creates a current I and magnetic
field B that oppose the change in flux -- this is known as Lenz's law. The direction (given by the minus sign) of the emf is so
important that it is called Lenz's law after the Russian Heinrich Lenz (1804–1865), who, lik e Faraday and Henry,independently
investigated aspects of induction. Faraday was aware of t he direction, but Lenz stated it so clearly that he is credited for its
discovery. (See Figure 1.)
Figure: (a) When this bar magnet is thrust into the co il, the strength of the magnetic field increases in th e coil. The current
induced in the coil creates another field, in the op posite direction of the bar magnet’s to oppose the inc rease. This is one aspect of
Lenz's law--induction opposes any charge in flux. (b) and (c) are two other situations. Verify for yourself that the direction of the
induced shown indeed opposes the change in flux and t hat the current direction shown is consistent with RHR- 2.
To use Lenz’s law to determine the directions of the indu ced magnetic fields, currents, and emfs:
1. Make a sketch of the situation for use in visualizing and rec ording directions.
2. Determine the direction of the magnetic field B.
3. Determine whether the flux is increasing or decreasing.
4. Now determine the direction of the induced magnetic fiel d B. It opposes the change in flux by adding or subtract ing from
the original field.
5. Use RHR-2 to determine the direction of the induced curr ent I that is responsible for the induced magnetic field B.Learning Objectives
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY FOR LENZ'S LAW:

8.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840396. The direction (or polarity) of the induced emf will n ow drive a current in this direction and can be represe nted as current
emerging from the positive terminal of the emf and returnin g to its negative terminal.
For practice, apply these steps to the situations shown in Fi gure 1 and to others that are part of the following text ma terial.
Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
There are many applications of Faraday’s Law of induct ion, as we will explore in this chapter and others. At this juncture, let us
mention several that have to do with data storage and magnetic fields. A very important application has to do with audio and video
recording tapes. A plastic tape, coated with iron oxide, moves past a recording head. This recording head is basically a r ound iron
ring about which is wrapped a coil of wire—an electroma gnet (Figure 2). A signal in the form of a varying in put current from a
microphone or camera goes to the recording head. Th ese signals (which are a function of the signal ampli tude and frequency)
produce varying magnetic fields at the recording hea d. As the tape moves past the recording head, the magneti c field orientations of
the iron oxide molecules on the tape are changed th us recording the signal. In the playback mode, the magnetized tape is run past
another head, similar in structure to the recording head. The different magnetic field orientations of the iron oxide molecules on the
tape induces an emf in the coil of wire in the playback head. Thi s signal then is sent to a loudspeaker or video player.
Figure: Recording and playback heads used with audio and video magnetic tapes. (credit: Steve Jurvetson)
Similar principles apply to computer hard drives, excep t at a much faster rate. Here recordings are on a coa ted, spinning disk. Read
heads historically were made to work on the principle of induction. However, the input information is carri ed in digital rather than
analog form – a series of 0’s or 1’s are written upon the spinning hard drive. Today, most hard drive read out devices do not work on
the principle of induction, but use a technique known as giant magnetoresistance. (The discovery that weak changes in a magnetic
field in a thin film of iron and chromium could bri ng about much larger changes in electrical resistanc e was one of the first large
successes of nanotechnology.) Another application of i nduction is found on the magnetic stripe on the back of your personal credit
card as used at the grocery store or the ATM machine. This works on the same principle as the audio or video tape mentioned in the
last paragraph in which a head reads personal information fr om your card.
Another application of electromagnetic induction is wh en electrical signals need to be transmitted across a barrier. Consider the
cochlear implant shown below. Sound is picked up by a microphone on the outside of the skull and is used to set up a varyin g
magnetic field. A current is induced in a receiver secured in the bone beneath the skin and transmitte d to electrodes in the inner ear.
Electromagnetic induction can be used in other instanc es where electric signals need to be conveyed across various media.
Figure: Electromagnetic induction used in transmittin g electric currents across mediums. The device on the b aby’s head
induces an electrical current in a receiver secured i n the bone beneath the skin. (credit: Bjorn Knetsch)
Another contemporary area of research in which electro magnetic induction is being successfully implemented (and with substantial
potential) is transcranial magnetic simulation. A hos t of disorders, including depression and hallucinations can be traced to irregular
localized electrical activity in the brain. In transcranial magnetic stimulation, a rapidly varying and very localized magnetic fie ld is
placed close to certain sites identified in the brai n. Weak electric currents are induced in the identif ied sites and can result in
recovery of electrical functioning in the brain tissue.
Sleep apnea (“the cessation of breath”) affects both adults and infants (especially premature babies and it may be a cause of sudden
infant deaths [SID]). In such individuals, breath can stop repeatedly during their sleep. A cessation of m ore than 20 seconds can be
very dangerous. Stroke, heart failure, and tiredness are just some of the possible consequences for a pe rson having sleep apnea. The

8.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84039concern in infants is the stopping of breath for th ese longer times. One type of monitor to alert parents when a child is not breathing
uses electromagnetic induction. A wire wrapped around the infant’s chest has an alternating current runni ng through it. The
expansion and contraction of the infant’s chest as t he infant breathes changes the area through the coil. A pickup coil located nearby
has an alternating current induced in it due to the changing magnetic field of the initial wire. If the child stops breathing, there will
be a change in the induced current, and so a parent can be a lerted.
MAKING CONNECTIONS: CONSERV ATION OF ENERGY:
Lenz’s law is a manifestation of the conservation of ene rgy. The induced emf produces a current that opposes t he change in flux,
because a change in flux means a change in energy. Energy c an enter or leave, but not instantaneously. Lenz’s law is a
consequence. As the change begins, the law says induction o pposes and, thus, slows the change. In fact, if the induced emf were in
the same direction as the change in flux, there would be a positive feedback that would give us free energy from n o apparent source
—conservation of energy would be violated.
Calculate the magnitude of the induced emf when the magnet in Figure 1a is thrust into the coil, given th e following
information: the single loop coil has a radius of 6.0 0 cm and the average value of (this is given, since the bar magnet’s
field is complex) increases from 0.0500 T to 0.250 T in 0.100 s.
Strategy:
To find the magnitute of emf, we use Faraday’s law of induction as stated by, but without the minus sign that
indicates direction:
Solution:
We are given that and but we must determine the ch ange in flux before we can find emf. Since the area
of the loop is fixed, we see that
Now, since it was given that changes from 0.0500 to 0. 250 T. The area of the loop is
. Thus,
Entering the determined values into the expression for em f gives
Discussion:
While this is an easily measured voltage, it is certa inly not large enough for most practical applicatio ns. More loops in the coil,
a stronger magnet, and faster movement make induction th e practical source of voltages that it is.
Summary
Faraday’s law of induction states that the emfinduced by a change in magnetic flux is
when flux changes by in a time.
If emf is induced in a coil, is its number of turns.
The minus sign means that the emf creates a current and ma gnetic field that oppose the change in flux -- this opposition
is known as Lenz’s law.Example: Calculating Emf: How Great is the Induced Emf?

8.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84039Glossary
Faraday’s law of induction
the means of calculating the emf in a coil due to changi ng magnetic flux, given by
Lenz’s law
the minus sign in Faraday’s law, signifying that the emf in duced in a coil opposes the change in magnetic flux
This page titled 8.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.5: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840408.7: Motional Emf
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate emf, force, magnetic field, and work due to the moti on of an object in a magnetic field.
As we have seen, any change in magnetic flux induces an emf opposing that change—a process known as induction. Motion is one
of the major causes of induction. For example, a magnet moved toward a coil induces an emf, and a coil moved toward a magnet
produces a similar emf. In this section, we concentrate on motion in a magnetic field that is stationary rel ative to the Earth,
producing what is loosely called motional emf.
One situation where motional emf occurs is known as the Hall effect and has already been examined. Charges mo ving in a
magnetic field experience the magnetic force, which moves opposite charges in opposite directions and p roduces an
. We saw that the Hall effect has applications, inclu ding measurements of and. We will now see that the Ha ll effect is
one aspect of the broader phenomenon of induction, and we will find that motional emf can be used as a power sour ce.
Consider the situation shown in Figure. A rod is mov ed at a speed along a pair of conducting rails sep arated by a distance
in a uniform magnetic field. The rails are stationa ry relative to and are connected to a stationary re sistor. The resistor could
be anything from a light bulb to a voltmeter. Consi der the area enclosed by the moving rod, rails, and resistor. is perpendicular to
this area, and the area is increasing as the rod mov es. Thus the magnetic flux enclosed by the rails, r od, and resistor is increasing.
When flux changes, an emf is induced according to Faraday’ s law of induction.Learning Objectives

8.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84040
Figure: (a) A motional is induced between the rails when this rod moves to the right in the uniform magne tic field.
The magnetic field is into the page, perpendicular to the moving rod and rails and, hence, to the area enclosed by them. (b)
Lenz’s law gives the directions of the induced field a nd current, and the polarity of the induced emf. Si nce the flux is increasing,
the induced field is in the opposite direction, or ou t of the page. RHR-2 gives the current direction show n, and the polarity of the
rod will drive such a current. RHR-1 also indicates th e same polarity for the rod. (Note that the script E symbol used in the
equivalent circuit at the bottom of part (b) represe nts emf.)
To find the magnitude of emf induced along the moving rod, we use Faraday’s law of induction without the sign:
Here and below, “emf” implies the magnitude of the em f. In this equation, and the flux. We have and
, since is perpendicular to. Now, since is unifor m. Note that the area swept out by the rod is
. Entering these quantities into the expression for emf yi elds

8.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84040Finally, note that, the velocity of the rod. Entering th is into the last expression shows that
is the motional emf. This is the same expression given f or the Hall effect previously..
There are many connections between the electric force and the magnetic force. The fact that a moving elect ric field produces a
magnetic field and, conversely, a moving magnetic fie ld produces an electric field is part of why electric and magnetic forces
are now considered to be different manifestations of the same force. This classic unification of electric and magnetic forces
into what is called the electromagnetic force is the in spiration for contemporary efforts to unify other basic f orces.
To find the direction of the induced field, the dir ection of the current, and the polarity of the indu ced emf, we apply Lenz’s law as
explained in "Faraday's Law of Induction: Lenz's Law" (Figu re).
Flux is increasing, since the area enclosed is increa sing. Thus the induced field must oppose the existing one and be out of the page.
And so the RHR-2 requires that I be counterclockwise, which in turn means the top of the rod is positive as shown.
Motional emf also occurs if the magnetic field moves and the rod (or other object) is stationary relative to the Earth (or some
observer). We have seen an example of this in the si tuation where a moving magnet induces an emf in a sta tionary coil. It is the
relative motion that is important. What is emerging in these observations is a connection between magnetic and electric fields. A
moving magnetic field produces an electric field th rough its induced emf. We already have seen that a moving electric field
produces a magnetic field—moving charge implies moving electric field and moving charge produces a magnetic fi eld.
Motional emfs in the Earth’s weak magnetic field are n ot ordinarily very large, or we would notice voltage along metal rods, such
as a screwdriver, during ordinary motions. For example, a simple calculation of the motional emf of a 1 m rod moving at 3.0 m/s
perpendicular to the Earth’s field gives. This small value is consistent with
experience. There is a spectacular exception, however. In 1992 and 1996, attempts were made with the space sh uttle to create large
motional emfs. The Tethered Satellite was to be let o ut on a 20 km length of wire as shown in Figure 2, to create a 5 kV emf by
moving at orbital speed through the Earth’s field. T his emf could be used to convert some of the shuttle ’s kinetic and potential
energy into electrical energy if a complete circuit could be made. To complete the circuit, the stationa ry ionosphere was to supply a
return path for the current to flow. (The ionospher e is the rarefied and partially ionized atmosphere at orbital altitudes. It conducts
because of the ionization. The ionosphere serves the same function as the stationary rails and connecting r esistor in Figure 1,
without which there would not be a complete circuit.) Dr ag on the current in the cable due to the magnetic force does
the work that reduces the shuttle’s kinetic and poten tial energy and allows it to be converted to electri cal energy. The tests were
both unsuccessful. In the first, the cable hung up an d could only be extended a couple of hundred meters; in the second, the cable
broke when almost fully extended. The example below indic ates feasibility in principle.MAKING CONNECTIONS: UNIFICATION OF FORCES:
Example: Calculating the Large Motional Emf of an Object in Orbit

8.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84040
Figure: Motional emf as electrical power conversion f or the space shuttle is the motivation for the Tethere d Satellite
experiment. A 5 kV emf was predicted to be induced i n the 20 km long tether while moving at orbital spee d in the Earth’s
magnetic field. The circuit is completed by a return path through the stationary ionosphere.
Calculate the motional emf induced along a 20.0 km l ong conductor moving at an orbital speed of 7.80 km/ s perpendicular to
the Earth’s magnetic field.
Strategy:
This is a straightforward application of the expression fo r motional emf--.
Solution:
Entering the given values into gives
Discussion:
The value obtained is greater than the 5 kV measured voltage for the shuttle experiment, since the actual orbital motion of the
tether is not perpendicular to the Earth’s field. The 7.8 0 kV value is the maximum emf obtained when and.
Summary
An emf induced by motion relative to a magnetic field i s called a motional emf and is given by
where is the length of the object moving at speed relat ive to the field.
This page titled 8.7: Motional Emf is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.6: Motional Emf by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840418.8: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the magnitude and direction of an induced eddy current, and the effect this will have on the object it is induced in.
Describe several applications of magnetic damping.
Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
As discussed in "Motional Emf," motional emf is induced when a conductor moves in a magnetic field or when a magnetic field
moves relative to a conductor. If motional emf can c ause a current loop in the conductor, we refer to th at current as an eddy
current. Eddy currents can produce significant drag, called magnetic damping, on the motion involved. Consider the apparatus
shown in Figure, which swings a pendulum bob between the poles of a strong magnet. (This is another favorite physics lab
activity.) If the bob is metal, there is significant d rag on the bob as it enters and leaves the field, qu ickly damping the motion. If,
however, the bob is a slotted metal plate, as shown in Fi gure, there is a much smaller effect due to the ma gnet. There is no
discernible effect on a bob made of an insulator. Why is there drag in both directions, and are there any uses for m agnetic drag?
Figure: A common physics demonstration device for expl oring eddy currents and magnetic damping. (a) The mo tion of a
metal pendulum bob swinging between the poles of a ma gnet is quickly damped by the action of eddy current s. (b) There is little
effect on the motion of a slotted metal bob, implyin g that eddy currents are made less effective. (c) Ther e is also no magnetic
damping on a nonconducting bob, since the eddy curre nts are extremely small.
Figure shows what happens to the metal plate as it ent ers and leaves the magnetic field. In both cases, it experiences a force
opposing its motion. As it enters from the left, flux i ncreases, and so an eddy current is set up (Faraday’s l aw) in the
counterclockwise direction (Lenz’s law), as shown. Only the right-hand side of the current loop is in the f ield, so that there is an
unopposed force on it to the left (RHR-1). When the m etal plate is completely inside the field, there is no eddy current if the field is
uniform, since the flux remains constant in this regi on. But when the plate leaves the field on the right, flux decreases, causing an
eddy current in the clockwise direction that, again, experiences a force to the left, further slowing the motion. A similar analysis of
what happens when the plate swings from the right toward the left shows that its motion is also damped when en tering and leaving
the field.Learning Objectives

8.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84041
Figure: A more detailed look at the conducting plat e passing between the poles of a magnet. As it enters an d leaves the field,
the change in flux produces an eddy current. Magneti c force on the current loop opposes the motion. There is no current and no
magnetic drag when the plate is completely inside the uniform field.
When a slotted metal plate enters the field, as shown i n Figure an emf is induced by the change in flux, b ut it is less effective
because the slots limit the size of the current loops. Moreover, adjacent loops have currents in opposite di rections, and their effects
cancel. When an insulating material is used, the edd y current is extremely small, and so magnetic dampin g on insulators is
negligible. If eddy currents are to be avoided in co nductors, then they can be slotted or constructed of thin layers of conducting
material separated by insulating sheets.
Figure: Eddy currents induced in a slotted metal plat e entering a magnetic field form small loops, and the forces on them tend
to cancel, thereby making magnetic drag almost zero.
Applications of Magnetic Damping
One use of magnetic damping is found in sensitive lab oratory balances. To have maximum sensitivity and a ccuracy, the balance
must be as friction-free as possible. But if it is friction-free, then it will oscillate for a very long time. Magnetic damping is a simple
and ideal solution. With magnetic damping, drag is pr oportional to speed and becomes zero at zero velocity. Thus the oscillations
are quickly damped, after which the damping force di sappears, allowing the balance to be very sensitive (Fi gure). In most
balances, magnetic damping is accomplished with a conduct ing disc that rotates in a fixed field.

8.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84041
Figure: Magnetic damping of this sensitive balance slow s its oscillations. Since Faraday’s law of induction giv es the greatest
effect for the most rapid change, damping is greatest for large oscillations and goes to zero as the motion st ops.
Since eddy currents and magnetic damping occur only in conductors, recycling centers can use magnets to s eparate metals from
other materials. Trash is dumped in batches down a r amp, beneath which lies a powerful magnet. Conductors in the trash are
slowed by magnetic damping while nonmetals in the tras h move on, separating from the metals (Figure). This works for all
metals, not just ferromagnetic ones. A magnet can separa te out the ferromagnetic materials alone by acting on st ationary trash.
Figure: Metals can be separated from other trash by ma gnetic drag. Eddy currents and magnetic drag are cre ated in the metals
sent down this ramp by the powerful magnet beneath it. Nonmetals move on.
Other major applications of eddy currents are in meta l detectors and braking systems in trains and roller coasters. Portable metal
detectors (Figure) consist of a primary coil carryin g an alternating current and a secondary coil in whic h a current is
induced. An eddy current will be induced in a piece of metal close to the detector which will cause a chang e in the induced current
within the secondary coil, leading to some sort of signa l like a shrill noise.

8.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84041
Figure: A soldier in Iraq uses a metal detector to sear ch for explosives and weapons. (credit: U.S. Army).
Braking using eddy currents is safer because factors such as rain do not affect the braking and the brak ing is smoother. However,
eddy currents cannot bring the motion to a complete stop, since the force produced decreases with speed. Thus, speed can be
reduced from say 20 m/s to 5 m/s, but another form of b raking is needed to completely stop the vehicle. Genera lly, powerful rare
earth magnets such as neodymium magnets are used in roller coasters. Figure shows rows of magnets in such an application.
The vehicle has metal fins (normally containing cop per) which pass through the magnetic field slowing the vehicle down in much
the same way as with the pendulum bob shown in Figure.
Figure: The rows of rare earth magnets (protruding ho rizontally) are used for magnetic braking in roller coasters. (credit:
Stefan Scheer, Wikimedia Commons)
Induction cooktops have electromagnets under their s urface. The magnetic field is varied rapidly producin g eddy currents in the
base of the pot, causing the pot and its contents to in crease in temperature. Induction cooktops have high efficiencies and good
response times but the base of the pot needs to be ferrom agnetic, iron or steel for induction to work.
Summary
Current loops induced in moving conductors are called e ddy currents.
They can create significant drag, called magnetic dampin g.
Glossary
eddy current
a current loop in a conductor caused by motional emf
magnetic damping
the drag produced by eddy currents
This page titled 8.8: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.7: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840428.9: Electric Generators
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the emf induced in a generator.
Calculate the peak emf which can be induced in a particula r generator system.
Electric generators induce an emf by rotating a coil in a magnetic fiel d, as briefly discussed in "Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux."
We will now explore generators in more detail. Consider the f ollowing example.
The generator coil shown in Figure is rotated through one-fourth of a revolution (from to) in 15.0 ms. The
200-turn circular coil has a 5.00 cm radius and is in a uniform 1.25 T magnetic field. What is the average emf induced?
Figure: When this generator coil is rotated through o ne-fourth of a revolution, the magnetic flux chang es from its
maximum to zero, inducing an emf.
Strategy:
We use Faraday’s law of induction to find the average emf indu ced over a time:
We know that and, and so we must determine the change i n flux to find emf.
Solution:
Since the area of the loop and the magnetic field strength are constant, we see that
Now,, since it was given that goes from to. Thus, and
The area of the loop is. Entering this value givesLearning Objectives
Example: Calculating the Emf Induced in a Generator Coil

8.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84042Discussion:
This is a practical average value, similar to the 120 V used in household power.
The emf calculated in the example is the average ove r one-fourth of a revolution. What is the emf at any given instant? It varies
with the angle between the magnetic field and a perpe ndicular to the coil. We can get an expression for em f as a function of time by
considering the motional emf on a rotating rectangu lar coil of width and height in a uniform magnetic field, as illustrated in
Figure.
Figure: A generator with a single rectangular coil r otated at constant angular velocity in a uniform mag netic field produces an
emf that varies sinusoidally in time. Note the generat or is similar to a motor, except the shaft is rotated t o produce a current rather
than the other way around.
Charges in the wires of the loop experience the magnet ic force, because they are moving in a magnetic fiel d. Charges in the vertical
wires experience forces parallel to the wire, causing c urrents. But those in the top and bottom segments fe el a force perpendicular
to the wire, which does not cause a current. We can thu s find the induced emf by considering only the side wires. Motional emf is
given to be, where the velocity is perpendicular t o the magnetic field. Here the velocity is at an ang le with, so
that its component perpendicular to is (Figure). Th us in this case the emf induced on each side is, an d
they are in the same direction. The total emf around the l oop is then
This expression is valid, but it does not give emf as a function of time. To find the time dependence of e mf, we assume the coil
rotates at a constant angular velocity. The angle is related to angular velocity by, so that
Now, linear velovity is related to angular velocity by. Here, so that, and
Noting that the area of the loop is, and allowing for loop s, we find that
is the emf induced in a generator coil of turns and area rotating at a constant angular v elocity in a uniform magnetic field
. This can also be expressed as
where
is the maximum (peak) emf. Note that the frequency of the oscillation is, an d the period is. Figure
shows a graph of emf as a function of time, and it now seems re asonable that AC voltage is sinusoidal.

8.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84042
Figure:The emf of a generator is sent to a light bulb with the system of rings and brushes shown. The graph gi ves the emf of
the generator as a function of time. is the peak emf. The period is, where is the frequency. Note that the
script E stands for emf.
The fact that the peak emf,, makes good sense. The gr eater the number of coils, the larger their area, and the
stronger the field, the greater the output voltage. It is interesting that the faster the generator is s pun (greater ω), the greater the emf.
This is noticeable on bicycle generators—at least th e cheaper varieties. One of the authors as a juvenile found it amusing to ride his
bicycle fast enough to burn out his lights, until he had to ri de home lightless one dark night.
Figure shows a scheme by which a generator can be made t o produce pulsed DC. More elaborate arrangements of mul tiple coils
and split rings can produce smoother DC, although el ectronic rather than mechanical means are usually us ed to make ripple-free
DC.
Figure: Split rings, called commutators, produce a pulsed DC emf out put in this configuration.
Calculate the maximum emf, emf0, of the generator that was the subject of Example.
Strategy
Once, the angular velocity, is determined, can be used to find. All other quantities are known.
Solution
Angular velocity is defined to be the change in angle per unit time:
One-fourth of a revolution is radians, and the time is 0.0150 s; thus,Example: Calculating the Maximum Emf of a Generator

8.9.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84042104.7 rad/s is exactly 1000 rpm. We substitute this va lue for ω and the information from the previous exam ple into
, yielding
Discussion
The maximum emf is greater than the average emf of 13 1 V found in the previous example, as it should be.
In real life, electric generators look a lot differen t than the figures in this section, but the principles are the same. The source of
mechanical energy that turns the coil can be fallin g water (hydropower), steam produced by the burning of fossil fuels, or the
kinetic energy of wind. shows a cutaway view of a stea m turbine; steam moves over the blades connected to the shaft, which
rotates the coil within the generator.
Figure: Steam turbine/generator. The steam produced by burning coal impacts the turbine blades, turning t he shaft which is
connected to the generator. (credit: Nabonaco, Wiki media Commons)
Generators illustrated in this section look very much like the motors illustrated previously. This is not c oincidental. In fact, a motor
becomes a generator when its shaft rotates. Certain ea rly automobiles used their starter motor as a genera tor. In Back Emf, we shall
further explore the action of a motor as a generator.
Summary
An electric generator rotates a coil in a magnetic fiel d, inducing an emfgiven as a function of time by
where is the area of an -turn coil rotated at a constan t angular velocity ω in a uniform magnetic field.
The peak emf \(emf_0) of a generator is
Glossary
electric generator
a device for converting mechanical work into electric ene rgy; it induces an emf by rotating a coil in a magnetic fi eld
emf induced in a generator coil
, where is the area of an -turn coil rotated at a consta nt angular velocity in a uniform magnetic field,
over a period of time
peak emf
(emf_0=NABω\)0=NABω

8.9.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84042This page titled 8.9: Electric Generators is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.8: Electric Generators by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840438.10: Back Emf
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain what back emf is and how it is induced.
It has been noted that motors and generators are very similar. Generators convert mechanical energy into el ectrical energy, whereas
motors convert electrical energy into mechanical ene rgy. Furthermore, motors and generators have the sam e construction. When the
coil of a motor is turned, magnetic flux changes, and an emf (consistent with Faraday’s law of induction) is ind uced. The motor
thus acts as a generator whenever its coil rotates. T his will happen whether the shaft is turned by an extern al input, like a belt drive,
or by the action of the motor itself. That is, when a motor is doing work and its shaft is turning, an emf i s generated. Lenz’s law
tells us the emf opposes any change, so that the inpu t emf that powers the motor will be opposed by the mot or’s self-generated emf,
called the back emf of the motor. (See Figure 1.)
Figure: The coil of a DC motor is represented as a resi stor in this schematic. The back emf is represented as a variable emf
that opposes the one driving the motor. Back emf is ze ro when the motor is not turning, and it increases pro portionally to the
motor’s angular velocity.
Back emf is the generator output of a motor, and so i t is proportional to the motor’s angular velocity. I t is zero when the motor is
first turned on, meaning that the coil receives the f ull driving voltage and the motor draws maximum curr ent when it is on but not
turning. As the motor turns faster and faster, the back emf grows, always opposing the driving emf, and reduce s the voltage across
the coil and the amount of current it draws. This eff ect is noticeable in a number of situations. When a va cuum cleaner, refrigerator,
or washing machine is first turned on, lights in the same circuit dim briefly due to the drop produced in feeder lines by the large
current drawn by the motor. When a motor first comes on, it draws more current than when it runs at its no rmal operating speed.
When a mechanical load is placed on the motor, like an electric wheelchair going up a hill, the motor slo ws, the back emf drops,
more current flows, and more work can be done. If the mo tor runs at too low a speed, the larger current can overheat it (via
resistive power in the coil,), perhaps even burning it out. On the other hand, if there is no mechanical l oad on the motor, it
will increase its angular velocity until the back e mf is nearly equal to the driving emf. Then the motor uses only enough energy to
overcome friction.
Consider, for example, the motor coils represented in Figure 1. The coils have a equivalent resistance and a re driven by a
48.0 V emf. Shortly after being turned on, they draw a current and, thus, dissipate
of energy as heat transfer. Under normal operating co nditions for this motor, suppose the back emf is 40.0 V. Then at
operating speed, the total voltage across the coils i s 8.0 V (48.0 V minus the 40.0 V back emf), and the cu rrent drawn is
. Under normal load, then, the power dissipated is. The latter will not
cause a problem for this motor, whereas the former 5.76 kW wo uld burn out the coils if sustained.
Summary
Any rotating coil will have an induced emf—in motors, this is called back emf, since it opposes the emf input to the motor.
Glossary
back emfLearning Objectives

8.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84043the emf generated by a running motor, because it con sists of a coil turning in a magnetic field; it opposes the voltage powering
the motor
This page titled 8.10: Back Emf is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
23.9: Back Emf by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840448.11: Transformers
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how a transformer works.
Calculate voltage, current, and/or number of turns given th e other quantities.
Transformers do what their name implies—they transform voltages from one value to another (The term voltage is used rather
than emf, because transformers have internal resist ance). For example, many cell phones, laptops, video g ames, and power tools
and small appliances have a transformer built into t heir plug-in unit (like that in Figure) that change s 120 V or 240 V AC into
whatever voltage the device uses.
Figure: The plug-in transformer has become increasingl y familiar with the proliferation of electronic dev ices that operate on
voltages other than common 120 V AC. Most are in the 3 to 12 V range. (credit: Shop Xtreme)
Transformers are also used at several points in the power distribution systems, such as illustrated in Figure. Power is sent
long distances at high voltages, because less current is required for a given amount of power, and this mean s less line loss, as was
discussed previously. But high voltages pose greater hazards, so that transformers are employed to produce lower voltage at the
user’s location.
Figure: Transformers change voltages at several points i n a power distribution system. Electric power is usually generated at
greater than 10 kV, and transmitted long distances at voltages over 200 kV—sometimes as great as 700 kV—to lim it energy losses.
Local power distribution to neighborhoods or industrie s goes through a substation and is sent short distances at v oltages ranging
from 5 to 13 kV. This is reduced to 120, 240, or 480 V for safety at the individual user site.
The type of transformer considered in this text (Fig ure) is based on Faraday’s law of induction and is v ery similar in
construction to the apparatus Faraday used to demonstr ate magnetic fields could cause currents. The two co ils are called the
primary and secondary coils. In normal use, the input voltage is placed on the primary, and the secondary produces the transformed
output voltage. Not only does the iron core trap the magnetic field created by the primary coil, its mag netization increases the field
strength. Since the input voltage is AC, a time-varying ma gnetic flux is sent to the secondary, inducing its AC output voltage.Learning Objectives

8.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84044
Figure: A typical construction of a simple transformer has two coils wound on a ferromagnetic core that is l aminated to
minimize eddy currents. The magnetic field created b y the primary is mostly confined to and increased by t he core, which transmits
it to the secondary coil. Any change in current in t he primary induces a current in the secondary.
For the simple transformer shown in Figure, the outpu t voltage depends almost entirely on the input volt age and the
ratio of the number of loops in the primary and sec ondary coils. Faraday’s law of induction for the secon dary coil gives its induced
output voltage to be
where is the number of loops in the secondary coil and is the rate of change of magnetic flux. Note tha t the output
voltage equals the induced emf (), provided coil res istance is small (a reasonable assumption for transform ers). The
cross-sectional area of the coils is the same on eith er side, as is the magnetic field strength, and so i s the same on either
side. The input primary voltage is also related to chan ging flux by
The reason for this is a little more subtle. Lenz’s law tells us that the primary coil opposes the chan ge in flux caused by the input
voltage, hence the minus sign (This is an example o f self-inductance, a topic to be explored in some detail in later se ctions).
Assuming negligible coil resistance, Kirchhoff’s loop ru le tells us that the induced emf exactly equals the input voltage. Taking the
ratio of these last two equations yields a useful relationshi p:
This is known as the transformer equation, and it simply states that the ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a transformer
equals the ratio of the number of loops in their coils.
The output voltage of a transformer can be less than, greater than, or equal to the input voltage, dependi ng on the ratio of the
number of loops in their coils. Some transformers ev en provide a variable output by allowing connection to be made at different
points on the secondary coil. A step-up transformer is one that increases voltage, whereas a step-down transformer decreases
voltage. Assuming, as we have, that resistance is negligibl e, the electrical power output of a transformer equal s its input. This is
nearly true in practice—transformer efficiency often ex ceeds 99%. Equating the power input and output,
Rearranging terms gives
Combining this with Equation, we find that

8.11.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84044is the relationship between the output and input curr ents of a transformer. So if voltage increases, current decreases. Conversely, if
voltage decreases, current increases.
A portable x-ray unit has a step-up transformer, the 120 V input of which is transformed to the 100 kV out put needed by the xray tube. The primary has 50 loops and draws a curren t of 10.00 A when in use. (a) What is the number of lo ops in the
secondary? (b) Find the current output of the secondary.
Strategy and Solution for (a):
We solve Equation for, the number of loops in the sec ondary, and enter the known values. This gives
Discussion for (a):
A large number of loops in the secondary (compared wi th the primary) is required to produce such a large voltage. This would
be true for neon sign transformers and those supplying hi gh voltage inside TVs and CRTs.
Strategy and Solution for (b):
We can similarly find the output current of the seco ndary by solving Equation and and entering known v alues. This
gives
Discussion for (b):
As expected, the current output is significantly less than the input. In certain spectacular demonstration s, very large voltages
are used to produce long arcs, but they are relativ ely safe because the transformer output does not supp ly a large current. Note
that the power input here is
This equals the power output
as we assumed in the derivation of the equations used.
The fact that transformers are based on Faraday’s law o f induction makes it clear why we cannot use transforme rs to change DC
voltages. If there is no change in primary voltage, t here is no voltage induced in the secondary. One possibi lity is to connect DC to
the primary coil through a switch. As the switch is open ed and closed, the secondary produces a voltage like that in Figure.
This is not really a practical alternative, and AC is in c ommon use wherever it is necessary to increase or decrease voltages.Example: Calculating Characteristics of a Step-Up Transformer

8.11.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84044
Figure: Transformers do not work for pure DC voltage input, but if it is switched on and off as on the top graph, the output
will look something like that on the bottom graph. T his is not the sinusoidal AC most AC appliances need.
A battery charger meant for a series connection of t en nickel-cadmium batteries (total emf of 12.5 V DC) needs to have a 15.0
V output to charge the batteries. It uses a step-down transformer with a 200-loop primary and a 120 V inpu t. (a) How many
loops should there be in the secondary coil? (b) If the ch arging current is 16.0 A, what is the input current?
Strategy and Solution for (a):
You would expect the secondary to have a small number of loops. Solving Equation for and entering known values
gives
Strategy and Solution for (b):
The current input can be obtained by solving Equation for and entering known values. This gives
Discussion:
The number of loops in the secondary is small, as exp ected for a step-down transformer. We also see that a s mall input current
produces a larger output current in a step-down trans former. When transformers are used to operate large ma gnets, they
sometimes have a small number of very heavy loops in the secondary. This allows the secondary to have low i nternal resistance
and produce large currents. Note again that this soluti on is based on the assumption of 100% efficiency—or power out equals
power in ()-- reasonable for good transformers. In th is case the primary and secondary power is 240 W. (Veri fy this for
yourself as a consistency check.) Note that the Ni-Cd bat teries need to be charged from a DC power source (as wo uld a 12 V
battery). So the AC output of the secondary coil needs to be converted into DC. This is done using something c alled a rectifier,
which uses devices called diodes that allow only a one-way f low of current.
Transformers have many applications in electrical safet y systems, which are discussed in 23.9.
Generate electricity with a bar magnet! Discover the ph ysics behind the phenomena by exploring magnets and h ow you can
use them to make a bulb light.Example: Calculating Characteristics of a Step-Down Transformer
PHET EXPLORATIONS: GENERATOR

8.11.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84044
Figure: Generator
Summary
Transformers use induction to transform voltages from on e value to another.
For a transformer, the voltages across the primary and seco ndary coils are related by
where and are the voltages across primary and seconda ry coils having and turns.
The currents and in the primary and secondary coils are related by
A step-up transformer increases voltage and decreases current, whereas a step-down transformer decreases voltage a nd
increases current.
Glossary
transformer
a device that transforms voltages from one value to anoth er using induction
transformer equation
the equation showing that the ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a transformer equals the ratio of the number of loops
in their coils;
step-up transformer
a transformer that increases voltage
step-down transformer
a transformer that decreases voltage
This page titled 8.11: Transformers is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.10: Transformers by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840458.12: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how various modern safety features in electric circ uits work, with an emphasis on how induction is employed.
Electricity has two hazards. A thermal hazard occurs when there is electrical overheating. A shock hazard occurs when electric
current passes through a person. Both hazards have already been discussed. Here we will concentrate on syst ems and devices that
prevent electrical hazards.
Figure 1 shows the schematic for a simple AC circuit wit h no safety features. This is not how power is distribute d in practice.
Modern household and industrial wiring requires the three-wire system, shown schematically in Figure 2, which has several safet y
features. First is the familiar circuit breaker (or fuse) to prevent thermal overload. Second, there is a prot ective case around the
appliance, such as a toaster or refrigerator. The cas e’s safety feature is that it prevents a person from touching exposed wires and
coming into electrical contact with the circuit, helping p revent shocks.
Figure: Schematic of a simple AC circuit with a volt age source and a single appliance represented by the r esistance There
are no safety features in this circuit.
Figure: The three-wire system connects the neutral wir e to the earth at the voltage source and user locatio n, forcing it to be at
zero volts and supplying an alternative return path f or the current through the earth. Also grounded to z ero volts is the case of the
appliance. A circuit breaker or fuse protects against thermal overload and is in series on the active (live/ hot) wire. Note that wire
insulation colors vary with region and it is essential t o check locally to determine which color codes are i n use (and even if they
were followed in the particular installation).
There are three connections to earth or ground (hereafter referred to as “earth/ground”) shown in Fig ure 2. Recall that an
earth/ground connection is a low-resistance path dir ectly to the earth. The two earth/ground connections on the neutral wire force it
to be at zero volts relative to the earth, giving t he wire its name. This wire is therefore safe to touch e ven if its insulation, usually
white, is missing. The neutral wire is the return pat h for the current to follow to complete the circuit. Furthermore, the two
earth/ground connections supply an alternative path through the earth, a good conductor, to complete t he circuit. The earth/ground
connection closest to the power source could be at t he generating plant, while the other is at the user’s location. The third
earth/ground is to the case of the appliance, throug h the green earth/ground wire, forcing the case, too, to be at zero volts. The live
or hot wire (hereafter referred to as “live/hot”) supplies volta ge and current to operate the appliance. Figure 3 sho ws a more
pictorial version of how the three-wire system is connect ed through a three-prong plug to an appliance.Learning Objectives

8.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84045
Figure: The standard three-prong plug can only be in serted in one way, to assure proper function of the th ree-wire system.
A note on insulation color-coding: Insulating plast ic is color-coded to identify live/hot, neutral and ground wires but these codes
vary around the world. Live/hot wires may be brown, red, black, blue or grey. Neutral wire may be blue, black o r white. Since the
same color may be used for live/hot or neutral in d ifferent parts of the world, it is essential to determ ine the color code in your
region. The only exception is the earth/ground wire which is often green but may be yellow or just bare wir e. Striped coatings are
sometimes used for the benefit of those who are colorblind.
The three-wire system replaced the older two-wire syste m, which lacks an earth/ground wire. Under ordinary circu mstances,
insulation on the live/hot and neutral wires prevents the case from being directly in the circuit, so that the earth/ground wire may
seem like double protection. Grounding the case solv es more than one problem, however. The simplest problem is worn insulation
on the live/hot wire that allows it to contact the case, as shown in Figure 4 Lacking an earth/ground connect ion (some people cut
the third prong off the plug because they only have outdated two hole receptacles), a severe shock is pos sible. This is particularly
dangerous in the kitchen, where a good connection to e arth/ground is available through water on the floor or a water faucet. With
the earth/ground connection intact, the circuit bre aker will trip, forcing repair of the appliance. Why are some appliances still sold
with two-prong plugs? These have nonconducting cases, such as power tools with impact resistant plastic cases, an d are called
doubly insulated. Modern two-prong plugs can be inserted into the asym metric standard outlet in only one way, to ensure pro per
connection of live/hot and neutral wires.

8.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84045
Figure: Worn insulation allows the live/hot wire to c ome into direct contact with the metal case of this a ppliance. (a) The
earth/ground connection being broken, the person is se verely shocked. The appliance may operate normally i n this situation. (b)
With a proper earth/ground, the circuit breaker tri ps, forcing repair of the appliance.
Electromagnetic induction causes a more subtle prob lem that is solved by grounding the case. The AC curr ent in appliances can
induce an emf on the case. If grounded, the case volt age is kept near zero, but if the case is not ground ed, a shock can occur as
pictured in Figure 5 Current driven by the induced c ase emf is called a leakage current, although current does not necessarily pass
from the resistor to the case.
Figure: AC currents can induce an emf on the case of an appliance. The voltage can be large enough to ca use a shock. If the
case is grounded, the induced emf is kept near zero.
A ground fault interrupter (GFI) is a safety device found in updated kitchen an d bathroom wiring that works based on
electromagnetic induction. GFIs compare the currents in the live/hot and neutral wires. When live/hot and neu tral currents are not
equal, it is almost always because current in the neu tral is less than in the live/hot wire. Then some of t he current, again called a
leakage current, is returning to the voltage source by a path other than through the neutral wire. It is assumed that this path presents
a hazard, such as shown in Figure 6. GFIs are usually set t o interrupt the circuit if the leakage current is gr eater than 5 mA, the

8.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84045accepted maximum harmless shock. Even if the leakage current goes safely to earth/ground through an intac t earth/ground wire, the
GFI will trip, forcing repair of the leakage.
Figure: A ground fault interrupter (GFI) compares th e currents in the live/hot and neutral wires and will trip if their difference
exceeds a safe value. The leakage current here follow s a hazardous path that could have been prevented by an intact earth/ground
wire.
Figure 7 shows how a GFI works. If the currents in the liv e/hot and neutral wires are equal, then they induce e qual and opposite
emfs in the coil. If not, then the circuit breaker will tr ip.
Figure:A GFI compares currents by using both to induce an emf in the same coil. If the currents are equal, t hey will induce
equal but opposite emfs.
Another induction-based safety device is the isolation transformer, shown in Figure 8. Most isolation transformers have equal input
and output voltages. Their function is to put a large resistance between the original voltage source and t he device being operated.
This prevents a complete circuit between them, even i n the circumstance shown. There is a complete circuit th rough the appliance.
But there is not a complete circuit for current to flow through the person in the figure, who is touchin g only one of the
transformer’s output wires, and neither output wire is grounded. The appliance is isolated from the origina l voltage source by the
high resistance of the material between the transfor mer coils, hence the name isolation transformer. For current to flow through the
person, it must pass through the high-resistance mate rial between the coils, through the wire, the person, and back through the earth
—a path with such a large resistance that the current is ne gligible.
Figure: An isolation transformer puts a large resistance between the original voltage source and the device, preventing a
complete circuit between them.
The basics of electrical safety presented here help p revent many electrical hazards. Electrical safety can b e pursued to greater
depths. There are, for example, problems related to d ifferent earth/ground connections for appliances in cl ose proximity. Many
other examples are found in hospitals. Microshock-sensit ive patients, for instance, require special protecti on. For these people,

8.12.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84045currents as low as 0.1 mA may cause ventricular fibr illation. The interested reader can use the materia l presented here as a basis for
further study.
Summary
Electrical safety systems and devices are employed to preve nt thermal and shock hazards.
Circuit breakers and fuses interrupt excessive current s to prevent thermal hazards.
The three-wire system guards against thermal and shock h azards, utilizing live/hot, neutral, and earth/ground wires, and
grounding the neutral wire and case of the appliance.
A ground fault interrupter (GFI) prevents shock by detect ing the loss of current to unintentional paths.
An isolation transformer insulates the device being power ed from the original source, also to prevent shock.
Many of these devices use induction to perform their basi c function.
Glossary
thermal hazard
the term for electrical hazards due to overheating
shock hazard
the term for electrical hazards due to current passing th rough a human
three-wire system
the wiring system used at present for safety reasons, with li ve, neutral, and ground wire
This page titled 8.12: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
23.11: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.13.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840468.13: Inductance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the inductance of an inductor.
Calculate the energy stored in an inductor.
Calculate the emf generated in an inductor.
Inductors
Induction is the process in which an emf is induced b y changing magnetic flux. Many examples have been di scussed so far, some
more effective than others. Transformers, for example, a re designed to be particularly effective at inducin g a desired voltage and
current with very little loss of energy to other for ms. Is there a useful physical quantity related to h ow “effective” a given device is?
The answer is yes, and that physical quantity is called indu ctance.
Mutual inductance is the effect of Faraday’s law of ind uction for one device upon another, such as the prima ry coil in transmitting
energy to the secondary in a transformer. See Figure, where simple coils induce emfs in one another.
Figure: These coils can induce emfs in one another lik e an inefficient transformer. Their mutual inductanc e M indicates the
effectiveness of the coupling between them. Here a ch ange in current in coil 1 is seen to induce an emf in coil 2. (Note that "
induced" represents the induced emf in coil 2.)
In the many cases where the geometry of the devices is f ixed, flux is changed by varying current. We therefore concentrate on the
rate of change of current,, as the cause of inductio n. A change in the current in one device, coil 1 in the figure, induces an
in the other. We express this in equation form as
where is defined to be the mutual inductance between the two devices. The minus sign is an expression of Lenz’s law. The larger
the mutual inductance, the more effective the coup ling. For example, the coils in Figure have a small compared with the
transformer coils in [link]. Units for are (V\cdot s)/A = \Omega \cdot s\), which is named a henry (H), after Joseph Henry. That
is,.
Nature is symmetric here. If we change the current in coil 2, we induce an in coil 1, which is given by
where is the same as for the reverse process. Transformer s run backward with the same effectiveness, or mutual induc tance.Learning Objectives

8.13.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84046A large mutual inductance may or may not be desirab le. We want a transformer to have a large mutual ind uctance. But an
appliance, such as an electric clothes dryer, can in duce a dangerous emf on its case if the mutual induct ance between its coils and
the case is large. One way to reduce mutual inductance is to counterwind coils to cancel the magnetic field produced. (See
Figure.)
Figure: The heating coils of an electric clothes dryer can be counter-wound so that their magnetic fields c ancel one another,
greatly reducing the mutual inductance with the case of the dryer.
Self-inductance, the effect of Faraday’s law of induct ion of a device on itself, also exists. When, for exa mple, current through a coil
is increased, the magnetic field and flux also increa se, inducing a counter emf, as required by Lenz’s law. Conversely, if the current
is decreased, an emf is induced that opposes the decre ase. Most devices have a fixed geometry, and so the cha nge in flux is due
entirely to the change in current through the devi ce. The induced emf is related to the physical geome try of the device and the
rate of change of current. It is given by
where is the self-inductance of the device. A device that exhibits significant self-inductance is called an inductor, and given the
symbol in Figure.
Figure:
The minus sign is an expression of Lenz’s law, indi cating that emf opposes the change in current. Units of self-inductance are
henries (H) just as for mutual inductance. The larger the self-inductance of a device, the greater its o pposition to any change in
current through it. For example, a large coil with ma ny turns and an iron core has a large and will not a llow current to change
quickly. To avoid this effect, a smal must be achieved, such as by counterwinding coils as in Figure.
A 1 H inductor is a large inductor. To illustrate th is, consider a device with that has a 10 A current fl owing through it.
What happens if we try to shut off the current rapidl y, perhaps in only 1.0 ms? An emf, given by, will oppose
the change. Thus an emf will be induced given by. The positive sign

8.13.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84046means this large voltage is in the same direction as the current, opposing its decrease. Such large emfs ca n cause arcs, damaging
switching equipment, and so it may be necessary to chan ge current more slowly.
There are uses for such a large induced voltage. Cam era flashes use a battery, two inductors that functio n as a transformer, and a
switching system or oscillator to induce large voltag es. (Remember that we need a changing magnetic field, brought about by a
changing current, to induce a voltage in another co il.) The oscillator system will do this many times as the battery voltage is
boosted to over one thousand volts. (You may hear the high pitched whine from the transformer as the capa citor is being charged.)
A capacitor stores the high voltage for later use in power ing the flash. (See Figure.)
Figure: Through rapid switching of an inductor, 1.5 V batteries can be used to induce emfs of several thousa nd volts. This
voltage can be used to store charge in a capacitor fo r later use, such as in a camera flash attachment.
It is possible to calculate for an inductor given i ts geometry (size and shape) and knowing the magnetic f ield that it produces.
This is difficult in most cases, because of the comp lexity of the field created. So in this text the indu ctance is usually a given
quantity. One exception is the solenoid, because it ha s a very uniform field inside, a nearly zero field outside, and a simple shape. It
is instructive to derive an equation for its inducta nce. We start by noting that the induced emf is give n by Faraday’s law of
induction as and, by the definition of self-inductance, as. Equating these yields
Solving for gives
This equation for the self-inductance of a device i s always valid. It means that self-inductance depend s on how effective the
current is in creating flux; the more effective, the gre ater is.
Let us use this last equation to find an expression fo r the inductance of a solenoid. Since the area of a solenoid is fixed, the
change in flux is. To find, we note that the magne tic field of a solenoid is given by.
(Here, where is the number of coils and is the solen oid’s length.) Only the current changes, so that
. Substituting into gives
This simplifies to

8.13.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84046This is the self-inductance of a solenoid of cross-sect ional area and length. Note that the inductance de pends only on the
physical characteristics of the solenoid, consistent with its de finition.
Calculate the self-inductance of a 10.0 cm long, 4.00 cm diameter solenoid that has 200 coils.
Strategy
This is a straightforward application of, since all quant ities in the equation except are known.
Solution
Use the following expression for the self-inductance of a solenoid:
The cross-sectional area in this example is, is given to be 200, and the length
is 0.100 m. We know the permeability of free space i s. Substituting these into the expression for
gives
Discussion
This solenoid is moderate in size. Its inductance of nearly a m illihenry is also considered moderate.
One common application of inductance is used in traff ic lights that can tell when vehicles are waiting at the intersection. An
electrical circuit with an inductor is placed in the road under the place a waiting car will stop over. Th e body of the car increases the
inductance and the circuit changes sending a signal to the traffic lights to change colors. Similarly, meta l detectors used for airport
security employ the same technique. A coil or induct or in the metal detector frame acts as both a transm itter and a receiver. The
pulsed signal in the transmitter coil induces a sign al in the receiver. The self-inductance of the circui t is affected by any metal
object in the path. Such detectors can be adjusted for sensitivity and also can indicate the approximate loc ation of metal found on a
person. (But they will not be able to detect any plastic explosive such as that found on the “underwear bomber.”) See Figure.Example: Calculating the Self-inductance of a Moderate Size Solenoid

8.13.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84046
Figure: The familiar security gate at an airport can not only detect metals but also indicate their appro ximate height above the
floor. (credit: Alexbuirds, Wikimedia Commons)
Energy Stored in an Inductor
We know from Lenz’s law that inductances oppose chang es in current. There is an alternative way to look at this opposition that is
based on energy. Energy is stored in a magnetic field. It takes time to build up energy, and it also takes time to deplete energy;
hence, there is an opposition to rapid change. In an i nductor, the magnetic field is directly proportional to current and to the
inductance of the device. It can be shown that the energy stored in an inductor is given by
This expression is similar to that for the energy stored i n a capacitor.
How much energy is stored in the 0.632 mH inductor of the preced ing example when a 30.0 A current flows through it?
Strategy
The energy is given by the equation, and all quantities e xcept are known.
Solution
Substituting the value for found in the previous example a nd the given current into gives
Discussion
This amount of energy is certainly enough to cause a spark if the current is suddenly switched off. It cann ot be built up
instantaneously unless the power input is infinite.Example: Calculating the Energy Stored in the Field of a Solenoid

8.13.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84046Summary
Inductance is the property of a device that tells how effect ively it induces an emf in another device.
Mutual inductance is the effect of two devices in inducin g emfs in each other.
A change in current in one induces an in the second:
where is defined to be the mutual inductance between t he two devices, and the minus sign is due to Lenz’s law.
Symmetrically, a change in current through the second d evice induces an in the first:
where is the same mutual inductance as in the reverse process.
Current changes in a device induce an emf in the devic e itself.
Self-inductance is the effect of the device inducing emf i n itself.
The device is called an inductor, and the emf induced in i t by a change in current through it is
where is the self-inductance of the inductor, and is the rate of change of current through it. The minus sign i ndicates
that emf opposes the change in current, as required by Lenz’ s law.
The unit of self- and mutual inductance is the henry (H), whe re
The self-inductance of an inductor is proportional to ho w much flux changes with current. For an N-turn inductor,
The self-inductance of a solenoid is
where is its number of turns in the solenoid, is its cro ss-sectional area, is its length, and is the
permeability of free space.
The energy stored in an inductor is
Glossary
inductance
a property of a device describing how efficient it is at in ducing emf in another device
mutual inductance
how effective a pair of devices are at inducing emfs in each other
henry
the unit of inductance;
self-inductance
how effective a device is at inducing emf in itself
inductor
a device that exhibits significant self-inductance
energy stored in an inductor

8.13.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84046self-explanatory; calculated by
Contributors
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State Un iversity, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State Universit y of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univers ity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 8.13: Inductance is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
23.12: Inductance by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

8.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840478.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies (Exercise)
Conceptual Questions
23.1 Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
1. How do the multiple-loop coils and iron ring in the version of Faraday’s apparatus shown in Figure enhance the
observation of induced emf?
2. When a magnet is thrust into a coil as in Figure(a), what is the direction of the force exerted by the c oil on the magnet?
Draw a diagram showing the direction of the current in duced in the coil and the magnetic field it produce s, to justify your
response. How does the magnitude of the force depend on the r esistance of the galvanometer?
3. Explain how magnetic flux can be zero when the magnetic field is not zero.
4. Is an emf induced in the coil in Figure when it is stretched? If so, state why and give the direction of the induced cu rrent.
A circular coil of wire is stretched in a magnetic field.
23.2 Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s Law
5. A person who works with large magnets sometimes places her head inside a strong field. She reports feeling di zzy as she
quickly turns her head. How might this be associated with induc tion?
6. A particle accelerator sends high-velocity charged particles down an evacuated pipe. Explain how a coil of wire wrapped
around the pipe could detect the passage of individu al particles. Sketch a graph of the voltage output of the coil as a single
particle passes through it.
23.3 Motional Emf
7. Why must part of the circuit be moving relative to other parts, to have usable motional emf? Consider, f or example, that
the rails in Figure are stationary relative to the magn etic field, while the rod moves.

8.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047
8. A powerful induction cannon can be made by placing a metal cylinder inside a solenoid coil. The cylinder is forcefully
expelled when solenoid current is turned on rapidly. Use Faraday’s and Lenz’s laws to explain how this works. W hy might
the cylinder get live/hot when the cannon is fired?
9. An induction stove heats a pot with a coil carrying a n alternating current located beneath the pot (and wi thout a hot
surface). Can the stove surface be a conductor? Why won’t a coi l carrying a direct current work?
10. Explain how you could thaw out a frozen water pipe b y wrapping a coil carrying an alternating current ar ound it. Does it
matter whether or not the pipe is a conductor? Explain.
23.4 Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
11. Explain why magnetic damping might not be effective on an object made of several thin conducting layers separated by
insulation.
12. Explain how electromagnetic induction can be used to detect metals? This technique is particularly import ant in detecting
buried landmines for disposal, geophysical prospecting a nd at airports.
23.5 Electric Generators
13. Using RHR-1, show that the emfs in the sides of the generator loop in Figure are in the same sense and thus add.
14. The source of a generator’s electrical energy outpu t is the work done to turn its coils. How is the work nee ded to turn the
generator related to Lenz’s law?
23.6 Back Emf
15. Suppose you find that the belt drive connecting a po werful motor to an air conditioning unit is broken a nd the motor is
running freely. Should you be worried that the motor is consuming a great deal of energy for no useful pur pose? Explain why
or why not.

8.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8404723.7 Transformers
16. Explain what causes physical vibrations in transformers at twice the frequency of the AC power involved.
23.8 Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
17. Does plastic insulation on live/hot wires prevent shock haz ards, thermal hazards, or both?
18. Why are ordinary circuit breakers and fuses ineffective in p reventing shocks?
19. A GFI may trip just because the live/hot and neutral wires connected to it are significantly different i n length. Explain
why.
23.9 Inductance
20. How would you place two identical flat coils in contact so th at they had the greatest mutual inductance? The least?
21. How would you shape a given length of wire to give it th e greatest self-inductance? The least?
22. Verify, as was concluded without proof in Example, that u nits of.
23.11 Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
23. Presbycusis is a hearing loss due to age that progre ssively affects higher frequencies. A hearing aid am plifier is designed
to amplify all frequencies equally. To adjust its o utput for presbycusis, would you put a capacitor in series or parallel with the
hearing aid’s speaker? Explain.
24. Would you use a large inductance or a large capacit ance in series with a system to filter out low frequen cies, such as the
100 Hz hum in a sound system? Explain.
25. High-frequency noise in AC power can damage computers. Does the plug-in unit designed to prevent this dama ge use a
large inductance or a large capacitance (in series with the computer) to filter out such high frequencies? Explai n.
26. Does inductance depend on current, frequency, or both? Wh at about inductive reactance?
27. Explain why the capacitor in Figure(a) acts as a low-fr equency filter between the two circuits, whereas that in Figure(b)
acts as a high-frequency filter.
Capacitors and inductors. Capacitor with high frequenc y and low frequency.
28. If the capacitors in Figure are replaced by inductor s, which acts as a low-frequency filter and which as a hi gh-frequency
filter?
23.12 RLC Series AC Circuits
29. Does the resonant frequency of an AC circuit depend on th e peak voltage of the AC source? Explain why or why not.
30. Suppose you have a motor with a power factor significan tly less than 1. Explain why it would be better to im prove the
power factor as a method of improving the motor’s outpu t, rather than to increase the voltage input.

8.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047Problems & Exercises
23.1 Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
31. What is the value of the magnetic flux at coil 2 in Figure due to coil 1?
(a) The planes of the two coils are perpendicular. (b) The wi re is perpendicular to the plane of the coil.
Solution
Zero
32. What is the value of the magnetic flux through the coi l in Figure(b) due to the wire?
23.2 Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s Law
33. Referring to Figure(a), what is the direction of the cu rrent induced in coil 2:
(a) If the current in coil 1 increases?
(b) If the current in coil 1 decreases?
(c) If the current in coil 1 is constant? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Stra tegy for
Lenz's Law.
(a) The coils lie in the same plane. (b) The wire is in the plane of the coil
Solution
(a) CCW
(b) CW
(c) No current induced
34. Referring to Figure(b), what is the direction of the curren t induced in the coil:
(a) If the current in the wire increases?
(b) If the current in the wire decreases?

8.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047(c) If the current in the wire suddenly changes dire ction? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Pr oblemSolving Strategy for Lenz’s Law.
35. Referring to Figure, what are the directions of the cur rents in coils 1, 2, and 3 (assume that the coils are lying in the plane
of the circuit):
(a) When the switch is first closed?
(b) When the switch has been closed for a long time?
(c) Just after the switch is opened?
Solution
(a) 1 CCW, 2 CCW, 3 CW
(b) 1, 2, and 3 no current induced
(c) 1 CW, 2 CW, 3 CCW
36. Repeat the previous problem with the battery reversed.
37. Verify that the units of are volts. That is, show that.
38. Suppose a 50-turn coil lies in the plane of the page in a uniform magnetic field that is directed into th e page. The coil
originally has an area of. It is stretched to have n o area in 0.100 s. What is the direction and magnitud e of the
induced emf if the uniform magnetic field has a strength of 1.50 T?
39. (a) An MRI technician moves his hand from a region o f very low magnetic field strength into an MRI scanner ’s 2.00 T
field with his fingers pointing in the direction of the field. Find the average emf induced in his weddin g ring, given its
diameter is 2.20 cm and assuming it takes 0.250 s to move it into the field. (b) Discuss whether this curre nt would
significantly change the temperature of the ring.
Solution
(a) 3.04 mV
(b) As a lower limit on the ring, estimate R = 1.00 mΩ. T he heat transferred will be 2.31 mJ. This is not a si gnificant
amount of heat.
40. Integrated Concepts
Referring to the situation in the previous problem:
(a) What current is induced in the ring if its resistanc e is 0.0100?
(b) What average power is dissipated?
(c) What magnetic field is induced at the center of the ring? (d) What is the direction of the induced magnetic
field relative to the MRI’s field?
41. An emf is induced by rotating a 1000-turn, 20.0 cm di ameter coil in the Earth’s magnetic field. What
average emf is induced, given the plane of the coil i s originally perpendicular to the Earth’s field and is rotated to be parallel

8.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047to the field in 10.0 ms?
Solution
0.157 V
42. A 0.250 m radius, 500-turn coil is rotated one-fourt h of a revolution in 4.17 ms, originally having its pl ane perpendicular
to a uniform magnetic field. (This is 60 rev/s.) Find the m agnetic field strength needed to induce an average emf of 10,000 V.
43. Integrated Concepts
Approximately how does the emf induced in the loop in Figure(b) depend on the distance of the center of the loop
from the wire?
Solution
proportional to
44. Integrated Concepts
(a) A lightning bolt produces a rapidly varying magn etic field. If the bolt strikes the earth vertically and acts like a
current in a long straight wire, it will induce a volt age in a loop aligned like that in Figure(b). What vo ltage is induced
in a 1.00 m diameter loop 50.0 m from a lightning strike, if the current falls to zero in?
(b) Discuss circumstances under which such a voltage would pro duce noticeable consequences.
23.3 Motional Emf
45. Use Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, and RHR-1 to show that t he magnetic force on the current in the moving rod i n Figure is
in the opposite direction of its velocity.
46. If a current flows in the Satellite Tether shown in Fi gure, use Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, and RHR-1 to show t hat there is
a magnetic force on the tether in the direction opposit e to its velocity.

8.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8404747. (a) A jet airplane with a 75.0 m wingspan is flying at 280 m/s. What emf is induced between wing tips if t he vertical
component of the Earth’s field is?
(b) Is an emf of this magnitude likely to have any conseq uences? Explain.
Solution
(a) 0.630 V
(b) No, this is a very small emf.
48. (a) A nonferrous screwdriver is being used in a 2.00 T magnetic field. What maximum emf can be induced al ong its 12.0
cm length when it moves at 6.00 m/s?
(b) Is it likely that this emf will have any consequences or even be noticed?
49. At what speed must the sliding rod in Figure move to pr oduce an emf of 1.00 V in a 1.50 T field, given the rod’s length is
30.0 cm?
Solution
2.22 m/s
50. The 12.0 cm long rod in Figure moves at 4.00 m/s. What is the st rength of the magnetic field if a 95.0 V emf is induced?
51. Prove that when and are not mutually perpendicular, motional emf is given by. If is perpendicular
to, then is the angle between and. If is perpendic ular to, then is the angle between and.
52. In the August 1992 space shuttle flight, only 250 m of the conducting tether considered in Example coul d be let out. A
40.0 V motional emf was generated in the Earth’s fie ld, while moving at. What was the angle
between the shuttle’s velocity and the Earth’s field, assu ming the conductor was perpendicular to the field?
53. Integrated Concepts
Derive an expression for the current in a system like that in Figure, under the following conditions. The r esistance
between the rails is, the rails and the moving rod ar e identical in cross section and have the same resist ivity. The
distance between the rails is, and the rod moves at constant speed perpendicular to the uniform field. At time ze ro,
the moving rod is next to the resistance.
54. Integrated Concepts
The Tethered Satellite in Figure has a mass of 525 kg and is at the end of a 20.0 km long, 2.50 mm diamet er cable with
the tensile strength of steel.

8.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047(a) How much does the cable stretch if a 100 N force i s exerted to pull the satellite in? (Assume the satell ite and
shuttle are at the same altitude above the Earth.)
(b) What is the effective force constant of the cable?
(c) How much energy is stored in it when stretched by the 100 N force?
55. Integrated Concepts
The Tethered Satellite discussed in this module is producin g 5.00 kV, and a current of 10.0 A flows.
(a) What magnetic drag force does this produce if the syst em is moving at 7.80 km/s?
(b) How much kinetic energy is removed from the system in 1.00 h, neglecting any change in altitude or vel ocity
during that time?
(c) What is the change in velocity if the mass of the system is 100,000 kg?
(d) Discuss the long term consequences (say, a week-lon g mission) on the space shuttle’s orbit, noting what
effect a decrease in velocity has and assessing the magnit ude of the effect.
Solution
(a) 10.0 N
(b)
(c) 0.36 m/s
(d) For a week-long mission (168 hours), the change i n velocity will be 60 m/s, or approximately 1%. In g eneral, a
decrease in velocity would cause the orbit to start spiraling inward because the velocity would no longer be sufficient
to keep the circular orbit. The long-term consequen ces are that the shuttle would require a little more fuel to maintain
the desired speed, otherwise the orbit would spiral sligh tly inward.
23.4 Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
56. Make a drawing similar to Figure, but with the pendulum moving in the opposite direction. Then use Faraday’ s law,
Lenz’s law, and RHR-1 to show that magnetic force opposes mo tion.
A coil is moved into and out of a region of uniform magnetic fi eld.
57. A coil is moved through a magnetic field as shown in Figure. The field is uniform inside the rectangle an d zero outside.
What is the direction of the induced current and wha t is the direction of the magnetic force on the coil at each position
shown?
23.5 Electric Generators
58. Calculate the peak voltage of a generator that rotates its 200-turn, 0.100 m diameter coil at 3600 rpm in a 0.800 T field.
Solution
474 V
59. At what angular velocity in rpm will the peak voltage of a generator be 480 V, if its 500-turn, 8.00 cm d iameter coil
rotates in a 0.250 T field?
60. What is the peak emf generated by rotating a 1000- turn, 20.0 cm diameter coil in the Earth’s magnetic field,
given the plane of the coil is originally perpendicular t o the Earth’s field and is rotated to be parallel to the fie ld in 10.0 ms?
Solution
0.247 V

8.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8404761. What is the peak emf generated by a 0.250 m radius, 5 00-turn coil is rotated one-fourth of a revolution i n 4.17 ms,
originally having its plane perpendicular to a unifo rm magnetic field. (This is 60 rev/s.)
62. (a) A bicycle generator rotates at 1875 rad/s, prod ucing an 18.0 V peak emf. It has a 1.00 by 3.00 cm rec tangular coil in a
0.640 T field. How many turns are in the coil?
(b) Is this number of turns of wire practical for a 1.00 by 3. 00 cm coil?
Solution
(a) 50
(b) yes
63. Integrated Concepts
This problem refers to the bicycle generator consider ed in the previous problem. It is driven by a 1.60 c m diameter
wheel that rolls on the outside rim of the bicycle tire.
(a) What is the velocity of the bicycle if the generat or’s angular velocity is 1875 rad/s?
(b) What is the maximum emf of the generator when the bicycle moves at 10.0 m/s, noting that it was 18.0 V
under the original conditions?
(c) If the sophisticated generator can vary its own magnetic field, what field strength will it need at 5.00 m/s to
produce a 9.00 V maximum emf?
64. (a) A car generator turns at 400 rpm when the engin e is idling. Its 300-turn, 5.00 by 8.00 cm rectangula r coil rotates in an
adjustable magnetic field so that it can produce suff icient voltage even at low rpms. What is the field str ength needed to
produce a 24.0 V peak emf?
(b) Discuss how this required field strength compares to tho se available in permanent and electromagnets.
Solution
(a) 0.477 T
(b) This field strength is small enough that it can be ob tained using either a permanent magnet or an electromagn et.
65. Show that if a coil rotates at an angular velocity, the per iod of its AC output is.
66. A 75-turn, 10.0 cm diameter coil rotates at an angu lar velocity of 8.00 rad/s in a 1.25 T field, starting with the plane of the
coil parallel to the field.
(a) What is the peak emf?
(b) At what time is the peak emf first reached?
(c) At what time is the emf first at its most negative?
(d) What is the period of the AC voltage output?
Solution
(a) 5.89 V
(b) At t=0
(c) 0.393 s
(d) 0.785 s
67. (a) If the emf of a coil rotating in a magnetic fi eld is zero at, and increases to its first peak at, wha t is
the angular velocity of the coil?
(b) At what time will its next maximum occur?
(c) What is the period of the output?
(d) When is the output first one-fourth of its maximum?
(e) When is it next one-fourth of its maximum?

8.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8404768. Unreasonable Results
A 500-turn coil with a area is spun in the Earth’s field, producing a 12.0 kV maximum emf.
(a) At what angular velocity must the coil be spun?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
Solution
(a)
(b) This angular velocity is unreasonably high, higher t han can be obtained for any mechanical system.
(c) The assumption that a voltage as great as 12.0 kV co uld be obtained is unreasonable.
23.6 Back Emf
69. Suppose a motor connected to a 120 V source draws 10.0 A when it first starts.
(a) What is its resistance?
(b) What current does it draw at its normal operating sp eed when it develops a 100 V back emf?
Solution
(a) 12.00 Ω
(b) 1.67 A
70. A motor operating on 240 V electricity has a 180 V back emf at operating speed and draws a 12.0 A curren t. (a) What is
its resistance? (b) What current does it draw when it is fi rst started?
71. What is the back emf of a 120 V motor that draws 8.00 A at its normal speed and 20.0 A when first starting?
Solution
72.0 V
72. The motor in a toy car operates on 6.00 V, developin g a 4.50 V back emf at normal speed. If it draws 3.0 0 A at normal
speed, what current does it draw when starting?
73. Integrated Concepts
The motor in a toy car is powered by four batteries i n series, which produce a total emf of 6.00 V. The mot or draws
3.00 A and develops a 4.50 V back emf at normal spee d. Each battery has a internal resistance. What is th e
resistance of the motor?
Solution
0.100 Ω
23.7 Transformers
74. A plug-in transformer, like that in Figure, supplies 9.00 V to a video game system.
(a) How many turns are in its secondary coil, if its input v oltage is 120 V and the primary coil has 400 turns?
(b) What is its input current when its output is 1.30 A?
Solution
(a) 30.0
(b)
75. An American traveler in New Zealand carries a transforme r to convert New Zealand’s standard 240 V to 120 V so that
she can use some small appliances on her trip.
(a) What is the ratio of turns in the primary and secondar y coils of her transformer?
(b) What is the ratio of input to output current?

8.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047(c) How could a New Zealander traveling in the United Sta tes use this same transformer to power her 240 V applia nces
from 120 V?
76. A cassette recorder uses a plug-in transformer to conv ert 120 V to 12.0 V, with a maximum current output of 200 mA.
(a) What is the current input?
(b) What is the power input?
(c) Is this amount of power reasonable for a small applianc e?
Solution
(a) 20.0 mA
(b) 2.40 W
(c) Yes, this amount of power is quite reasonable for a s mall appliance.
77. (a) What is the voltage output of a transformer used for rechargeable flashlight batteries, if its prima ry has 500 turns, its
secondary 4 turns, and the input voltage is 120 V?
(b) What input current is required to produce a 4.00 A ou tput? (c) What is the power input?
78. (a) The plug-in transformer for a laptop computer p uts out 7.50 V and can supply a maximum current of 2.00 A. What is
the maximum input current if the input voltage is 240 V? Assume 100% efficiency.
(b) If the actual efficiency is less than 100%, would t he input current need to be greater or smaller? Explain.
Solution
(a) 0.063 A
(b) Greater input current needed.
79. A multipurpose transformer has a secondary coil with se veral points at which a voltage can be extracted, giv ing outputs
of 5.60, 12.0, and 480 V.
(a) The input voltage is 240 V to a primary coil of 280 turns. What are the numbers of turns in the part s of the
secondary used to produce the output voltages?
(b) If the maximum input current is 5.00 A, what are the max imum output currents (each used alone)?
80. A large power plant generates electricity at 12.0 kV. I ts old transformer once converted the voltage to 335 kV. The
secondary of this transformer is being replaced so that its output can be 750 kV for more efficient cro ss-country transmission
on upgraded transmission lines.
(a) What is the ratio of turns in the new secondary compared with the old secondary?
(b) What is the ratio of new current output to old output (at 335 kV) for the same power?
(c) If the upgraded transmission lines have the same resis tance, what is the ratio of new line power loss to old?
Solution
(a) 2.2
(b) 0.45
(c) 0.20, or 20.0%
81. If the power output in the previous problem is 1000 MW and line resistance is, what were the old and ne w line
losses?
82. Unreasonable Results
The 335 kV AC electricity from a power transmission li ne is fed into the primary coil of a transformer. T he ratio of the
number of turns in the secondary to the number in the pri mary is.
(a) What voltage is induced in the secondary?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?

8.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
Solution
(a) 335 MV
(b) way too high, well beyond the breakdown voltage of air o ver reasonable distances
(c) input voltage is too high
83. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a double transformer to be used to create v ery large voltages. The device consists of two stages. The first is a
transformer that produces a much larger output voltag e than its input. The output of the first transform er is used as
input to a second transformer that further increase s the voltage. Construct a problem in which you calcu late the output
voltage of the final stage based on the input volta ge of the first stage and the number of turns or lo ops in both parts of
both transformers (four coils in all). Also calculate the maximum output current of the final stage based o n the input
current. Discuss the possibility of power losses in the dev ices and the effect on the output current and power.
23.8 Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
84. Integrated Concepts
A short circuit to the grounded metal case of an app liance occurs as shown in Figure. The person touching the case is
wet and only has a resistance to earth/ground.
(a) What is the voltage on the case if 5.00 mA flows through the person?
(b) What is the current in the short circuit if the resi stance of the earth/ground wire is?
(c) Will this trigger the 20.0 A circuit breaker supplyi ng the appliance?
A person can be shocked even when the case of an appliance i s grounded. The large short circuit current produces a volta ge
on the case of the appliance, since the resistance of the earth/ground wire is not zero.
Solution
(a) 15.0 V
(b) 75.0 A
(c) yes
23.9 Inductance
85. Two coils are placed close together in a physics lab to demonstrate Faraday’s law of induction. A current of 5.00 A in one
is switched off in 1.00 ms, inducing a 9.00 V emf in the other. What is their mutual inductance?
Solution
1.80 mH

8.E.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8404786. If two coils placed next to one another have a mutu al inductance of 5.00 mH, what voltage is induced in o ne when the
2.00 A current in the other is switched off in 30.0 ms?
87. The 4.00 A current through a 7.50 mH inductor is switched of f in 8.33 ms. What is the emf induced opposing this?
Solution
3.60 V
88. A device is turned on and 3.00 A flows through it 0.1 00 ms later. What is the self-inductance of the devic e if an induced
150 V emf opposes this?
89. Starting with, show that the units of inductance are.
90. Camera flashes charge a capacitor to high voltage by switching the current through an inductor on and off rapidly. In
what time must the 0.100 A current through a 2.00 mH inducto r be switched on or off to induce a 500 V emf?
91. A large research solenoid has a self-inductance of 25.0 H.
(a) What induced emf opposes shutting it off when 100 A o f current through it is switched off in 80.0 ms?
(b) How much energy is stored in the inductor at full curre nt?
(c) At what rate in watts must energy be dissipated to switch the current off in 80.0 ms?
(d) In view of the answer to the last part, is it surprising that shutting it down this quickly is difficult?
Solution
(a) 31.3 kV
(b) 125 kJ
(c) 1.56 MW
(d) No, it is not surprising since this power is very high.
92. (a) Calculate the self-inductance of a 50.0 cm long, 10.0 c m diameter solenoid having 1000 loops.
(b) How much energy is stored in this inductor when 20.0 A o f current flows through it?
(c) How fast can it be turned off if the induced emf cannot ex ceed 3.00 V?
93. A precision laboratory resistor is made of a coil of wire 1.50 cm in diameter and 4.00 cm long, and it has 500 turns.
(a) What is its self-inductance?
(b) What average emf is induced if the 12.0 A current through it is turned on in 5.00 ms (one-fourth of a cycle for 50
Hz AC)?
(c) What is its inductance if it is shortened to hal f its length and counter-wound (two layers of 250 turn s in opposite
directions)?
Solution
(a) 1.39 mH
(b) 3.33 V
(c) Zero
94. The heating coils in a hair dryer are 0.800 cm i n diameter, have a combined length of 1.00 m, and a total of 400 turns.
(a) What is their total self-inductance assuming they act like a single solenoid?
(b) How much energy is stored in them when 6.00 A flows?
(c) What average emf opposes shutting them off if this is don e in 5.00 ms (one-fourth of a cycle for 50 Hz AC)?
95. When the 20.0 A current through an inductor is turn ed off in 1.50 ms, an 800 V emf is induced, opposing the change.
What is the value of the self-inductance?

8.E.14 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047Solution
60.0 mH
96. How fast can the 150 A current through a 0.250 H inductor be shut off if the induced emf cannot exceed 75.0 V?
97. Integrated Concepts
A very large, superconducting solenoid such as one u sed in MRI scans, stores 1.00 MJ of energy in its mag netic field
when 100 A flows.
(a) Find its self-inductance.
(b) If the coils “go normal,” they gain resistance an d start to dissipate thermal energy. What temperatur e increase
is produced if all the stored energy goes into heat ing the 1000 kg magnet, given its average specific he at is
Solution
(a) 200 H
(b) 5.00ºC
98. Unreasonable Results
A 25.0 H inductor has 100 A of current turned off in 1.00 ms.
(a) What voltage is induced to oppose this?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
23.10 RL Circuits
99. If you want a characteristic time constant of 1.00 s, and you have a 500 Ω resistor, what value of self-inductance is
needed?
Solution
500 H
100. Your circuit has a characteristic time constant of 20. 0 ns, and a resistance of.
(a) What is the inductance of the circuit?
(b) What resistance would give you a 1.00 ns time const ant, perhaps needed for quick response in an oscilloscop e?
101. A large superconducting magnet, used for magnetic r esonance imaging, has a 50.0 H inductance. If you want cu rrent
through it to be adjustable with a 1.00 s characteristic time constant, what is the minimum resistance of system?
Solution
50.0 Ω
102. Verify that after a time of 10.0 ms, the current for the situation considered in Example will be 0.183 A as stated.
103. Suppose you have a supply of inductors ranging from 1.00 nH to 10.0 H, and resistors ranging from to.
What is the range of characteristic time constants you can produce by connecting a single resistor to a sing le inductor?
Solution
to 0.100 s
104. (a) What is the characteristic time constant of a 25.0 mH in ductor that has a resistance of?
(b) If it is connected to a 12.0 V battery, what is the curren t after 12.5 ms?
105. What percentage of the final current flows through an inductor in series with a resistor, three time co nstants after
the circuit is completed?

8.E.15 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047Solution
95.0%
106. The 5.00 A current through a 1.50 H inductor is dissi pated by a resistor in a circuit like that in Figure with the
switch in position 2.
(a) What is the initial energy in the inductor?
(b) How long will it take the current to decline to 5.00% of its initial value?
(c) Calculate the average power dissipated, and compare it with the initial power dissipated by the resistor.
107. (a) Use the exact exponential treatment to find how m uch time is required to bring the current through an 80.0 mH
inductor in series with a resistor to 99.0% of its final value, starting from zero.
(b) Compare your answer to the approximate treatment using integral numbers of τ.
(c) Discuss how significant the difference is.
Solution
(a) 24.6 ms
(b) 26.7 ms
(c) 9% difference, which is greater than the inherent uncer tainty in the given parameters.
108. (a) Using the exact exponential treatment, find the time required for the current through a 2.00 H induct or in series with
a 0.500 Ω resistor to be reduced to 0.100% of its original value.
(b) Compare your answer to the approximate treatment using integral numbers of.
(c) Discuss how significant the difference is.
23.11 Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
109. At what frequency will a 30.0 mH inductor have a reactance of 100 Ω?
Solution
531 Hz
110. What value of inductance should be used if a reactance is n eeded at a frequency of 500 Hz?
111. What capacitance should be used to produce a reactance at 60.0 Hz?
Solution
1.33 nF
112. At what frequency will an 80.0 mF capacitor have a reactanc e of?
113. (a) Find the current through a 0.500 H inductor connecte d to a 60.0 Hz, 480 V AC source.
(b) What would the current be at 100 kHz?
Solution
(a) 2.55 A
(b) 1.53 mA
114. (a) What current flows when a 60.0 Hz, 480 V AC source is c onnected to a 0.250 μF capacitor?
(b) What would the current be at 25.0 kHz?
115. A 20.0 kHz, 16.0 V source connected to an inductor produce s a 2.00 A current. What is the inductance?
Solution
63.7 µH
116. A 20.0 Hz, 16.0 V source produces a 2.00 mA current when conn ected to a capacitor. What is the capacitance?

8.E.16 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047117. (a) An inductor designed to filter high-frequency no ise from power supplied to a personal computer is pl aced in series
with the computer. What minimum inductance should it hav e to produce a reactance for 15.0 kHz noise?
(b) What is its reactance at 60.0 Hz?
Solution
(a) 21.2 mH
(b) 8.00 Ω
118. The capacitor in Figure(a) is designed to filter low-fre quency signals, impeding their transmission between cir cuits.
(a) What capacitance is needed to produce a reactance at a frequency of 120 Hz?
(b) What would its reactance be at 1.00 MHz?
(c) Discuss the implications of your answers to (a) and (b).
119. The capacitor in Figure(b) will filter high-frequency signal s by shorting them to earth/ground.
(a) What capacitance is needed to produce a reactance of for a 5.00 kHz signal?
(b) What would its reactance be at 3.00 Hz? (c) Discuss the implications of your answers to (a) and (b).
Solution
(a) 3.18 mF
(b) 16.7 Ω
120. Unreasonable Results
In a recording of voltages due to brain activity (an EEG), a 10.0 mV signal with a 0.500 Hz frequency is appl ied to a
capacitor, producing a current of 100 mA. Resistance is n egligible.
(a) What is the capacitance?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible?
121. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider the use of an inductor in series with a comp uter operating on 60 Hz electricity. Construct a pro blem in which
you calculate the relative reduction in voltage of incoming high frequency noise compared to 60 Hz volta ge. Among
the things to consider are the acceptable series rea ctance of the inductor for 60 Hz power and the likely frequencies of
noise coming through the power lines.
23.12 RLC Series AC Circuits
122. An circuit consists of a resistor and a 3.00 mH inducto r.
(a) Find its impedance at 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz.
(b) Compare these values of with those found in Example i n which there was also a capacitor.
Solution
(a) at 60.0 Hz, at 10.0 kHz
(b) At 60 Hz, with a capacitor,, over 13 times as hig h as without the capacitor. The capacitor makes a la rge
difference at low frequencies. At 10 kHz, with a capaci tor, about the same as without the capacitor. The
capacitor has a smaller effect at high frequencies.
123. An circuit consists of a resistor and a capacitor.
(a) Find its impedance at 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz.
(b) Compare these values of with those found in Example, in which there was also an inductor.
124. An circuit consists of a inductor and a capacitor.

8.E.17 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047(a) Find its impedance at 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz.
(b) Compare these values of with those found in Example i n which there was also a resistor.
Solution
(a) at 60.0 Hz, at 10.0 kHz
(b) These values are close to those obtained in Exa mple because at low frequency the capacitor dominate s and at high
frequency the inductor dominates. So in both cases the resis tor makes little contribution to the total impedance.
125. What is the resonant frequency of a 0.500 mH inductor con nected to a capacitor?
126. To receive AM radio, you want an circuit that can be made to resonate at any frequency between 500 and 16 50
kHz. This is accomplished with a fixed inductor connec ted to a variable capacitor. What range of capacitan ce is
needed?
Solution
9.30 nF to 101 nF
127. Suppose you have a supply of inductors ranging from 1.0 0 nH to 10.0 H, and capacitors ranging from 1.00 pF to 0.100
F. What is the range of resonant frequencies that can be achieved from combinations of a single inductor and a single
capacitor?
128. What capacitance do you need to produce a resonant freq uency of 1.00 GHz, when using an 8.00 nH inductor?
Solution
3.17 pF
129. What inductance do you need to produce a resonant frequ ency of 60.0 Hz, when using a capacitor?
130. The lowest frequency in the FM radio band is 88.0 MHz.
(a) What inductance is needed to produce this resonant frequency if it is connected to a 2.50 pF capacitor?
(b) The capacitor is variable, to allow the resonant frequency to be adjusted to as high as 108 MHz. What m ust the
capacitance be at this frequency?
Solution
(a)
(b)
131. An series circuit has a resistor, a inductor, and an capacitor.
(a) Find the circuit’s impedance at 120 Hz.
(b) Find the circuit’s impedance at 5.00 kHz.
(c) If the voltage source has, what is at each frequency?
(d) What is the resonant frequency of the circuit?
(e) What is at resonance?
132. An series circuit has a resistor, a inductor, and a 25.0 nF capacitor.
(a) Find the circuit’s impedance at 500 Hz.
(b) Find the circuit’s impedance at 7.50 kHz.
(c) If the voltage source has, what is at each frequency?
(d) What is the resonant frequency of the circuit?
(e) What is at resonance?
Solution
(a) 12.8 kΩ

8.E.18 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84047(b) 1.31 kΩ
(c) 31.9 mA at 500 Hz, 312 mA at 7.50 kHz
(d) 82.2 kHz
(e) 0.408 A
133. An series circuit has a resistor, a inductor, and a n capacitor.
(a) Find the power factor at f=120 Hz.
(b) What is the phase angle at 120 Hz?
(c) What is the average power at 120 Hz?
(d) Find the average power at the circuit’s resonant frequ ency.
134. An series circuit has a resistor, a inductor, and a 25.0 nF capacitor
(a) Find the power factor at f=7.50 Hz.
(b) What is the phase angle at this frequency?
(c) What is the average power at this frequency?
(d) Find the average power at the circuit’s resonant frequ ency.
Solution
(a) 0.159
(b) 80.9º
(c) 26.4 W
(d) 166 W
135. An series circuit has a resistor and a 25.0 mH inducto r. At 8000 Hz, the phase angle is.
(a) What is the impedance?
(b) Find the circuit’s capacitance.
(c) If is applied, what is the average power supplied?
136. Referring to Example, find the average power at 10.0 kHz.
Solution
16.0 W
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Peter Urone (Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento) and Roger Hinrichs (State University of New
York, College at Oswego) with Contributing Authors: Kim Dirks (University of Auckland) and Manjula Sharma (Univer sity of
Sydney). This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics u nder a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
8.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Ele ctrical Technologies (Exercise) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
23: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electric al Technologies (Exercises) has no license indicated. Original source:
https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and -computer-science/6-013-electromagnetics-and-applicat ions-spring-2009.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: Electromagnetic Waves
In this chapter, we explain Maxwell’s theory and show h ow it leads to his prediction of electromagnetic waves. We use his theory
to examine what electromagnetic waves are, how they are produced, and how they transport energy and momentum. We conclude
by summarizing some of the many practical applications o f electromagnetic waves.
9.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Waves
9.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
9.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves
9.4: Polarization
9.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
9.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer)
9.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises)
9.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary)
This page titled 9: Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840689.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Waves
Our view of objects in the sky at night, the warm radianc e of sunshine, the sting of sunburn, our cell phone conversations, and the
X-rays revealing a broken bone—all are brought to us by electromagnetic waves. It would be hard to oversta te the practical
importance of electromagnetic waves, through their rol e in vision, through countless technological applica tions, and through their
ability to transport the energy from the Sun through space t o sustain life and almost all of its activities on Earth.
Figure: The pressure from sunlight predicted by Maxwel l’s equations helped produce the tail of Comet McNaug ht. (credit:
modification of work by Sebastian Deiries—ESO)
Theory predicted the general phenomenon of electrom agnetic waves before anyone realized that light is a form of an
electromagnetic wave. In the mid-nineteenth century, James Clerk Maxwell formulated a single theory combini ng all the electric
and magnetic effects known at that time. Maxwell’s equ ations, summarizing this theory, predicted the existenc e of electromagnetic
waves that travel at the speed of light. His theory als o predicted how these waves behave, and how they carry b oth energy and
momentum. The tails of comets, such as Comet McNaught in Figure 16.1, provide a spectacular example. Energ y carried by light
from the Sun warms the comet to release dust and gas. The momentum carried by the light exerts a weak forc e that shapes the dust
into a tail of the kind seen here. The flux of parti cles emitted by the Sun, called the solar wind, typical ly produces an additional,
second tail, as described in detail in this chapter.
In this chapter, we explain Maxwell’s theory and show h ow it leads to his prediction of electromagnetic waves. We use his theory
to examine what electromagnetic waves are, how they are produced, and how they transport energy and momentum. We conclude
by summarizing some of the many practical applications o f electromagnetic waves.
This page titled 9.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

9.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840699.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain Maxwell’s correction of Ampère’s law by including th e displacement current
State and apply Maxwell’s equations in integral form
Describe how the symmetry between changing electric and c hanging magnetic fields explains Maxwell’s prediction of
electromagnetic waves
Describe how Hertz confirmed Maxwell’s prediction of electr omagnetic waves
James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) was one of the major contributors to ph ysics in the nineteenth century (Figure). Although
he died young, he made major contributions to the d evelopment of the kinetic theory of gases, to the unde rstanding of color vision,
and to the nature of Saturn’s rings. He is probably be st known for having combined existing knowledge of the laws of electricity
and of magnetism with insights of his own into a comple te overarching electromagnetic theory, represented by Maxwell’s
equations.
Figure: James Clerk Maxwell, a nineteenth-century phy sicist, developed a theory that explained the relatio nship between
electricity and magnetism, and correctly predicted t hat visible light consists of electromagnetic waves.
Maxwell’s Correction to the Laws of Electricity and Magnetism
The four basic laws of electricity and magnetism had been discovered experimentally through the work of physicists such as
Oersted, Coulomb, Gauss, and Faraday. Maxwell discovered logic al inconsistencies in these earlier results and ide ntified the
incompleteness of Ampère’s law as their cause.
Recall that according to Ampère’s law, the integral o f the magnetic field around a closed loop C is proportional to the current I
passing through any surface whose boundary is loop C itself:
There are infinitely many surfaces that can be attac hed to any loop, and Ampère’s law stated in Equation is independent of the
choice of surface.
Consider the set-up in Figure. A source of emf is ab ruptly connected across a parallel-plate capacitor s o that a time-dependent
current I develops in the wire. Suppose we apply Ampère’s law to l oop C shown at a time before the capacitor is fully charge d, so
that. Surface gives a nonzero value for the enclos ed current I, whereas surface gives zero for the enclosed current
because no current passes through it:Learning Objectives

9.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84069Clearly, Ampère’s law in its usual form does not work he re. This may not be surprising, because Ampère’s law as a pplied in earlier
chapters required a steady current, whereas the current in this experiment is changing with time and is not steady a t all.
Figure: The currents through surface and surface are unequal, despite having the same boundary loop C.
How can Ampère’s law be modified so that it works in all si tuations? Maxwell suggested including an additional contribution,
called the displacement current, to the real current I,
where the displacement current is defined to be
Here is the permittivity of free space and is the electric flux, defined as
The displacement current is analogous to a real current in Ampère’s law, ente ring into Ampère’s law in the same way. It is
produced, however, by a changing electric field. It a ccounts for a changing electric field producing a m agnetic field, just as a real
current does, but the displacement current can produ ce a magnetic field even where no real current is pr esent. When this extra term
is included, the modified Ampère’s law equation becomes
and is independent of the surface S through which the current I is measured.
We can now examine this modified version of Ampère’s la w to confirm that it holds independent of whether the surface or the
surface in Figure is chosen. The electric field co rresponding to the flux in Equation is between the capacitor
plates. Therefore, the field and the displacement cur rent through the surface are both zero, and Equation tak es the form

9.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84069We must now show that for surface, through which no ac tual current flows, the displacement current leads to th e same value
for the right side of the Ampère’s law equation. For surface the equation becomes
Gauss’s law for electric charge requires a closed surf ace and cannot ordinarily be applied to a surface l ike alone or alone. But
the two surfaces and form a closed surface in Figur e and can be used in Gauss’s law. Because the electr ic field is zero on
, the flux contribution through is zero. This gives us
Therefore, we can replace the integral over in Equat ion with the closed Gaussian surface and apply Gauss’ s law to
obtain
Thus, the modified Ampère’s law equation is the same u sing surface, where the right-hand side results from the displacement
current, as it is for the surface, where the contribution comes from the actual flow of electric charge.
A parallel-plate capacitor with capacitance C whose plates have area A and separation distance d is connected to a resistor R
and a battery of voltage V. The current starts to flow at.
a. Find the displacement current between the capacitor plat es at time t.
b. From the properties of the capacitor, find the correspondin g real current, and compare the answer to the expected
current in the wires of the corresponding RC circuit.
Strategy
We can use the equations from the analysis of an RC circuit (Alternating-Current Circuits) plus Maxwell’s version of Ampère’s
law.
Solution
a. The voltage between the plates at time t is given by
Let the z-axis point from the positive plate to the negative plate. Then the z-component of the electric field between the
plates as a function of time t is
Therefore, the z-component of the displacement current between the plates is
where we have used for the capacitance.
b. From the expression for the charge on the capacitor isDisplacement current in a charging capacitor

9.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84069The current into the capacitor after the circuit is clos ed, is therefore
This current is the same as found in (a).
Maxwell’s Equations
With the correction for the displacement current, Maxwell’ s equations take the form
Once the fields have been calculated using these four equ ations, the Lorentz force equation
gives the force that the fields exert on a particle with charge q moving with velocity. The Lorentz force equation c ombines the
force of the electric field and of the magnetic fie ld on the moving charge. The magnetic and electric forces have been examined in
earlier modules. These four Maxwell’s equations are, res pectively:
1. Gauss’s law
The electric flux through any closed surface is equa l to the electric charge enclosed by the surface. Gauss ’s law (Equation
) describes the relation between an electric charge a nd the electric field it produces. This is often pict ured in terms of
electric field lines originating from positive char ges and terminating on negative charges, and indica ting the direction of the
electric field at each point in space.
2. Gauss’s law for magnetism
The magnetic field flux through any closed surface i s zero (Equation). This is equivalent to the stateme nt that magnetic
field lines are continuous, having no beginning or e nd. Any magnetic field line entering the region encl osed by the surface
must also leave it. No magnetic monopoles, where magn etic field lines would terminate, are known to exist (se e section on
Magnetic Fields and Lines).
3. Faraday’s law
A changing magnetic field induces an electromotive force (emf) and, hence, an electric field. The directi on of the emf opposes
the change. Equation is Faraday’s law of induction and includes Lenz’s law. The electric field from a cha nging magnetic
field has field lines that form closed loops, without any b eginning or end.
4. Ampère-Maxwell law
Magnetic fields are generated by moving charges or by changing electric fields. This fourth of Maxwell’s e quations, Equation
, encompasses Ampère’s law and adds another source of mag netic fields, namely changing electric fields.
Maxwell’s equations and the Lorentz force law together encompass all the laws of electricity and magnetism. T he symmetry that
Maxwell introduced into his mathematical framework may not be immediately apparent. Faraday’s law describes ho w changing
magnetic fields produce electric fields. The displaceme nt current introduced by Maxwell results instead fro m a changing electricMaxwell's Equations

9.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84069field and accounts for a changing electric field pro ducing a magnetic field. The equations for the effe cts of both changing electric
fields and changing magnetic fields differ in form only where the absence of magnetic monopoles leads to missing terms. This
symmetry between the effects of changing magnetic an d electric fields is essential in explaining the nat ure of electromagnetic
waves.
Later application of Einstein’s theory of relativity to Maxwell’s complete and symmetric theory showed that electric and magnetic
forces are not separate but are different manifestatio ns of the same thing—the electromagnetic force. The e lectromagnetic force and
weak nuclear force are similarly unified as the elec troweak force. This unification of forces has been on e motivation for attempts to
unify all of the four basic forces in nature—the gra vitational, electrical, strong, and weak nuclear forces (see Particle Physics and
Cosmology).
The Mechanism of Electromagnetic Wave Propagation
To see how the symmetry introduced by Maxwell accounts for the existence of combined electric and magneti c waves that
propagate through space, imagine a time-varying magne tic field produced by the high-frequency alternati ng current seen in
Figure. We represent in the diagram by one of its f ield lines. From Faraday’s law, the changing magnetic fie ld through a
surface induces a time-varying electric field at t he boundary of that surface. The displacement current source for the electric
field, like the Faraday’s law source for the magnetic field, produces only closed loops of field lines, be cause of the mathematical
symmetry involved in the equations for the induced electric and induced magnetic fields. A field line representation of is
shown. In turn, the changing electric field creates a magnetic field according to the modified Ampère’s l aw. This
changing field induces which induces and so on. We then have a self-continuing process that leads to t he creation of
time-varying electric and magnetic fields in region s farther and farther away from O. This process may be visualized as the
propagation of an electromagnetic wave through space.
Figure: How changing and fields propagate through space.
In the next section, we show in more precise mathemati cal terms how Maxwell’s equations lead to the predict ion of
electromagnetic waves that can travel through space without a material medium, implying a speed of elect romagnetic waves equal
to the speed of light.
Prior to Maxwell’s work, experiments had already indicat ed that light was a wave phenomenon, although the nat ure of the waves
was yet unknown. In 1801, Thomas Young (1773–1829) showe d that when a light beam was separated by two narrow sl its and then
recombined, a pattern made up of bright and dark fr inges was formed on a screen. Young explained this beha vior by assuming that
light was composed of waves that added constructively at some points and destructively at others (see Interference). Subsequently,
Jean Foucault (1819–1868), with measurements of the sp eed of light in various media, and Augustin Fresnel (178 8–1827), with
detailed experiments involving interference and dif fraction of light, provided further conclusive evide nce that light was a wave. So,
light was known to be a wave, and Maxwell had predicted t he existence of electromagnetic waves that traveled at the speed of
light. The conclusion seemed inescapable: Light must b e a form of electromagnetic radiation. But Maxwell’s t heory showed that
other wavelengths and frequencies than those of light we re possible for electromagnetic waves. He showed that el ectromagnetic
radiation with the same fundamental properties as vi sible light should exist at any frequency. It remain ed for others to test, and
confirm, this prediction.
When the emf across a capacitor is turned on and the capacitor is allowed to charge, when does the magneti c field induced by
the displacement current have the greatest magnitude?Exercise

9.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84069Solution
It is greatest immediately after the current is switche d on. The displacement current and the magnetic fie ld from it are proportional
to the rate of change of electric field between the plat es, which is greatest when the plates first begin to charg e.
Hertz’s Observations
The German physicist Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894) was the f irst to generate and detect certain types of electrom agnetic waves in
the laboratory. Starting in 1887, he performed a ser ies of experiments that not only confirmed the exist ence of electromagnetic
waves but also verified that they travel at the speed of light.
Hertz used an alternating-current RLC (resistor-inductor-capacitor) circuit that resonate s at a known frequency and
connected it to a loop of wire, as shown in Figure. Hi gh voltages induced across the gap in the loop prod uced sparks that were
visible evidence of the current in the circuit and help ed generate electromagnetic waves.
Across the laboratory, Hertz placed another loop attach ed to another RLC circuit, which could be tuned (as the dial on a rad io) to
the same resonant frequency as the first and could th us be made to receive electromagnetic waves. This loo p also had a gap across
which sparks were generated, giving solid evidence that ele ctromagnetic waves had been received.
Figure: The apparatus used by Hertz in 1887 to genera te and detect electromagnetic waves.
Hertz also studied the reflection, refraction, and int erference patterns of the electromagnetic waves he gen erated, confirming their
wave character. He was able to determine the wavelengths from the interference patterns, and knowing their fr equencies, he could
calculate the propagation speed using the equation, where v is the speed of a wave, f is its frequency, and is its
wavelength. Hertz was thus able to prove that electromag netic waves travel at the speed of light. The SI unit for frequency, the
hertz, is named in his honor.
Could a purely electric field propagate as a wave through a vacuum without a magnetic field? Justify your answer.
Solution
No. The changing electric field according to the mod ified version of Ampère’s law would necessarily induce a changing magnetic
field.
This page titled 9.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.Exercise

9.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840709.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how Maxwell’s equations predict the relative direc tions of the electric fields and magnetic fields, and the direction
of propagation of plane electromagnetic waves
Explain how Maxwell’s equations predict that the speed o f propagation of electromagnetic waves in free space is exa ctly
the speed of light
Calculate the relative magnitude of the electric and mag netic fields in an electromagnetic plane wave
Describe how electromagnetic waves are produced and detect ed
Mechanical waves travel through a medium such as a stri ng, water, or air. Perhaps the most significant predict ion of Maxwell’s
equations is the existence of combined electric and magnetic (or electromagnetic) fields that propagat e through space as
electromagnetic waves. Because Maxwell’s equations hold in free space, the predicted electromagnetic waves, u nlike mechanical
waves, do not require a medium for their propagation.
A general treatment of the physics of electromagneti c waves is beyond the scope of this textbook. We can, ho wever, investigate the
special case of an electromagnetic wave that propagates thro ugh free space along the x-axis of a given coordinate system.
Electromagnetic Waves in One Direction
An electromagnetic wave consists of an electric field, d efined as usual in terms of the force per charge on a stationary charge, and a
magnetic field, defined in terms of the force per cha rge on a moving charge. The electromagnetic field i s assumed to be a function
of only the x-coordinate and time. The y-component of the electric field is then written as, the z-component of the magnetic
field as, etc. Because we are assuming free space, ther e are no free charges or currents, so we can set and in
Maxwell’s equations.
The transverse nature of electromagnetic waves
We examine first what Gauss’s law for electric fields im plies about the relative directions of the electric f ield and the propagation
direction in an electromagnetic wave. Assume the Gaussi an surface to be the surface of a rectangular box whos e cross-section is a
square of side l and whose third side has length, as shown in Figure. Because the electric field is a function only of x and t,
the y-component of the electric field is the same on bot h the top (labeled Side 2) and bottom (labeled Side 1) of the box, so that
these two contributions to the flux cancel. The corres ponding argument also holds for the net flux from t he z-component of the
electric field through Sides 3 and 4. Any net flux th rough the surface therefore comes entirely from the x-component of the electric
field. Because the electric field has no y- or z-dependence, is constant over the face of the box wi th area A and has a
possibly different value that is constant over the opp osite face of the box.
Applying Gauss’s law gives
where is the area of the front and back faces of the rectangular surface. But the charge enclosed is, so t his
component’s net flux is also zero, and Equation impl ies for any. Therefore, if there is an xcomponent of the electric field, it cannot vary with x. A uniform field of that kind would merely be super posed artificially on the
traveling wave, for example, by having a pair of paral lel-charged plates. Such a component would not be pa rt of an
electromagnetic wave propagating along the x-axis; so for this wave. Therefore, the only nonzero c omponents of the
electric field are and perpendicular to the directi on of propagation of the wave.LEARNING OBJECTIVES

9.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84070
Figure: The surface of a rectangular box of dimension s is our Gaussian surface. The electric field shown is fr om an
electromagnetic wave propagating along the x-axis.
A similar argument holds by substituting E for B and using Gauss’s law for magnetism instead of Gauss’s law for electric fields.
This shows that the B field is also perpendicular to the direction of pr opagation of the wave. The electromagnetic wave is the refore
a transverse wave, with its oscillating electric and magneti c fields perpendicular to its direction of propagation.
The speed of propagation of electromagnetic waves
We can next apply Maxwell’s equations to the descripti on given in connection with Figure 16.2.3 in the previous section to obtain
an equation for the E field from the changing B field, and for the B field from a changing E field. We then combine the two
equations to show how the changing E and B fields propagate through space at a speed precisely equal to the speed of light.
First, we apply Faraday’s law over Side 3 of the Gaussian s urface, using the path shown in Figure. Because, we
have
Assuming is small and approximating by
we obtain

9.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84070
Figure: We apply Faraday’s law to the front of the re ctangle by evaluating along the rectangular edge o f Side 3 in the
direction indicated, taking the B field crossing the face to be approximately its value in the middle of the area traversed.
Because is small, the magnetic flux through the fac e can be approximated by its value in the center of the area traversed,
namely. The flux of the B field through Face 3 is then the B field times the area,
From Faraday’s law,
Therefore, from Equations and,
Canceling and taking the limit as, we are left with
We could have applied Faraday’s law instead to the top surfac e (numbered 2) in Figure, to obtain the resulting equati on
This is the equation describing the spatially dependent E field produced by the time-dependent B field.
Next we apply the Ampère-Maxwell law (with) over the sam e two faces (Surface 3 and then Surface 2) of the rect angular box
of Figure. Applying Equation 16.2.16,
to Surface 3, and then to Surface 2, yields the two equation s

9.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84070and
These equations describe the spatially dependent B field produced by the time-dependent E field.
We next combine the equations showing the changing B field producing an E field with the equation showing the changing E field
producing a B field. Taking the derivative of Equation with respec t to x and using Equation gives
or
This is the form taken by the general wave equation f or our plane wave. Because the equations describe a wav e traveling at some
as-yet-unspecified speed c, we can assume the field components are each functi ons of x – ct for the wave traveling in the + xdirection, that is,
It is left as a mathematical exercise to show, using the chain rule for differentiation, that Equations and imply
The speed of the electromagnetic wave in free space is therefore given in terms of the permeability and the permittivity of free
space by
We could just as easily have assumed an electromagn etic wave with field components and. The same type of
analysis with Equation and would also show that the spe ed of an electromagnetic wave is.
The physics of traveling electromagnetic fields was worked out by Maxwell in 1873. He showed in a more genera l way than our
derivation that electromagnetic waves always travel in free space with a speed given by Equation. If we ev aluate the speed
, we find that
which is the speed of light. Imagine the excitement t hat Maxwell must have felt when he discovered this equ ation! He had found a
fundamental connection between two seemingly unrelated ph enomena: electromagnetic fields and light.
The wave equation was obtained by (1) finding the E field produced by the changing B field, (2) finding the B field produced
by the changing E field, and combining the two results. Which of Maxwel l’s equations was the basis of step (1) and which of
step (2)?
Answer (step 1)
Faraday’s law
Answer (step 2)
the Ampère-Maxwell lawExercise

9.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84070How the E and B Fields Are Related
So far, we have seen that the rates of change of diffe rent components of the E and B fields are related, that the electromagnetic
wave is transverse, and that the wave propagates at sp eed c. We next show what Maxwell’s equations imply about the ratio of the E
and B field magnitudes and the relative directions of the E and B fields.
We now consider solutions to Equation in the form of plan e waves for the electric field:
We have arbitrarily taken the wave to be traveling i n the +x-direction and chosen its phase so that the maximum f ield strength
occurs at the origin at time. We are justified in c onsidering only sines and cosines in this way, and ge neralizing the results,
because Fourier’s theorem implies we can express any wa ve, including even square step functions, as a superp osition of sines and
cosines.
At any one specific point in space, the E field oscillates sinusoidally at angular frequency between and and similarly,
the B field oscillates between and. The amplitude of the wave is the maximum value of. The period of oscilla tion
T is the time required for a complete oscillation. The frequency f is the number of complete oscillations per unit of time, and is
related to the angular frequency by. The wavelengt h is the distance covered by one complete cycle of the wave, and the
wavenumber k is the number of wavelengths that fit into a distan ce of in the units being used. These quantities are r elated in the
same way as for a mechanical wave:
Given that the solution of has the form shown in Equ ation, we need to determine the field that accompa nies it. From
Equation, the magnetic field component must obey
Because the solution for the B-field pattern of the wave propagates in the + x-direction at the same speed c as the E-field pattern, it
must be a function of. Thus, we conclude from Equation that is
These results may be written as
Therefore, the peaks of the E and B fields coincide, as do the troughs of the wave, and at each point, the E and B fields are in the
same ratio equal to the speed of light c. The plane wave has the form shown in Figure.

9.3.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84070
Figure: The plane wave solution of Maxwell’s equation s has the B field directly proportional to the E fiel d at each point, with
the relative directions shown.
What is the maximum strength of the B field in an electromagnetic wave that has a maximum E-field strength of 1000 V/m?
Strategy
To find the B-field strength, we rearrange Equation to solve for, yie lding
Solution We are given E, and c is the speed of light. Entering these into the expressio n for B yields
Significance
The B-field strength is less than a tenth of Earth’s adm ittedly weak magnetic field. This means that a relativ ely strong electric
field of 1000 V/m is accompanied by a relatively weak mag netic field.
Changing electric fields create relatively weak magn etic fields. The combined electric and magnetic field s can be detected in
electromagnetic waves, however, by taking advantage of the phenomenon of resonance, as Hertz did. A system wit h the same
natural frequency as the electromagnetic wave can be made to oscillate. All radio and TV receivers use th is principle to pick up and
then amplify weak electromagnetic waves, while rejecting a ll others not at their resonant frequency.
What conclusions did our analysis of Maxwell’s equations lead to about these properties of a plane electromagnetic wave:
a. the relative directions of wave propagation, of the E field, and of B field,
b. the speed of travel of the wave and how the speed depe nds on frequency, and
c. the relative magnitudes of the E and B fields.
Answer a
The directions of wave propagation, of the E field, and of B field are all mutually perpendicular.
Answer b
The speed of the electromagnetic wave is the speed of ligh t independent of frequency.
Answer c
The ratio of electric and magnetic field amplitudes i s.Example: Calculating B-Field Strength in an Electromagnetic Wave
Exercise

9.3.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84070Production and Detection of Electromagnetic Waves
A steady electric current produces a magnetic field that is constant in time and which does not propagate as a wave. Accelerating
charges, however, produce electromagnetic waves. An elec tric charge oscillating up and down, or an alternati ng current or flow of
charge in a conductor, emit radiation at the frequen cies of their oscillations. The electromagnetic fiel d of a dipole antenna is
shown in Figure. The positive and negative charges on the two conductors are made to reverse at the desired frequency by the
output of a transmitter as the power source. The contin ually changing current accelerates charge in the ant enna, and this results in
an oscillating electric field a distance away from t he antenna. The changing electric fields produce chan ging magnetic fields that in
turn produce changing electric fields, which thereby p ropagate as electromagnetic waves. The frequency of th is radiation is the
same as the frequency of the ac source that is accel erating the electrons in the antenna. The two conduc ting elements of the dipole
antenna are commonly straight wires. The total lengt h of the two wires is typically about one-half of the desired wavelength (hence,
the alternative name half-wave antenna), because this allows standing waves to be set up and enhances the effectiveness of the
radiation.
Figure: The oscillatory motion of the charges in a di pole antenna produces electromagnetic radiation.
The electric field lines in one plane are shown. The m agnetic field is perpendicular to this plane. This ra diation field has cylindrical
symmetry around the axis of the dipole. Field lines ne ar the dipole are not shown. The pattern is not at al l uniform in all directions.
The strongest signal is in directions perpendicular t o the axis of the antenna, which would be horizontal i f the antenna is mounted
vertically. There is zero intensity along the axis of the antenna. The fields detected far from the anten na are from the changing
electric and magnetic fields inducing each other an d traveling as electromagnetic waves. Far from the ant enna, the wave fronts, or
surfaces of equal phase for the electromagnetic wave, are almost spherical. Even farther from the antenna, the radiation propagates
like electromagnetic plane waves.
The electromagnetic waves carry energy away from thei r source, similar to a sound wave carrying energy away f rom a standing
wave on a guitar string. An antenna for receiving ele ctromagnetic signals works in reverse. Incoming elect romagnetic waves induce
oscillating currents in the antenna, each at its own f requency. The radio receiver includes a tuner circu it, whose resonant frequency
can be adjusted. The tuner responds strongly to tshe d esired frequency but not others, allowing the user to tune to the desired
broadcast. Electrical components amplify the signal f ormed by the moving electrons. The signal is then c onverted into an audio
and/or video format.
Use this simulation to broadcast radio waves. Wiggle the transmitter elec tron manually or have it oscillate automatically.
Display the field as a curve or vectors. The strip chart sho ws the electron positions at the transmitter and at the r eceiver.
This page titled 9.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Note

9.3.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84070

9.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840719.4: Polarization
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the change in intensity as polarized light passes th rough a polarizing filter
Calculate the effect of polarization by reflection and B rewster’s angle
Describe the effect of polarization by scattering
Explain the use of polarizing materials in devices such a s LCDs
Polarizing sunglasses are familiar to most of us. They have a special ability to cut the glare of light re flected from water or glass
(Figure). They have this ability because of a wave ch aracteristic of light called polarization. What is p olarization? How is it
produced? What are some of its uses? The answers to these q uestions are related to the wave character of light.
Figure: These two photographs of a river show the effe ct of a polarizing filter in reducing glare in ligh t reflected from the
surface of water. Part (b) of this figure was taken wi th a polarizing filter and part (a) was not. As a resu lt, the reflection of clouds
and sky observed in part (a) is not observed in part (b). Polarizing sunglasses are particularly useful on snow a nd water. (credit a
and credit b: modifications of work by “Amithshs”/Wiki media Commons)
Malus’s Law
Light is one type of electromagnetic (EM) wave. EM waves are transverse waves consisting of varying electric and magnetic fields
that oscillate perpendicular to the direction of pro pagation (Figure). However, in general, there are no spe cific directions for
the oscillations of the electric and magnetic fields; they vibrate in any randomly oriented plane perpen dicular to the direction of
propagation. Polarization is the attribute that a wave ’s oscillations do have a definite direction relativ e to the direction of
propagation of the wave. (This is not the same type of polarization as that discussed for the separation of charges.) Waves having
such a direction are said to be polarized. For an EM wave, we define the direction of polarization to be t he direction parallel to the
electric field. Thus, we can think of the electric field ar rows as showing the direction of polarization, as in Figure.
Figure: An EM wave, such as light, is a transverse wave. The electric and magnetic fields are perpendicula r to the
direction of propagation. The direction of polariza tion of the wave is the direction of the electric fi eld.Learning Objectives

9.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071To examine this further, consider the transverse wave s in the ropes shown in Figure. The oscillations in one rope are in a
vertical plane and are said to be vertically polari zed. Those in the other rope are in a horizontal pl ane and are horizontally
polarized. If a vertical slit is placed on the firs t rope, the waves pass through. However, a vertical slit blocks the horizontally
polarized waves. For EM waves, the direction of the electri c field is analogous to the disturbances on the ropes.
Figure: The transverse oscillations in one rope (a) are in a vertical plane, and those in the other rope (b) are in a horizontal
plane. The first is said to be vertically polarized, a nd the other is said to be horizontally polarized. Ve rtical slits pass vertically
polarized waves and block horizontally polarized wav es.
The Sun and many other light sources produce waves tha t have the electric fields in random directions (Figu re). Such light is
said to be unpolarized, because it is composed of many waves with all possible directions of polarization. Pol aroid materials—
which were invented by the founder of the Polaroid Cor poration, Edwin Land—act as a polarizing slit for lig ht, allowing only
polarization in one direction to pass through. Polariz ing filters are composed of long molecules aligned in one direction. If we think
of the molecules as many slits, analogous to those f or the oscillating ropes, we can understand why only l ight with a specific
polarization can get through. The axis of a polariz ing filter is the direction along which the filter pa sses the electric field of an EM
wave.
Figure: The slender arrow represents a ray of unpolari zed light. The bold arrows represent the direction of polarization of the
individual waves composing the ray. (a) If the light is unpolarized, the arrows point in all directions. (b) A polarizing filter has a
polarization axis that acts as a slit passing through ele ctric fields parallel to its direction. The direction of polarization of an EM
wave is defined to be the direction of its electric f ield.
Figure shows the effect of two polarizing filters on o riginally unpolarized light. The first filter polar izes the light along its
axis. When the axes of the first and second filters ar e aligned (parallel), then all of the polarized lig ht passed by the first filter is
also passed by the second filter. If the second polari zing filter is rotated, only the component of the l ight parallel to the second
filter’s axis is passed. When the axes are perpendicular, no light is passed by the second filter.

9.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071
Figure: The effect of rotating two polarizing filte rs, where the first polarizes the light. (a) All of th e polarized light is passed
by the second polarizing filter, because its axis is par allel to the first. (b) As the second filter is rotated, only part of the light is
passed. (c) When the second filter is perpendicular to the first, no light is passed. (d) In this photograph, a polarizing filter is placed
above two others. Its axis is perpendicular to the filt er on the right (dark area) and parallel to the fil ter on the left (lighter area).
(credit d: modification of work by P.P. Urone)
Only the component of the EM wave parallel to the axi s of a filter is passed. Let us call the angle between the direction of
polarization and the axis of a filter θ. If the ele ctric field has an amplitude E, then the transmitted part of the wave has an amplit ude
(Figure). Since the intensity of a wave is proportiona l to its amplitude squared, the intensity I of the transmitted wave is
related to the incident wave by
where is the intensity of the polarized wave before pass ing through the filter. This equation is known as Malus’ s law.
Figure: A polarizing filter transmits only the compon ent of the wave parallel to its axis, reducing the in tensity of any light not
polarized parallel to its axis.
This Open Source Physics animation helps you visualize the electric field vectors as l ight encounters a polarizing filter. You
can rotate the filter—note that the angle displayed is in radians. You can also rotate the animation for 3D v isualization.
l l l i i d i b l i i il

9.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071Example: Calculating Intensity Reduction by a Polarizing Fil ter
What angle is needed between the direction of polari zed light and the axis of a polarizing filter to red uce its intensity by
90.0%?
Strategy
When the intensity is reduced by 90.0%, it is 10.0% or 0.100 times its original value. That is, I=0.100I. Using this
information, the equation I=I cos θ can be used to solve for the needed angle.
Solution
Solving Malus's law (Equation) for and substituting with the relationship between I and I gives
Solving for yields
Significance
A fairly large angle between the direction of polari zation and the filter axis is needed to reduce the i ntensity to 10.0% of its
original value. This seems reasonable based on experi menting with polarizing films. It is interesting tha t at an angle of 45°, the
intensity is reduced to 50% of its original value. Not e that 71.6° is 18.4° from reducing the intensity t o zero, and that at an
angle of 18.4°, the intensity is reduced to 90.0% of its or iginal value, giving evidence of symmetry.
Although we did not specify the direction in Example, let’s say the polarizing filter was rotated clockwi se by 71.6° to
reduce the light intensity by 90.0%. What would be th e intensity reduction if the polarizing filter were r otated
counterclockwise by 71.6°?
Answer
also 90.0%
Polarization by Reflection
By now, you can probably guess that polarizing sungla sses cut the glare in reflected light, because that light is polarized. You can
check this for yourself by holding polarizing sungla sses in front of you and rotating them while looking at light reflected from
water or glass. As you rotate the sunglasses, you will notic e the light gets bright and dim, but not completely black. This implies the
reflected light is partially polarized and cannot be com pletely blocked by a polarizing filter.
Figure illustrates what happens when unpolarized light is reflected from a surface. Vertically polarized lig ht is preferentially
refracted at the surface, so the reflected light is l eft more horizontally polarized. The reasons for thi s phenomenon are beyond the
scope of this text, but a convenient mnemonic for rem embering this is to imagine the polarization directi on to be like an arrow.
Vertical polarization is like an arrow perpendicular to the surface and is more likely to stick and not be reflected. Horizontal
polarization is like an arrow bouncing on its side an d is more likely to be reflected. Sunglasses with vert ical axes thus block more
reflected light than unpolarized light from other sour ces.0
Exercise

9.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071
Figure: Polarization by reflection. Unpolarized ligh t has equal amounts of vertical and horizontal polari zation. After
interaction with a surface, the vertical components a re preferentially absorbed or refracted, leaving the reflected light more
horizontally polarized. This is akin to arrows striking on their sides and bouncing off, whereas arrows strikin g on their tips go into
the surface.
Since the part of the light that is not reflected is refracted, the amount of polarization depends on th e indices of refraction of the
media involved. It can be shown that reflected light is compl etely polarized at an angle of reflection θ given by
where n is the medium in which the incident and refle cted light travel and n is the index of refraction of the medium that forms
the interface that reflects the light. This equation is known as Brewster’s law and θ is known as Brewster’s ang le, named after the
nineteenth-century Scottish physicist who discovered them.
This Open Source Physics animation shows incident, reflected, and refracted light as ray s and EM waves. Try rotating the
animation for 3D visualization and also change the a ngle of incidence. Near Brewster’s angle, the reflected light becomes
highly polarized.
Example: Calculating Polarization by Reflection
(a) At what angle will light traveling in air be completely p olarized horizontally when reflected from water? (b) From g lass?
Strategy
All we need to solve these problems are the indices of refraction. Air has n =1.00, water has n =1.333, and crown g lass has
n′ =1.520. The equation can be directly applied to find θ in each case.
Solution
a. Putting the known quantities into the equation
gives
Solving for the angle θ yieldsb
1 2
b
1 2
2 b
b

9.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071b. Similarly, for crown glass and air,
Thus,
Significance
Light reflected at these angles could be completely blocked by a good polarizing filter held with its axi s vertical. Brewster’s
angle for water and air are similar to those for gla ss and air, so that sunglasses are equally effective for light reflected from
either water or glass under similar circumstances. Lig ht that is not reflected is refracted into these med ia. Therefore, at an
incident angle equal to Brewster’s angle, the refract ed light is slightly polarized vertically. It is not completely polarized
vertically, because only a small fraction of the inci dent light is reflected, so a significant amount of horizontally polarized light
is refracted.
What happens at Brewster’s angle if the original incident li ght is already 100% vertically polarized?
Answer
There will be only refraction but no reflection.
Atomic Explanation of Polarizing Filters
Polarizing filters have a polarization axis that acts a s a slit. This slit passes EM waves (often visible lig ht) that have an electric field
parallel to the axis. This is accomplished with long molecul es aligned perpendicular to the axis, as shown in Figure.
Figure: Long molecules are aligned perpendicular to the axis of a polarizing filter. In an EM wave, the component of the
electric field perpendicular to these molecules passes t hrough the filter, whereas the component parallel to the molecules is
absorbed.
Figure illustrates how the component of the electric f ield parallel to the long molecules is absorbed. An E M wave is composed
of oscillating electric and magnetic fields. The elec tric field is strong compared with the magnetic field and is more effective in
exerting force on charges in the molecules. The mos t affected charged particles are the electrons, sin ce electron masses are small. If
an electron is forced to oscillate, it can absorb ene rgy from the EM wave. This reduces the field in the wave and, hence, reduces its
intensity. In long molecules, electrons can more eas ily oscillate parallel to the molecule than in the p erpendicular direction. The
electrons are bound to the molecule and are more res tricted in their movement perpendicular to the mole cule. Thus, the electrons
can absorb EM waves that have a component of their el ectric field parallel to the molecule. The electrons are much less responsiveExercise

9.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071to electric fields perpendicular to the molecule and allow these fields to pass. Thus, the axis of the p olarizing filter is perpendicular
to the length of the molecule.
Figure: Diagram of an electron in a long molecule o scillating parallel to the molecule. The oscillation of the electron absorbs
energy and reduces the intensity of the component of the EM wave that is parallel to the molecule.
Polarization by Scattering
If you hold your polarizing sunglasses in front of you and rotate them while looking at blue sky, you will se e the sky get bright and
dim. This is a clear indication that light scattered by air is partially polarized. Figure helps illustra te how this happens. Since
light is a transverse EM wave, it vibrates the electrons of air molecules perpendicular to the direction tha t it is traveling. The
electrons then radiate like small antennae. Since the y are oscillating perpendicular to the direction of the light ray, they produce EM
radiation that is polarized perpendicular to the di rection of the ray. When viewing the light along a l ine perpendicular to the original
ray, as in the figure, there can be no polarization i n the scattered light parallel to the original ray, because that would require the
original ray to be a longitudinal wave. Along other di rections, a component of the other polarization can b e projected along the line
of sight, and the scattered light is only partially polarized. Furthermore, multiple scattering can bri ng light to your eyes from other
directions and can contain different polarizations.

9.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071
Figure: Polarization by scattering. Unpolarized light scattering from air molecules shakes their electrons pe rpendicular to the
direction of the original ray. The scattered light t herefore has a polarization perpendicular to the ori ginal direction and none parallel
to the original direction.
Photographs of the sky can be darkened by polarizing filters, a trick used by many photographers to make clouds brighter by
contrast. Scattering from other particles, such as smo ke or dust, can also polarize light. Detecting polari zation in scattered EM
waves can be a useful analytical tool in determining the s cattering source.
A range of optical effects are used in sunglasses. Besi des being polarizing, sunglasses may have colored pig ments embedded in
them, whereas others use either a nonreflective or refl ective coating. A recent development is photochromi c lenses, which darken in
the sunlight and become clear indoors. Photochromic le nses are embedded with organic microcrystalline molecul es that change
their properties when exposed to UV in sunlight, but becom e clear in artificial lighting with no UV.
Liquid Crystals and Other Polarization Effects in Materials
Although you are undoubtedly aware of liquid crystal di splays (LCDs) found in watches, calculators, computer sc reens, cellphones,
flat screen televisions, and many other places, you m ay not be aware that they are based on polarization. Liquid crystals are so
named because their molecules can be aligned even tho ugh they are in a liquid. Liquid crystals have the pr operty that they can
rotate the polarization of light passing through the m by 90°. Furthermore, this property can be turned of f by the application of a
voltage, as illustrated in Figure. It is possible to manipulate this characteristic quickly and in small, well-defined regions to
create the contrast patterns we see in so many LCD device s.
In flat screen LCD televisions, a large light is generate d at the back of the TV. The light travels to the fr ont screen through millions
of tiny units called pixels (picture elements). One of these is shown in Figure. Each unit has three cells, with red, blue, or
green filters, each controlled independently. When th e voltage across a liquid crystal is switched off, the liquid crystal passes the
light through the particular filter. We can vary the picture contrast by varying the strength of the vo ltage applied to the liquid
crystal.

9.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071
Figure: (a) Polarized light is rotated 90° by a liqu id crystal and then passed by a polarizing filter that has its axis
perpendicular to the direction of the original pola rization. (b) When a voltage is applied to the liqui d crystal, the polarized light is
not rotated and is blocked by the filter, making the region dark in comparison with its surroundings. (c) L CDs can be made color
specific, small, and fast enough to use in laptop compu ters and TVs.
Many crystals and solutions rotate the plane of pola rization of light passing through them. Such substanc es are said to be optically
active. Examples include sugar water, insulin, and coll agen (Figure). In addition to depending on the type of substance, the
amount and direction of rotation depend on several other factors. Among these is the concentration of t he substance, the distance
the light travels through it, and the wavelength of l ight. Optical activity is due to the asymmetrical sh ape of molecules in the
substance, such as being helical. Measurements of the r otation of polarized light passing through substances can thus be used to
measure concentrations, a standard technique for suga rs. It can also give information on the shapes of mole cules, such as proteins,
and factors that affect their shapes, such as temperatur e and pH.
Figure. Optical activity is the ability of some substan ces to rotate the plane of polarization of light passi ng through them. The
rotation is detected with a polarizing filter or ana lyzer.
Glass and plastic become optically active when stressed: the greater the stress, the greater the effect. Optic al stress analysis on
complicated shapes can be performed by making plastic models of them and observing them through crossed f ilters, as seen in
Figure. It is apparent that the effect depends on wa velength as well as stress. The wavelength dependence is sometimes also
used for artistic purposes.

9.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84071
Figure: Optical stress analysis of a plastic lens placed b etween crossed polarizers. (credit: “Infopro”/Wikimedi a Commons)
Another interesting phenomenon associated with polariz ed light is the ability of some crystals to split an unpolarized beam of light
into two polarized beams. This occurs because the cry stal has one value for the index of refraction of po larized light but a different
value for the index of refraction of light polarize d in the perpendicular direction, so that each compon ent has its own angle of
refraction. Such crystals are said to be birefringent, and, when aligned properly, two perpendicularly polari zed beams will emerge
from the crystal (Figure). Birefringent crystals ca n be used to produce polarized beams from unpolarized light. Some
birefringent materials preferentially absorb one of t he polarizations. These materials are called dichroic and can produce
polarization by this preferential absorption. This is fu ndamentally how polarizing filters and other polarizer s work.
Figure: Birefringent materials, such as the common min eral calcite, split unpolarized beams of light into t wo with two
different values of index of refraction.
This page titled 9.4: Polarization is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
1.8: Polarization by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

9.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840729.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Express the time-averaged energy density of electromagne tic waves in terms of their electric and magnetic field ampli tudes
Calculate the Poynting vector and the energy intensity of electromagnetic waves
Explain how the energy of an electromagnetic wave depend s on its amplitude, whereas the energy of a photon is
proportional to its frequency
Anyone who has used a microwave oven knows there is ene rgy in electromagnetic waves. Sometimes this energy is obvious, such
as in the warmth of the summer Sun. Other times, it is s ubtle, such as the unfelt energy of gamma rays, which can destroy living
cells.
Electromagnetic waves bring energy into a system by v irtue of their electric and magnetic fields. These fie lds can exert forces and
move charges in the system and, thus, do work on them. However, there is energy in an electromagnetic wave itsel f, whether it is
absorbed or not. Once created, the fields carry energy away from a source. If some energy is later absorbed, the field strengths are
diminished and anything left travels on.
Clearly, the larger the strength of the electric and magnetic fields, the more work they can do and the g reater the energy the
electromagnetic wave carries. In electromagnetic waves, the amplitude is the maximum field strength of the electric and magnetic
fields (Figure). The wave energy is determined by the wa ve amplitude.
Figure: Energy carried by a wave depends on its ampli tude. With electromagnetic waves, doubling the E fields and B fields
quadruples the energy density u and the energy flux uc.
For a plane wave traveling in the direction of the po sitive x-axis with the phase of the wave chosen so that the wave maximum is at
the origin at, the electric and magnetic fields obey the equations
The energy in any part of the electromagnetic wave i s the sum of the energies of the electric and magne tic fields. This energy per
unit volume, or energy density u, is the sum of the energy density from the electric field and the energy density from the magnetic
field. Expressions for both field energy densities were discussed earlier (in Capacitance and in Inductance). Combining these
the contributions, we obtainLearning Objectives

9.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84072The expression then shows that the magnetic energy de nsity and electric energy density are equal, desp ite
the fact that changing electric fields generally pr oduce only small magnetic fields. The equality of th e electric and magnetic energy
densities leads to
The energy density moves with the electric and magnetic f ields in a similar manner to the waves themselves.
We can find the rate of transport of energy by consi dering a small time interval. As shown in Figure, the energy contained
in a cylinder of length and cross-sectional area A passes through the cross-sectional plane in the interval.
Figure: The energy contained in the electric and m agnetic fields of the electromagnetic wave in the vo lume
passes through the area in time.
The energy passing through area in time is
The energy per unit area per unit time passing throu gh a plane perpendicular to the wave, called the energy flux and denoted by,
can be calculated by dividing the energy by the area a nd the time interval.
More generally, the flux of energy through any surfac e also depends on the orientation of the surface. To take the direction into
account, we introduce a vector, called the Poynting vector, with the following definition:
The cross-product of and points in the direction perpendicular to both vectors. To confirm that the direction of is that of
wave propagation, and not its negative, return to Figure 16.3.2. Note that Lenz’s and Faraday’s laws imply that when th e magnetic
field shown is increasing in time, the electric field is greater at than at. The electric field is decr easing with increasing at
the given time and location. The proportionality bet ween electric and magnetic fields requires the electr ic field to increase in time
along with the magnetic field. This is possible only if the wave is propagating to the right in the diagr am, in which case, the relative
orientations show that is specifically in the direct ion of propagation of the electromagnetic wave.
The energy flux at any place also varies in time, as can be seen by substituting from Equation 16.3.19 into Equation.
Because the frequency of visible light is very high, of the order of, the energy flux for visible ligh t through any area is an
extremely rapidly varying quantity. Most measuring d evices, including our eyes, detect only an average ov er many cycles. The time
average of the energy flux is the intensity of the electromagnetic wave and is the power per un it area. It can be expressed by
averaging the cosine function in Equation over one complete cycle, which is the same as time-averaging o ver many cycles
(here, is one period):
We can either evaluate the integral, or else note tha t because the sine and cosine differ merely in phase, the average over a complete
cycle for is the same as for, to obtain

9.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84072where the angle brackets stand for the time-averagin g operation. The intensity of light moving at speed in vacuum is then
found to be
in terms of the maximum electric field strength, wh ich is also the electric field amplitude. Algebraic manipulation produces the
relationship
where is the magnetic field amplitude, which is the sa me as the maximum magnetic field strength. One more expression for
in terms of both electric and magnetic field strengths is useful. Substituting the fact that, the previous expre ssion becomes
We can use whichever of the three preceding equations is most convenient, because the three equations are r eally just different
versions of the same result: The energy in a wave is r elated to amplitude squared. Furthermore, because the se equations are based
on the assumption that the electromagnetic waves are sinusoi dal, the peak intensity is twice the average intensity; th at is,.
The beam from a small laboratory laser typically ha s an intensity of about. Assuming that the beam is
composed of plane waves, calculate the amplitudes of the ele ctric and magnetic fields in the beam.
Strategy
Use the equation expressing intensity in terms of electr ic field to calculate the electric field from the inte nsity.
Solution
From Equation, the intensity of the laser beam is
The amplitude of the electric field is therefore
The amplitude of the magnetic field can be obtained from:
A light bulb emits 5.00 W of power as visible light. W hat are the average electric and magnetic fields fr om the light at a
distance of 3.0 m?
StrategyExample: A Laser Beam
Light Bulb Fields

9.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84072Assume the bulb’s power output P is distributed uniformly over a sphere of radius 3.0 m to calculate the intensity, and from it,
the electric field.
Solution
The power radiated as visible light is then
Significance
The intensity I falls off as the distance squared if the radiation is disper sed uniformly in all directions.
A 60-kW radio transmitter on Earth sends its signal to a satellite 100 km away (Figure). At what distance in the same
direction would the signal have the same maximum field stre ngth if the transmitter’s output power were increased to 90 k W?
Figure: In three dimensions, a signal spreads over a soli d angle as it travels outward from its source.Radio Range

9.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84072Strategy
The area over which the power in a particular directi on is dispersed increases as distance squared, as ill ustrated in Figure.
Change the power output P by a factor of (90 kW/60 kW) and change the area b y the same factor to keep the
same. Then use the proportion of area A in the diagram to distance squared to find the distan ce that produces the calculated
change in area.
Solution
Using the proportionality of the areas to the squares of the distances, and solving, we obtain from the diagram
Significance
The range of a radio signal is the maximum distance between the transmitter and receiver that allows for n ormal operation. In
the absence of complications such as reflections fr om obstacles, the intensity follows an inverse square law, and doubling the
range would require multiplying the power by four.
This page titled 9.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

9.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840739.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the relationship of the radiation pressure and the energy density of an electromagnetic wave
Explain how the radiation pressure of light, while small, ca n produce observable astronomical effects
Material objects consist of charged particles. An elect romagnetic wave incident on the object exerts forces on the charged particles,
in accordance with the Lorentz force. These forces do work on the particles of the object, increasing its energy, as discussed in the
previous section. The energy that sunlight carries is a familiar part of every warm sunny day. A much less familiar feature of
electromagnetic radiation is the extremely weak pres sure that electromagnetic radiation produces by exert ing a force in the
direction of the wave. This force occurs because electro magnetic waves contain and transport momentum.
To understand the direction of the force for a very specific case, consider a plane electromagnetic wave incident on a metal in
which electron motion, as part of a current, is damped b y the resistance of the metal, so that the average e lectron motion is in phase
with the force causing it. This is comparable to an object moving against friction and stopping as soon as the force pushing it stops
(Figure). When the electric field is in the directi on of the positive y-axis, electrons move in the negative y-direction, with the
magnetic field in the direction of the positive z-axis. By applying the right-hand rule, and accountin g for the negative charge of the
electron, we can see that the force on the electron f rom the magnetic field is in the direction of the p ositive x-axis, which is the
direction of wave propagation. When the field revers es, the field does too, and the force is again in th e same direction.
Maxwell’s equations together with the Lorentz force equa tion imply the existence of radiation pressure much more generally than
this specific example, however.
Figure: Electric and magnetic fields of an electroma gnetic wave can combine to produce a force in the d irection of
propagation, as illustrated for the special case of ele ctrons whose motion is highly damped by the resistance o f a metal.
Maxwell predicted that an electromagnetic wave carries momentum. An object absorbing an electromagnetic wave wo uld
experience a force in the direction of propagation of the wave. The force corresponds to radiation press ure exerted on the object by
the wave. The force would be twice as great if the radiatio n were reflected rather than absorbed.
Maxwell’s prediction was confirmed in 1903 by Nichols an d Hull by precisely measuring radiation pressures with a torsion
balance. The schematic arrangement is shown in Figure. The mirrors suspended from a fiber were housed insid e a glass
container. Nichols and Hull were able to obtain a small measurable deflection of the mirrors from shining light on one of them.
From the measured deflection, they could calculate th e unbalanced force on the mirror, and obtained agreem ent with the predicted
value of the force.Learning Objectives

9.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84073
Figure: Simplified diagram of the central part of th e apparatus Nichols and Hull used to precisely measure r adiation pressure
and confirm Maxwell’s prediction.
The radiation pressure applied by an electromagnetic wave on a perfectly absorbing surface turns out to be equal to the
energy density of the wave:
If the material is perfectly reflecting, such as a me tal surface, and if the incidence is along the normal to the surface, then the
pressure exerted is twice as much because the momentum di rection reverses upon reflection:
We can confirm that the units are right:
Equations and give the instantaneous pressure, but because the energy density oscillates ra pidly, we are usually
interested in the time-averaged radiation pressure, whi ch can be written in terms of intensity:
Radiation pressure plays a role in explaining many observed astronomical phenomena, including the appearance of comets. Comets
are basically chunks of icy material in which frozen gases and particles of rock and dust are embedded. Wh en a comet approaches
the Sun, it warms up and its surface begins to evapor ate. The coma of the comet is the hazy area around it from the g ases and dust.
Some of the gases and dust form tails when they leave the comet. Notice in Figure that a comet has two tails. The ion tail (or
gas tail) is composed mainly of ionized gases. These ions int eract electromagnetically with the solar wind, which i s a continuous
stream of charged particles emitted by the Sun. The force of the solar wind on the ionized gases is strong enough that the ion tail
almost always points directly away from the Sun. The se cond tail is composed of dust particles. Because the dust tail is electrically
neutral, it does not interact with the solar wind. Howev er, this tail is affected by the radiation pressure p roduced by the light from
the Sun. Although quite small, this pressure is strong eno ugh to cause the dust tail to be displaced from the path of the comet.

9.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84073
Figure: Evaporation of material being warmed by the Sun forms two tails, as shown in this photo of Comet Ison. (credit:
modification of work by E. Slawik—ESO)
On February 9, 1986, Comet Halley was at its closest poin t to the Sun, about from the center of the Sun. The
average power output of the Sun is.
a. Calculate the radiation pressure on the comet at this po int in its orbit. Assume that the comet reflects all the i ncident light.
b. Suppose that a 10-kg chunk of material of cross-sectiona l area breaks loose from the comet. Calculate the
force on this chunk due to the solar radiation. Compar e this force with the gravitational force of the Sun.
Strategy
Calculate the intensity of solar radiation at the gi ven distance from the Sun and use that to calculate t he radiation pressure.
From the pressure and area, calculate the force.
Solution
a. The intensity of the solar radiation is the avera ge solar power per unit area. Hence, at from the cent er of the Sun,
we have
Assuming the comet reflects all the incident radiation, we obtain from Equation
b. The force on the chunk due to the radiation isExample: Halley’s Comet

9.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84073whereas the gravitational force of the Sun is
Significance
The gravitational force of the Sun on the chunk is ther efore much greater than the force of the radiation.
After Maxwell showed that light carried momentum as well as energy, a novel idea eventually emerged, initiall y only as science
fiction. Perhaps a spacecraft with a large reflecting light sail could use radiation pressure for propulsion. Such a v ehicle would not
have to carry fuel. It would experience a constant b ut small force from solar radiation, instead of the sho rt bursts from rocket
propulsion. It would accelerate slowly, but by being a ccelerated continuously, it would eventually reach gr eat speeds. A spacecraft
with small total mass and a sail with a large area would be nece ssary to obtain a usable acceleration.
When the space program began in the 1960s, the idea started to receive serious attention from NASA. The most recent
development in light propelled spacecraft has come from a citizen-funded group, the Planetary Society. It is currently testing the
use of light sails to propel a small vehicle built from CubeSats, tiny satellites that NASA places in orbit for variou s research
projects during space launches intended mainly for oth er purposes.
The LightSail spacecraft shown below (Figure) consists of three CubeSats bundled together. It has a total mass of only about
5 kg and is about the size as a loaf of bread. Its s ails are made of very thin Mylar and open after lau nch to have a surface area of
Figure: Two small CubeSat satellites deployed from the International Space Station in May, 2016. The solar sa ils open out
when the CubeSats are far enough away from the Stati on.
The first LightSail spacecraft was launched in 2015 to test the sail depl oyment system. It was placed in low-earth orbit in 201 5
by hitching a ride on an Atlas 5 rocket launched for an unrelated mission. The test was successful, but the low-earth orbit
allowed too much drag on the spacecraft to accelerat e it by sunlight. Eventually, it burned in the atmos phere, as expected. The
next Planetary Society’s LightSail solar sailing spacecraft is scheduled for 2018.Example: LightSail Acceleration

9.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84073
The Lightsail is based on the on NASA's NanoSail-D project. (Public domain; NASA).
LightSail Acceleration
The intensity of energy from sunlight at a distance o f 1 AU from the Sun is. The LightSail spacecraft has sails with
total area of and a total mass of 5.0 kg. Calculate the maximum acceleration LightSail spacecraft could achieve from
radiation pressure when it is about 1 AU from the Sun.
Strategy
The maximum acceleration can be expected when the sa il is opened directly facing the Sun. Use the light in tensity to calculate
the radiation pressure and from it, the force on the sails. Then use Newton’s second law to calculate the acceleration.
Solution
The radiation pressure is
The resulting acceleration is
Significance
If this small acceleration continued for a year, the cra ft would attain a speed of 1829 m/s, or 6600 km/h.
How would the speed and acceleration of a radiation-pro pelled spacecraft be affected as it moved farther fr om the Sun on an
interplanetary space flight?
Solution
Its acceleration would decrease because the radiation force is proportional to the intensity of light fr om the Sun, which decreases
with distance. Its speed, however, would not change except for the effects of gravity from the Sun and planets.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many
contributing authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics under a Creative Commons Attribution
License (by 4.0).
This page titled 9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Exercise

9.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407316.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

9.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840749.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how electromagnetic waves are divided into differe nt ranges, depending on wavelength and corresponding
frequency
Describe how electromagnetic waves in different categor ies are produced
Describe some of the many practical everyday application s of electromagnetic waves
Electromagnetic waves have a vast range of practical everyday applications that includes such diverse us es as communication by
cell phone and radio broadcasting, WiFi, cooking, vis ion, medical imaging, and treating cancer. In this mo dule, we discuss how
electromagnetic waves are classified into categories such as radio, infrared, ultraviolet, and so on. We al so summarize some of the
main applications for each range.
The different categories of electromagnetic waves dif fer in their wavelength range, or equivalently, in t heir corresponding
frequency ranges. Their properties change smoothly f rom one frequency range to the next, with different applications in each range.
A brief overview of the production and utilization of el ectromagnetic waves is found in Table.
Table: Electromagnetic Waves
Type of wave Production Applications Issues
Radio Accelerating chargesCommunications, Remote
controls, MRIRequires control for band use
MicrowavesAccelerating charges and
thermal agitationCommunications, Ovens,
Radar, Cell phone use
InfraredThermal agitation and
electronic transitionsThermal imaging, HeatingAbsorbed by atmosphere,
Greenhouse effect
Visible lightThermal agitation and
electronic transitionsPhotosynthesis, Human vision
UltravioletThermal agitation and
electronic transitionsSterilization, Vitamin D
productionOzone depletion, Cancer
causing
X-raysInner electronic transitions and
fast collisionsSecurity, Medical diagnosis,
Cancer therapyCancer causing
Gamma rays Nuclear decayNuclear medicine, Security,
Medical diagnosis, Cancer
therapyCancer causing, Radiation
damage
The relationship between frequency f and wavelength applies to all waves and ensures that greater frequency means
smaller wavelength. Figure shows how the various types of electromagnetic waves are categorized according to t heir
wavelengths and frequencies - that is, it shows the electro magnetic spectrum.Learning Objectives

9.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84074
Figure: The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the maj or categories of electromagnetic waves.
Radio Waves
The term radio waves refers to electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths greater than about 0.1 m. Radio waves are commonly
used for audio communications (i.e., for radios), bu t the term is used for electromagnetic waves in this ra nge regardless of their
application. Radio waves typically result from an alt ernating current in the wires of a broadcast antenna. They cover a very broad
wavelength range and are divided into many subranges, including microwaves, electromagnetic waves used for AM and FM radio,
cellular telephones, and TV signals.
There is no lowest frequency of radio waves, but ELF wa ves, or “extremely low frequency” are among the lowest frequencies
commonly encountered, from 3 Hz to 3 kHz. The accelera ting charge in the ac currents of electrical power li nes produce
electromagnetic waves in this range. ELF waves are able t o penetrate sea water, which strongly absorbs electrom agnetic waves of
higher frequency, and therefore are useful for submari ne communications.
In order to use an electromagnetic wave to transmit i nformation, the amplitude, frequency, or phase of the wave is modulated, or
varied in a controlled way that encodes the intended information into the wave. In AM radio transmission, the amplitude of the
wave is modulated to mimic the vibrations of the soun d being conveyed. Fourier’s theorem implies that the modulated AM wave
amounts to a superposition of waves covering some narr ow frequency range. Each AM station is assigned a speci fic carrier
frequency that, by international agreement, is allowed to vary by. In FM radio transmission, the frequency of the wave is
modulated to carry this information, as illustrated in Figure, and the frequency of each station is allowed to use 100 kHz on
each side of its carrier frequency. The electromagne tic wave produces a current in a receiving antenna, a nd the radio or television
processes the signal to produce the sound and any im age. The higher the frequency of the radio wave used t o carry the data, the
greater the detailed variation of the wave that can be carried by modulating it over each time unit, an d the more data that can be
transmitted per unit of time. The assigned frequencie s for AM broadcasting are 540 to 1600 kHz, and for FM are 88 MHz to108
MHz.
Figure: Electromagnetic waves are used to carry commu nications signals by varying the wave’s amplitude (AM), its
frequency (FM), or its phase.

9.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84074Cell phone conversations, and television voice and video images are commonly transmitted as digital data, by converting the
signal into a sequence of binary ones and zeros. This allows clearer data transmission when the signal is weak, and allows using
computer algorithms to compress the digital data to transmit more data in each frequency range. Compute r data as well is
transmitted as a sequence of binary ones and zeros, each on e or zero constituting one bit of data.
Microwaves
Microwaves are the highest-frequency electromagnetic waves that can be produced by currents in macroscopic circuits a nd
devices. Microwave frequencies range from about to ne arly. Their high frequencies correspond to short wave lengths
compared with other radio waves—hence the name “microwa ve.” Microwaves also occur naturally as the cosmic ba ckground
radiation left over from the origin of the universe. Along with other ranges of electromagnetic waves, the y are part of the radiation
that any object above absolute zero emits and absor bs because of thermal agitation, that is, from the thermal motion of its atoms
and molecules.
Most satellite-transmitted information is carried on microwaves. Radar is a common application of microwaves. By detecting a nd
timing microwave echoes, radar systems can determine the distance to objects as diverse as clouds, aircra ft, or even the surface of
Venus.
Microwaves of 2.45 GHz are commonly used in microwave oven s. The electrons in a water molecule tend to remain clo ser to the
oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen nuclei (Figure). Thi s creates two separated centers of equal and opposit e charges, giving
the molecule a dipole moment. The oscillating electric field of the microwaves in side the oven exerts a torque that tends to align
each molecule first in one direction and then in th e other, with the motion of each molecule coupled to others around it. This pumps
energy into the continual thermal motion of the wate r to heat the food. The plate under the food contai ns no water, and remains
relatively unheated.
Figure: The oscillating electric field in a microwav e oven exerts a torque on water molecules because of t heir dipole moment,
and the torque reverses direction times per second. In teractions between the molecules distributes the energy being
pumped into them. The and denote the charge distri bution on the molecules.
The microwaves in a microwave oven reflect off the wal ls of the oven, so that the superposition of waves prod uces standing waves,
similar to the standing waves of a vibrating guitar or violin string (Normal Modes of a Standing Sound Wave). A rotating fan acts
as a stirrer by reflecting the microwaves in different di rections, and food turntables, help spread out the hot spots.
How far apart are the hotspots in a 2.45-GHz microwave oven?
Strategy
Consider the waves along one direction in the oven, being ref lected at the opposite wall from where they are generated.
Solution
The antinodes, where maximum intensity occurs, are half the wavelength apart, with separationExample: Why Microwave Ovens Heat Unevenly

9.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84074Significance
The distance between the hot spots in a microwave oven are deter mined by the wavelength of the microwaves.
A cell phone has a radio receiver and a weak radio t ransmitter, both of which can quickly tune to hundre ds of specifically assigned
microwave frequencies. The low intensity of the transm itted signal gives it an intentionally limited rang e. A ground-based system
links the phone to only to the broadcast tower assigned to the specific small area, or cell, and smoothly t ransitions its connection to
the next cell when the signal reception there is the str onger one. This enables a cell phone to be used while chang ing location.
Microwaves also provide the WiFi that enables owners of cell phones, laptop computers, an d similar devices to connect wirelessly
to the Internet at home and at coffee shops and airp orts. A wireless WiFi router is a device that exchange s data over the Internet
through the cable or another connection, and uses mic rowaves to exchange the data wirelessly with devices such as cell phones and
computers. The term WiFi itself refers to the standard s followed in modulating and analyzing the microwaves so that wireless
routers and devices from different manufacturers work compatibly with one another. The computer data in e ach direction consist of
sequences of binary zeros and ones, each correspondi ng to a binary bit. The microwaves are in the range o f 2.4 GHz to 5.0 GHz
range.
Other wireless technologies also use microwaves to provi de everyday communications between devices. Bluetooth developed
alongside WiFi as a standard for radio communication in the 2.4-GHz range between nearby devices, for examp le, to link to
headphones and audio earpieces to devices such as r adios, or a driver’s cell phone to a hands-free devic e to allow answering phone
calls without fumbling directly with the cell phone.
Microwaves find use also in radio tagging, using RFID (ra dio frequency identification) technology. Examples a re RFID tags
attached to store merchandize, transponder for toll booths use attached to the windshield of a car, or eve n a chip embedded into a
pet’s skin. The device responds to a microwave signal by emitting a signal of its own with encoded informa tion, allowing stores to
quickly ring up items at their cash registers, drivers to charge tolls to their account without stopping, and lost pets to be reunited
with their owners. NFC (near field communication) works sim ilarly, except it is much shorter range. Its mechanism of interaction is
the induced magnetic field at microwave frequencies b etween two coils. Cell phones that have NFC capability a nd the right
software can supply information for purchases using the cell phone instead of a physical credit card. Th e very short range of the
data transfer is a desired security feature in this case.
Infrared Radiation
The boundary between the microwave and infrared regio ns of the electromagnetic spectrum is not well defined (Figure).
Infrared radiation is generally produced by thermal motion, and the vi bration and rotation of atoms and molecules. Electroni c
transitions in atoms and molecules can also produce infrared radiation. About half of the solar energy arriving at Earth is i n the
infrared region, with most of the rest in the visible pa rt of the spectrum. About 23% of the solar energy is absorbed in the
atmosphere, about 48% is absorbed at Earth’s surface, and ab out 29% is reflected back into space.
The range of infrared frequencies extends up to the lower limit of visible light, just below red. In fac t, infrared means “below red.”
Water molecules rotate and vibrate particularly well at infrared frequencies. Reconnaissance satellites can detect buildings,
vehicles, and even individual humans by their infrare d emissions, whose power radiation is proportional to t he fourth power of the
absolute temperature. More mundanely, we use infrared lamps, including those called quartz heaters, to preferentially warm us
because we absorb infrared better than our surroundings.
The familiar handheld “remotes” for changing channe ls and settings on television sets often transmit thei r signal by modulating an
infrared beam. If you try to use a TV remote without the infrared emitter being in direct line of sight with the infrared detector, you
may find the television not responding. Some remotes use Bluetooth instead and reduce this annoyance.

9.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84074Visible Light
Visible light is the narrow segment of the electromagnetic spectr um between about 400 nm and about 750 nm to which the normal
human eye responds. Visible light is produced by vib rations and rotations of atoms and molecules, as well as by electronic
transitions within atoms and molecules. The receivers or de tectors of light largely utilize electronic transitions.
Red light has the lowest frequencies and longest wave lengths, whereas violet has the highest frequencies an d shortest wavelengths
(Figure). Blackbody radiation from the Sun peaks in t he visible part of the spectrum but is more intense in the red than in the
violet, making the sun yellowish in appearance.
Figure. A small part of the electromagnetic spectrum that includes its visible components. The divisions betwe en infrared,
visible, and ultraviolet are not perfectly distinct, nor are those between the seven rainbow colors.
Living things - plants and animals - have evolved to utilize and respond to parts of the electromagnetic spectrum in which they are
embedded. We enjoy the beauty of nature through visi ble light. Plants are more selective. Photosynthesis uses parts of the visible
spectrum to make sugars.
Ultraviolet Radiation
Ultraviolet means “above violet.” The electromagnetic frequencies of ultraviolet radiation (UV) extend upward from violet, the
highest-frequency visible light. The highest-frequenc y ultraviolet overlaps with the lowest-frequency X-rays. The wavelengths of
ultraviolet extend from 400 nm down to about 10 nm a t its highest frequencies. Ultraviolet is produced by atomic and molecular
motions and electronic transitions.
UV radiation from the Sun is broadly subdivided into t hree wavelength ranges: UV-A (320–400 nm) is the lowest frequency, then
UV-B (290–320 nm) and UV-C (220–290 nm). Most UV-B and all UV-C are absorbed by ozone (molecules in the up per
atmosphere. Consequently, 99% of the solar UV radiation reac hing Earth’s surface is UV-A.
Sunburn is caused by large exposures to UV-B and UV-C, and repeated exposure can increase the likelihood of skin cancer. The
tanning response is a defense mechanism in which the body produces pigments in inert skin layers to redu ce exposure of the living
cells below.
As examined in a later chapter, the shorter the waveleng th of light, the greater the energy change of an at om or molecule that
absorbs the light in an electronic transition. This makes short-wavelength ultraviolet light damaging to living cells. It also explains
why ultraviolet radiation is better able than visible li ght to cause some materials to glow, or fluoresce.
Besides the adverse effects of ultraviolet radiation, there are also benefits of exposure in nature and u ses in technology. Vitamin D
production in the skin results from exposure to UV-B radiation, generally from sunlight. Several studies su ggest vitamin D
deficiency is associated with the development of a r ange of cancers (prostate, breast, colon), as well as osteoporosis. Low-intensity
ultraviolet has applications such as providing the en ergy to cause certain dyes to fluoresce and emit visi ble light, for example, in
printed money to display hidden watermarks as counterfeit protection.
X-Rays
X-rays have wavelengths from about to. They have shorter wavelengths, and higher frequencies, than ultraviol et, so
that the energy they transfer at an atomic level is greater. As a result, X-rays have adverse effects on li ving cells similar to those of
ultraviolet radiation, but they are more penetratin g. Cancer and genetic defects can be induced by X-ray s. Because of their effect on
rapidly dividing cells, X-rays can also be used to treat a nd even cure cancer.
The widest use of X-rays is for imaging objects that ar e opaque to visible light, such as the human body or aircraft parts. In
humans, the risk of cell damage is weighed carefully again st the benefit of the diagnostic information obtained.

9.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84074Gamma Rays
Soon after nuclear radioactivity was first detected in 1896, it was found that at least three distinct types of radiation were being
emitted, and these were designated as alpha, beta, and gamma rays. The most penetrating nuclear radiation, the gamma ray -ray)
was later found to be an extremely high-frequency elect romagnetic wave.
The lower end of the -ray frequency range overlaps t he upper end of the X-ray range. Gamma rays have charac teristics identical to
X-rays of the same frequency—they differ only in sou rce. The name “gamma rays” is generally used for el ectromagnetic radiation
emitted by a nucleus, while X-rays are generally prod uced by bombarding a target with energetic electrons in an X-ray tube. At
higher frequencies, -rays are more penetrating and m ore damaging to living tissue. They have many of th e same uses as X-rays,
including cancer therapy. Gamma radiation from radioactiv e materials is used in nuclear medicine.
Use this simulation to explore how light interacts with molecules in our atmos phere.
Explore how light interacts with molecules in our atmosphere.
Identify that absorption of light depends on the molecu le and the type of light.
Relate the energy of the light to the resulting motion.
Identify that energy increases from microwave to ultraviole t.
Predict the motion of a molecule based on the type of light it absorbs.
How do the electromagnetic waves for the different kinds of electromagnetic radiation differ?
Answer
They fall into different ranges of wavelength, and therefor e also different corresponding ranges of frequency.
This page titled 9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.Exercise

9.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840759.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer)
Check Your Understanding
16.1. It is greatest immediately after the current is switch ed on. The displacement current and the magnetic fi eld from it are
proportional to the rate of change of electric field betwee n the plates, which is greatest when the plates first begin to charge.
16.2. No. The changing electric field according to the mod ified version of Ampère’s law would necessarily induce a
changing magnetic field.
16.3. (1) Faraday’s law, (2) the Ampère-Maxwell law
16.4. a. The directions of wave propagation, of the E field, and of B field are all mutually perpendicular.
b. The speed of the electromagnetic wave is the speed of l ight independent of frequency.
c. The ratio of electric and magnetic field amplitudes is.
16.5. Its acceleration would decrease because the radiatio n force is proportional to the intensity of light fr om the Sun, which
decreases with distance. Its speed, however, would not chang e except for the effects of gravity from the Sun and planet s.
16.6. They fall into different ranges of wavelength, and therefor e also different corresponding ranges of frequency.
Conceptual Questions
1. The current into the capacitor to change the electr ic field between the plates is equal to the displacem ent current between
the plates.
3. The first demonstration requires simply observing the current produced in a wire that experiences a changin g magnetic
field. The second demonstration requires moving elec tric charge from one location to another, and theref ore involves electric
currents that generate a changing electric field. Th e magnetic fields from these currents are not easily separated from the
magnetic field that the displacement current produces.
5. in (a), because the electric field is parallel to the wire, accelerating the electrons
7. A steady current in a dc circuit will not produce el ectromagnetic waves. If the magnitude of the current va ries while
remaining in the same direction, the wires will emit el ectromagnetic waves, for example, if the current is turne d on or off.
9. The amount of energy (about) is can quickly produce a considerable change in temperature, but the ligh t
pressure (about) is much too small to notice.
11. It has the magnitude of the energy flux and points i n the direction of wave propagation. It gives the dir ection of energy
flow and the amount of energy per area transported per secon d.
13. The force on a surface acting over time is the mom entum that the force would impart to the object. The momentum
change of the light is doubled if the light is refl ected back compared with when it is absorbed, so the f orce acting on the
object is twice as great.
15. a. According to the right hand rule, the direction of energy propagation would reverse.
b. This would leave the vector, and therefore the propaga tion direction, the same.
17. a. Radio waves are generally produced by alternating cur rent in a wire or an oscillating electric field between two pl ates;
b. Infrared radiation is commonly produced by heate d bodies whose atoms and the charges in them vibrate at about the
right frequency.
19. a. blue;
b. Light of longer wavelengths than blue passes through the air with less scattering, whereas more of the bl ue light is
scattered in different directions in the sky to give i t is blue color.
21. A typical antenna has a stronger response when the wi res forming it are orientated parallel to the electr ic field of the radio
wave.

9.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407523. No, it is very narrow and just a small portion of the overall electromagnetic spectrum.
25. Visible light is typically produced by changes of ene rgies of electrons in randomly oriented atoms and m olecules. Radio
waves are typically emitted by an ac current flowing along a wire, that has fixed orientation and produces electric fields
pointed in particular directions.
27. Radar can observe objects the size of an airplane a nd uses radio waves of about 0.5 cm in wavelength. Visib le light can
be used to view single biological cells and has wavelength s of about.
29. ELF radio waves
31. The frequency of 2.45 GHz of a microwave oven is close to th e specific frequencies in the 2.4 GHz band used for WiFi.
Problems
33. because
35. a.;
b.;
c.; which is the sum of and, consistent with
how the displacement current maintaining the continuity of current.
37.
39.
41. 499 s
43. 25 m
45. a. 5.00 V/m;
b.;
c. 31.4 cm;
d. toward the + x-axis;
e.
47.
49. The magnetic field is downward, and it has magnitude.
51. a.;
b. 394 m
53. 11.5 m
55.
57. a.;
b.
59.
61. a.;
b.
63. a.;
b.;

9.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84075c. 1.12 W
65.
67.
69. a.
b. it is reduced to half the pressure,
71. a.;
b.
73. a.;
b. X-rays
75. a. The wavelength range is 187 m to 556 m.
b. The wavelength range is 2.78 m to 3.41 m.
77.
79. time for 1 bit = s, difference in travel time is s
81. a.;
b.;
c.
83., the non-oscillating geomagnetic field of 25–65 is mu ch larger
85. a.;
b.;
c.
87. a.;
b. radio wave;
c.
Additional Problems
89.
91., which is much greater than Earth’s circumference
93. a. 564 W;
b.;
c.;
d.
95. a.;
b.;
c.

9.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407597. a.;
b.
99. Power into the wire=
101. 0.431
103. a.;
b.;
c. 33 ns
105.
Challenge Problems
107. a.;
b. The radiation pressure is greater than the Sun’s g ravity if the particle size is smaller, because the gr avitational force
varies as the radius cubed while the radiation pressure var ies as the radius squared.
c. The radiation force outward implies that particles smaller than this are less likely to be near the Sun than outside the
range of the Sun’s radiation pressure.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 9.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.9: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

9.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840769.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
16.2 Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
1. Explain how the displacement current maintains the cont inuity of current in a circuit containing a capacitor.
2. Describe the field lines of the induced magnetic fie ld along the edge of the imaginary horizontal cylin der shown below if
the cylinder is in a spatially uniform electric field t hat is horizontal, pointing to the right, and increasing in magnitude.
3. Why is it much easier to demonstrate in a student lab that a changing magnetic field induces an electric field than it is to
demonstrate that a changing electric field produces a mag netic field?
16.3 Plane Electromagnetic Waves
4. If the electric field of an electromagnetic wave is oscillating along the z-axis and the magnetic field is oscillating along the
x-axis, in what possible direction is the wave traveling?
5. In which situation shown below will the electromagnetic wa ve be more successful in inducing a current in the wire?
Explain.

9.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840766. In which situation shown below will the electromagnetic wave be more successful in inducing a current in the loop?
Explain.
7. Under what conditions might wires in a circuit where the curren t flows in only one direction emit electromagnetic waves?
8. Shown below is the interference pattern of two radio an tennas broadcasting the same signal. Explain how thi s is analogous
to the interference pattern for sound produced by t wo speakers. Could this be used to make a directiona l antenna system that
broadcasts preferentially in certain directions? Expla in.
16.4 Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
9. When you stand outdoors in the sunlight, why can you feel the energy that the sunlight carries, but not the momentum it
carries?
10. How does the intensity of an electromagnetic wave depen d on its electric field? How does it depend on its magne tic
field?
11. What is the physical significance of the Poynting vecto r?

9.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407612. A 2.0-mW helium-neon laser transmits a continuous beam of red light of cross-sectional area. If the beam d oes
not diverge appreciably, how would its rms electric field vary with distance from the laser? Explain.
16.5 Momentum and Radiation Pressure
13. Why is the radiation pressure of an electromagnetic wa ve on a perfectly reflecting surface twice as large a s the pressure
on a perfectly absorbing surface?
14. Why did the early Hubble Telescope photos of Comet Is on approaching Earth show it to have merely a fuzzy c oma
around it, and not the pronounced double tail that devel oped later (see below)?
(credit: ESA, Hubble)
15. (a) If the electric field and magnetic field in a si nusoidal plane wave were interchanged, in which directi on relative to
before would the energy propagate?
(b) What if the electric and the magnetic fields were both changed to their negatives?
16.6 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
16. Compare the speed, wavelength, and frequency of radio waves and X-rays traveling in a vacuum.
17. Accelerating electric charge emits electromagnetic r adiation. How does this apply in each case: (a) radio wav es, (b)
infrared radiation.
18. Compare and contrast the meaning of the prefix “micro” in the names of SI units in the term microwaves.
19. Part of the light passing through the air is scattere d in all directions by the molecules comprising the atmosphere. The
wavelengths of visible light are larger than molecul ar sizes, and the scattering is strongest for wavelengt hs of light closest to
sizes of molecules.
(a) Which of the main colors of light is scattered the m ost?
(b) Explain why this would give the sky its familiar back ground color at midday.
20. When a bowl of soup is removed from a microwave oven, t he soup is found to be steaming hot, whereas the bowl is only
warm to the touch. Discuss the temperature changes that have occu rred in terms of energy transfer.
21. Certain orientations of a broadcast television antenna give better reception than others for a particular station. Explain.
22. What property of light corresponds to loudness in sound?
23. Is the visible region a major portion of the electromagn etic spectrum?
24. Can the human body detect electromagnetic radiation tha t is outside the visible region of the spectrum?

9.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407625. Radio waves normally have their E and B fields in specific directions, whereas visible light usually has its E and B fields
in random and rapidly changing directions that are p erpendicular to each other and to the propagation d irection. Can you
explain why?
26. Give an example of resonance in the reception of electrom agnetic waves.
27. Illustrate that the size of details of an object tha t can be detected with electromagnetic waves is relat ed to their
wavelength, by comparing details observable with two differen t types (for example, radar and visible light).
28. In which part of the electromagnetic spectrum are each o f these waves:
(a),
(b),
(c),
(d)
29. In what range of electromagnetic radiation are the e lectromagnetic waves emitted by power lines in a count ry that uses
50-Hz ac current?
30. If a microwave oven could be modified to merely tune the waves generated to be in the infrared range instea d of using
microwaves, how would this affect the uneven heating of the ove n?
31. A leaky microwave oven in a home can sometimes cause inter ference with the homeowner’s WiFi system. Why?
32. When a television news anchor in a studio speaks to a reporter in a distant country, there is sometimes a not iceable lag
between when the anchor speaks in the studio and when t he remote reporter hears it and replies. Explain what c auses this
delay.
Problems
16.2 Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
33. Show that the magnetic field at a distance r from the axis of two circular parallel plates, produc ed by placing charge Q(t)
on the plates is
34. Express the displacement current in a capacitor in t erms of the capacitance and the rate of change of th e voltage across
the capacitor.
35. A potential difference is maintained across a para llel-plate capacitor with capacitance C consisting of two
circular parallel plates. A thin wire with resistance R connects the centers of the two plates, allowing char ge to leak between
plates while they are charging.
(a) Obtain expressions for the leakage current in th e thin wire. Use these results to obtain an expression f or the
current in the wires connected to the capacitor.
(b) Find the displacement current in the space between the pla tes from the changing electric field between the plate s.
(c) Compare with the sum of the displacement current and resistor current between the plates, and
explain why the relationship you observe would be expecte d.
36. Suppose the parallel-plate capacitor shown below is accu mulating charge at a rate of 0.010 C/s. What is the i nduced
magnetic field at a distance of 10 cm from the capacit ator?

9.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84076
37. The potential difference V(t) between parallel plates shown above is instantaneously i ncreasing at a rate of. What
is the displacement current between the plates if the separ ation of the plates is 1.00 cm and they have an area of?
38. A parallel-plate capacitor has a plate area of and a separation of 0.0100 m. What must be must be the
angular frequency for a voltage with to produce a maximum displacement induced current of
1.00 A between the plates?
39. The voltage across a parallel-plate capacitor with ar ea and separation varies sinusoidally as
, where t is in seconds. Find the displacement current between the plates.
40. The voltage across a parallel-plate capacitor with ar ea A and separation d varies with time t as, where is a
constant. Find the displacement current between the plates.
16.3 Plane Electromagnetic Waves
41. If the Sun suddenly turned off, we would not know it un til its light stopped coming. How long would that be, gi ven that
the Sun is away?
42. What is the maximum electric field strength in an ele ctromagnetic wave that has a maximum magnetic field strength of
(about 10 times Earth’s magnetic field)?
43. An electromagnetic wave has a frequency of 12 MHz. What is its wavelength in vacuum?
44. If electric and magnetic field strengths vary sinuso idally in time at frequency 1.00 GHz, being zero at, then
and.
(a) When are the field strengths next equal to zero?
(b) When do they reach their most negative value? (c) How much time is needed for them to complete one
cycle?
45. The electric field of an electromagnetic wave traveli ng in vacuum is described by the following wave function:
where k is the wavenumber in rad/m, x is in m, t is in s.
Find the following quantities:
(a) amplitude
(b) frequency
(c) wavelength
(d) the direction of the travel of the wave
(e) the associated magnetic field wave
46. A plane electromagnetic wave of frequency 20 GHz move s in the positive y-axis direction such that its ele ctric field is
pointed along the z-axis. The amplitude of the elect ric field is 10 V/m. The start of time is chosen so t hat at, the electric
field has a value 10 V/m at the origin.
(a) Write the wave function that will describe the electric f ield wave.

9.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84076(b) Find the wave function that will describe the associate d magnetic field wave.
47. The following represents an electromagnetic wave travelin g in the direction of the positive y-axis:
The wave is passing through a wide tube of circular cro ss-section of radius R whose axis is along the y-axis. Find the
expression for the displacement current through the tub e.
16.4 Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
48. While outdoors on a sunny day, a student holds a larg e convex lens of radius 4.0 cm above a sheet of paper to produce a
bright spot on the paper that is 1.0 cm in radius, rat her than a sharp focus. By what factor is the electri c field in the bright
spot of light related to the electric field of sunlight le aving the side of the lens facing the paper?
49. A plane electromagnetic wave travels northward. At one instant, its electric field has a magnitude of 6.0 V/m and points
eastward. What are the magnitude and direction of the magne tic field at this instant?
50. The electric field of an electromagnetic wave is given b y
Write the equations for the associated magnetic field a nd Poynting vector.
51. A radio station broadcasts at a frequency of 760 kHz. At a receiver some distance from the antenna, the m aximum
magnetic field of the electromagnetic wave detected is.
(a) What is the maximum electric field?
(b) What is the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave?
52. The filament in a clear incandescent light bulb rad iates visible light at a power of 5.00 W. Model the gl ass part of the bulb
as a sphere of radius and calculate the amount of elect romagnetic energy from visible light inside the bulb.
53. At what distance does a 100-W lightbulb produce the s ame intensity of light as a 75-W lightbulb produces 10 m away?
(Assume both have the same efficiency for converting ele ctrical energy in the circuit into emitted electromagne tic energy.)
54. An incandescent light bulb emits only 2.6 W of its powe r as visible light. What is the rms electric field o f the emitted
light at a distance of 3.0 m from the bulb?
55. A 150-W lightbulb emits 5% of its energy as electroma gnetic radiation. What is the magnitude of the avera ge Poynting
vector 10 m from the bulb?
56. A small helium-neon laser has a power output of 2.5 mW. What is the electromagnetic energy in a 1.0-m le ngth of the
beam?
57. At the top of Earth’s atmosphere, the time-averaged Poynting vector associated with sunlight has a magnitu de of about
(a) What are the maximum values of the electric and magn etic fields for a wave of this intensity?
(b) What is the total power radiated by the sun? Assu me that the Earth is from the Sun and that sunlight is
composed of electromagnetic plane waves.
58. The magnetic field of a plane electromagnetic wave movin g along the z axis is given by
, where and
(a) Write an expression for the electric field associate d with the wave.
(b) What are the frequency and the wavelength of the wav e?
(c) What is its average Poynting vector?
59. What is the intensity of an electromagnetic wave with a pea k electric field strength of 125 V/m?

9.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407660. Assume the helium-neon lasers commonly used in student ph ysics laboratories have power outputs of 0.500 mW.
(a) If such a laser beam is projected onto a circular spo t 1.00 mm in diameter, what is its intensity?
(b) Find the peak magnetic field strength.
(c) Find the peak electric field strength.
61. An AM radio transmitter broadcasts 50.0 kW of power uni formly in all directions. (a) Assuming all of the ra dio waves
that strike the ground are completely absorbed, and that there is no absorption by the atmosphere or other objects, what is the
intensity 30.0 km away? (Hint: Half the power will be spread over the area of a hemi sphere.) (b) What is the maximum
electric field strength at this distance?
62. Suppose the maximum safe intensity of microwaves for human e xposure is taken to be.
(a) If a radar unit leaks 10.0 W of microwaves (other than those sent by its antenna) uniformly in all di rections, how far
away must you be to be exposed to an intensity consid ered to be safe? Assume that the power spreads uniforml y over
the area of a sphere with no complications from absorpti on or reflection.
(b) What is the maximum electric field strength at th e safe intensity? (Note that early radar units leaked more than
modern ones do. This caused identifiable health problem s, such as cataracts, for people who worked near them.)
63. A 2.50-m-diameter university communications satellit e dish receives TV signals that have a maximum elec tric field
strength (for one channel) of 7.50μV/m (see below). (a) What is the intensity of this wave? (b) What is the power received by
the antenna? (c) If the orbiting satellite broadcasts u niformly over an area of (a large fraction of North
America), how much power does it radiate?
64. Lasers can be constructed that produce an extremely h igh intensity electromagnetic wave for a brief time— called pulsed
lasers. They are used to initiate nuclear fusion, for e xample. Such a laser may produce an electromagnetic wav e with a
maximum electric field strength of for a time of 1.00 ns.
(a) What is the maximum magnetic field strength in the wave?
(b) What is the intensity of the beam?
(c) What energy does it deliver on an area?
16.5 Momentum and Radiation Pressure
65. A 150-W lightbulb emits 5% of its energy as electroma gnetic radiation. What is the radiation pressure on a n absorbing
sphere of radius 10 m that surrounds the bulb?

9.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407666. What pressure does light emitted uniformly in all di rections from a 100-W incandescent light bulb exert on a mirror at a
distance of 3.0 m, if 2.6 W of the power is emitted as visib le light?
67. A microscopic spherical dust particle of radius 2μm and mass 10μg is moving in outer space at a constant speed of 30
cm/sec. A wave of light strikes it from the opposite d irection of its motion and gets absorbed. Assuming the particle
decelerates uniformly to zero speed in one second, what is t he average electric field amplitude in the light?
68. A Styrofoam spherical ball of radius 2 mm and mass 20μg is to be suspended by the radiation pressure in a va cuum tube
in a lab. How much intensity will be required if the light is completely absorbed the ball?
69. Suppose that for sunlight at a point on the surface of Earth is.
(a) If sunlight falls perpendicularly on a kite with a reflecting surface of area 0.75m20.75m2, what is the average force
on the kite due to radiation pressure?
(b) How is your answer affected if the kite material is black and absorbs all sunlight?
70. Sunlight reaches the ground with an intensity of abou t. A sunbather has a body surface area of 0.8m20.8m2
facing the sun while reclining on a beach chair on a clear day.
(a) how much energy from direct sunlight reaches the sunbather’s skin per second?
(b) What pressure does the sunlight exert if it is abso rbed?
71. Suppose a spherical particle of mass m and radius R in space absorbs light of intensity I for time t.
(a) How much work does the radiation pressure do to acc elerate the particle from rest in the given time it absorbs the
light?
(b) How much energy carried by the electromagnetic wav es is absorbed by the particle over this time based on the
radiant energy incident on the particle?
16.6 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
72. How many helium atoms, each with a radius of about 31 p m, must be placed end to end to have a length equal t o one
wavelength of 470 nm blue light?
73. If you wish to detect details of the size of atoms (a bout 0.2 nm) with electromagnetic radiation, it must h ave a wavelength
of about this size.
(a) What is its frequency?
(b) What type of electromagnetic radiation might this b e?
74. Find the frequency range of visible light, given that it en compasses wavelengths from 380 to 760 nm.
75. (a) Calculate the wavelength range for AM radio given its frequ ency range is 540 to 1600 kHz.
(b) Do the same for the FM frequency range of 88.0 to 108 MHz.
76. Radio station WWVB, operated by the National Institute o f Standards and Technology (NIST) from Fort Collins,
Colorado, at a low frequency of 60 kHz, broadcasts a time synchronization signal whose range covers the en tire continental
US. The timing of the synchronization signal is controll ed by a set of atomic clocks to an accuracy of, and repeats
every 1 minute. The signal is used for devices, such as radio-controlled watches, that automatically synch ronize with it at
preset local times. WWVB’s long wavelength signal tends to pro pagate close to the ground.
(a) Calculate the wavelength of the radio waves from WWVB.
(b) Estimate the error that the travel time of the signal causes in synchronizing a radio controlled watc h in Norfolk,
Virginia, which is 1570 mi (2527 km) from Fort Collins, Col orado.
77. An outdoor WiFi unit for a picnic area has a 100-mW o utput and a range of about 30 m. What output power wou ld
reduce its range to 12 m for use with the same device s as before? Assume there are no obstacles in the way a nd that
microwaves into the ground are simply absorbed.

9.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407678. The prefix “mega” (M) and “kilo” (k), when referring to amounts of computer data, refer to factors of 1 024 or
210210rather than 1000 for the prefix kilo, and rather than 1,000,000 for the prefix Mega (M). If a wireless
(WiFi) router transfers 150 Mbps of data, how many bits per second is that in decimal arithmetic?
79. A computer user finds that his wireless router transmit s data at a rate of 75 Mbps (megabits per second). Co mpare the
average time to transmit one bit of data with the ti me difference between the wifi signal reaching an obs erver’s cell phone
directly and by bouncing back to the observer from a wall 8. 00 m past the observer.
80. (a) The ideal size (most efficient) for a broadcast an tenna with one end on the ground is one-fourth the wa velength (λ/4)
of the electromagnetic radiation being sent out. If a new radio station has such an antenna that is 50.0 m high, what frequency
does it broadcast most efficiently? Is this in the AM or FM ba nd?
(b) Discuss the analogy of the fundamental resonant mo de of an air column closed at one end to the resonanc e of
currents on an antenna that is one-fourth their waveleng th.
81. What are the wavelengths of (a) X-rays of frequency?
(b) Yellow light of frequency?
(c) Gamma rays of frequency?
82. For red light of λ=660nm, what are and?
83. A radio transmitter broadcasts plane electromagneti c waves whose maximum electric field at a particular l ocation is
. What is the maximum magnitude of the oscillating magnetic field at that location? How does it compare with
Earth’s magnetic field?
84. (a) Two microwave frequencies authorized for use in mi crowave ovens are: 915 and 2450 MHz. Calculate the
wavelength of each.
(b) Which frequency would produce smaller hot spots i n foods due to interference effects?
85. During normal beating, the heart creates a maximum 4.0 0-mV potential across 0.300 m of a person’s chest, cre ating a
1.00-Hz electromagnetic wave.
(a) What is the maximum electric field strength create d?
(b) What is the corresponding maximum magnetic field s trength in the electromagnetic wave?
(c) What is the wavelength of the electromagnetic wave?
86. Distances in space are often quoted in units of light-yea rs, the distance light travels in 1 year.
(a) How many meters is a light-year?
(b) How many meters is it to Andromeda, the nearest large gala xy, given that it is ly away?
(c) The most distant galaxy yet discovered is ly away. How far is this in meters?
87. A certain 60.0-Hz ac power line radiates an electromag netic wave having a maximum electric field strength o f 13.0
kV/m.
(a) What is the wavelength of this very-low-frequency ele ctromagnetic wave?
(b) What type of electromagnetic radiation is this wave
(c) What is its maximum magnetic field strength?
88. (a) What is the frequency of the 193-nm ultraviolet radiation used in laser eye surgery? (b) Assuming the accuracy with
which this electromagnetic radiation can ablate (res hape) the cornea is directly proportional to wavelen gth, how much more
accurate can this UV radiation be than the shortest visible wa velength of light?
Additional Problems
89. In a region of space, the electric field is pointed alon g the x-axis, but its magnitude changes as described by

9.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84076where t is in nanoseconds and x is in cm. Find the displacement current through a ci rcle of radius 3 cm in the plane at
90. A microwave oven uses electromagnetic waves of frequen cy to heat foods. The waves reflect from the
inside walls of the oven to produce an interference pattern of standing waves whose antinodes are hot spots that can leave
observable pit marks in some foods. The pit marks a re measured to be 6.0 cm apart. Use the method employ ed by Heinrich
Hertz to calculate the speed of electromagnetic waves this i mplies.
Use the Appendix D for the next two exercises
91. Galileo proposed measuring the speed of light by unc overing a lantern and having an assistant a known dist ance away
uncover his lantern when he saw the light from Galileo ’s lantern, and timing the delay. How far away must the assistant be
for the delay to equal the human reaction time of about 0.25 s?
92. Show that the wave equation in one dimension
is satisfied by any doubly differentiable function of ei ther the form or.
93. On its highest power setting, a microwave oven increases the temperature of 0.400 kg of spaghetti by 45.0°C in 120 s.
(a) What was the rate of energy absorption by the sp aghetti, given that its specific heat is? Assume
the spaghetti is perfectly absorbing.
(b) Find the average intensity of the microwaves, given t hat they are absorbed over a circular area 20.0 cm in diamet er.
(c) What is the peak electric field strength of the micr owave?
(d) What is its peak magnetic field strength?
94. A certain microwave oven projects 1.00 kW of microwaves ont o a 30-cm-by-40-cm area.
(a) What is its intensity in?
(b) Calculate the maximum electric field strength in t hese waves.
(c) What is the maximum magnetic field strength?
95. Electromagnetic radiation from a 5.00-mW laser is concen trated on a area.
(a) What is the intensity in?
(b) Suppose a 2.00-nC electric charge is in the beam. What is the maximum electric force it experiences?
(c) If the electric charge moves at 400 m/s, what maximum m agnetic force can it feel?
96. A 200-turn flat coil of wire 30.0 cm in diameter act s as an antenna for FM radio at a frequency of 100 MHz. T he
magnetic field of the incoming electromagnetic wave is perpendicular to the coil and has a maximum stren gth of
(a) What power is incident on the coil?
(b) What average emf is induced in the coil over one-fou rth of a cycle?
(c) If the radio receiver has an inductance of 2.50μH, what capacitance must it have to resonate at 100 MHz?
97. Suppose a source of electromagnetic waves radiates uni formly in all directions in empty space where there a re no
absorption or interference effects.
(a) Show that the intensity is inversely proportional to, th e distance from the source squared.
(b) Show that the magnitudes of the electric and magnetic f ields are inversely proportional to r.

9.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8407698. A radio station broadcasts its radio waves with a power of 50,000 W. What would be the intensity of this signal if it is
received on a planet orbiting Proxima Centuri, the close st star to our Sun, at 4.243 ly away?
99. The Poynting vector describes a flow of energy whenever electric and magnetic fields are present. Consider a long
cylindrical wire of radius r with a current I in the wire, with resistance R and voltage V. From the expressions for the electric
field along the wire and the magnetic field around t he wire, obtain the magnitude and direction of the Po ynting vector at the
surface. Show that it accounts for an energy flow into the wire from the fields around it that accounts for th e Ohmic heating
of the wire.
100. The Sun’s energy strikes Earth at an intensity of. As sume as a model approximation that all of the light is
absorbed. (Actually, about 30% of the light intensity is r eflected out into space.)
(a) Calculate the total force that the Sun’s radiation exerts on Earth.
(b) Compare this to the force of gravity between the Sun and Earth.
Note: Earth’s mass is.
101. If a Lightsail spacecraft were sent on a Mars mission, by what fractio n would its propulsion force be reduced when it
reached Mars?
102. Lunar astronauts placed a reflector on the Moon’s su rface, off which a laser beam is periodically reflecte d. The distance
to the Moon is calculated from the round-trip time.
(a) To what accuracy in meters can the distance to the Moon be determined, if this time can be measured to 0.100 ns?
(b) What percent accuracy is this, given the average di stance to the Moon is 384,400 km?
103. Radar is used to determine distances to various objects by measuring the round-trip time for an echo from the obje ct.
(a) How far away is the planet Venus if the echo time is 1000 s?
(b) What is the echo time for a car 75.0 m from a highway p olice radar unit?
(c) How accurately (in nanoseconds) must you be able to measure the echo time to an airplane 12.0 km away to
determine its distance within 10.0 m?
104. Calculate the ratio of the highest to lowest frequen cies of electromagnetic waves the eye can see, given t he wavelength
range of visible light is from 380 to 760 nm. (Note that t he ratio of highest to lowest frequencies the ear can hear is 1000.)
105. How does the wavelength of radio waves for an AM radio sta tion broadcasting at 1030 KHz compare with the
wavelength of the lowest audible sound waves (of 20 Hz). The speed of sound in air at 20°C is about 343 m/s.
Challenge Problems
106. A parallel-plate capacitor with plate separation d is connected to a source of emf that places a time -dependent voltage
V(t) across its circular plates of radius and area (see belo w).
(a) Write an expression for the time rate of change of e nergy inside the capacitor in terms of V(t) and dV(t)/dt.
(b) Assuming that V(t) is increasing with time, identify the directions of the electric field lines inside the capacitor and
of the magnetic field lines at the edge of the regio n between the plates, and then the direction of the Po ynting vector
at this location.
(c) Obtain expressions for the time dependence of E(t), for B(t) from the displacement current, and for the magnitud e
of the Poynting vector at the edge of the region between t he plates.

9.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84076(d) From, obtain an expression in terms of V(t) and dV(t)/dt for the rate at which electromagnetic field energy en ters
the region between the plates.
(e) Compare the results of parts (a) and (d) and explain th e relationship between them.
107. A particle of cosmic dust has a density.
(a) Assuming the dust particles are spherical and lig ht absorbing, and are at the same distance as Earth from the Sun,
determine the particle size for which radiation press ure from sunlight is equal to the Sun’s force of grav ity on the dust
particle.
(b) Explain how the forces compare if the particle radius is smaller.
(c) Explain what this implies about the sizes of dust particle likely to be present in the inner solar sy stem compared
with outside the Oort cloud.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 9.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.8: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-2.

9.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/840779.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary)
Key Terms
displacement currentextra term in Maxwell’s equations that is analogous to a real
current but accounts for a changing electric field p roducing a
magnetic field, even when the real current is present
gamma ray (ray)extremely high frequency electromagnetic radiation emitted by the
nucleus of an atom, either from natural nuclear deca y or induced
nuclear processes in nuclear reactors and weapons; the l ower end
of the -ray frequency range overlaps the upper end of the X-ray
range, but rays can have the highest frequency of an y
electromagnetic radiation
infrared radiationregion of the electromagnetic spectrum with a freque ncy range that
extends from just below the red region of the visible light
spectrum up to the microwave region, or from to
Maxwell’s equationsset of four equations that comprise a complete, overar ching theory
of electromagnetism
microwaveselectromagnetic waves with wavelengths in the range fr om 1 mm
to 1 m; they can be produced by currents in macroscop ic circuits
and devices
Poynting vectorvector equal to the cross product of the electric-and magnetic
fields, that describes the flow of electromagnetic ene rgy through a
surface
radarcommon application of microwaves; radar can determine the
distance to objects as diverse as clouds and aircraft, as well as
determine the speed of a car or the intensity of a ra instorm
radiation pressureforce divided by area applied by an electromagnetic wave on a
surface
radio waveselectromagnetic waves with wavelengths in the range fr om 1 mm
to 100 km; they are produced by currents in wires and circuits and
by astronomical phenomena
thermal agitationthermal motion of atoms and molecules in any object a t a
temperature above absolute zero, which causes them to emit and
absorb radiation
ultraviolet radiationelectromagnetic radiation in the range extending up ward in
frequency from violet light and overlapping with th e lowest X-ray
frequencies, with wavelengths from 400 nm down to abou t 10 nm
visible lightnarrow segment of the electromagnetic spectrum to which the
normal human eye responds, from about 400 to 750 nm
X-rayinvisible, penetrating form of very high frequency e lectromagnetic
radiation, overlapping both the ultraviolet range a nd the -ray
range

9.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84077Key Equations
Displacement current
Gauss’s law
Gauss’s law for magnetism
Faraday’s law
Ampère-Maxwell law
Wave equation for plane EM wave
Speed of EM waves
Ratio of E field to B field in electromagnetic wave
Energy flux (Poynting) vector
Average intensity of an electromagnetic wave
Radiation pressure
Summary
16.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) was one of the major c ontributors to physics in the nineteenth century. Altho ugh he died young,
he made major contributions to the development of th e kinetic theory of gases, to the understanding of co lor vision, and to the
nature of Saturn’s rings. He is best known for having c ombined existing knowledge of the laws of electricity a nd of magnetism
with insights of his own into a complete overarching electrom agnetic theory, represented by Maxwell’s equations.
Maxwell’s prediction of electromagnetic waves resulted fro m his formulation of a complete and symmetric theory of e lectricity
and magnetism, known as Maxwell’s equations.
The four Maxwell’s equations together with the Lorentz f orce law encompass the major laws of electricity and magne tism. The
first of these is Gauss’s law for electricity; the second is Gauss’s law for magnetism; the third is Faraday’s law of in duction
(including Lenz’s law); and the fourth is Ampère’s law in a symmetric formulation that adds another source of magn etism,
namely changing electric fields.
The symmetry introduced between electric and magnetic f ields through Maxwell’s displacement current explains the
mechanism of electromagnetic wave propagation, in which changing magnetic fields produce changing electric fi elds and vice
versa.
Although light was already known to be a wave, the nature of th e wave was not understood before Maxwell. Maxwell’s
equations also predicted electromagnetic waves with wavel engths and frequencies outside the range of light. These theoretical
predictions were first confirmed experimentally by Heinrich Hertz.
16.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves
Mechanical waves travel through a medium such as a stri ng, water, or air. Perhaps the most significant predict ion of Maxwell’s
equations is the existence of combined electric and magnetic (or electromagnetic) fields that propagat e through space as
electromagnetic waves. Because Maxwell’s equations hold in free space, the predicted electromagnetic waves, u nlike mechanical
waves, do not require a medium for their propagation.
Maxwell’s equations predict that the directions of the elec tric and magnetic fields of the wave, and the wave’s direc tion of
propagation, are all mutually perpendicular. The electr omagnetic wave is a transverse wave.

9.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84077The strengths of the electric and magnetic parts of the wa ve are related by, which implies that the magnetic field B is
very weak relative to the electric field E.
Accelerating charges create electromagnetic waves (for e xample, an oscillating current in a wire produces electrom agnetic
waves with the same frequency as the oscillation).
16.4: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
The energy carried by any wave is proportional to its ampli tude squared. For electromagnetic waves, this means inten sity can be
expressed as
where I is the average intensity in and is the maxi mum electric field strength of a continuous sinusoid al wave. This
can also be expressed in terms of the maximum magnetic fiel d strength as
and in terms of both electric and magnetic fields as
The three expressions for are all equivalent.
16.5: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
Electromagnetic waves carry momentum and exert radiatio n pressure.
The radiation pressure of an electromagnetic wave is dire ctly proportional to its energy density.
The pressure is equal to twice the electromagnetic energy intensity if the wave is reflected and equal to the incide nt energy
intensity if the wave is absorbed.
16.6: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
The relationship among the speed of propagation, wavelen gth, and frequency for any wave is given by, so that for
electromagnetic waves,, where f is the frequency, is the wa velength, and c is the speed of light.
The electromagnetic spectrum is separated into many catego ries and subcategories, based on the frequency and wavel ength,
source, and uses of the electromagnetic waves.
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loy ola Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many con tributing
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 9.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.7: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-2.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: Geometrical Optics
In this chapter, we study the basic properties of lig ht. In the next few chapters, we investigate the beha vior of light when it interacts
with optical devices such as mirrors, lenses, and apertures.
10.1: Prelude to The Nature of Light
10.2: Prelude to Geometric Optics and Image Formation
10.3: The Propagation of Light
10.4: The Law of Reflection
10.5: Refraction
10.6: Total Internal Reflection
10.7: Dispersion
10.8: Huygens’s Principle
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction
10.12: Thin Lenses
10.13: The Simple Magnifier
10.14: The Camera
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
10.16: The Eye
10.17: A_Vision
10.18: Processing_Visual_Information
10.19: Chemistry_of_Vision
10.20: Vision_-_Anatomy_of_the_Eye
10.21: Vision_-_Transduction_of_Light
10.22: Visual_Processing
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
10.24: Vision
10.25: Physics_of_the_Eye
10.26: Vision_Correction
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
10.28: The_Human_Eye
10.29: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light
10.A: The Nature of Light (Answers)
1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers)
10.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises)
1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises)
10.S: The Nature of Light (Summary)
1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary)

2This page titled 10: Geometrical Optics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8409810.1: Prelude to The Nature of Light
Our investigation of light revolves around two questions of fundamental importance:
1. What is the nature of light, and
2. how does light behave under various circumstances?
Answers to these questions can be found in Maxwell’s equations, which predict the existence of electromagnetic waves and their
behavior. Examples of light include radio and infrar ed waves, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, and X-r ays. Interestingly, not all
light phenomena can be explained by Maxwell’s theory. Experiments performed early in the twentieth century showed that light
has corpuscular, or particle-like, properties. The i dea that light can display both wave and particle ch aracteristics is called waveparticle duality, which is examined in Photons and Matter Wa ves.
Figure: Due to total internal reflection, an underw ater swimmer’s image is reflected back into the water where the camera is
located. The circular ripple in the image center is actually on the water surface. Due to the viewing an gle, total internal reflection is
not occurring at the top edge of this image, and we can see a view of activities on the pool deck. (credi t: modification of work by
“jayhem”/Flickr)
In this chapter, we study the basic properties of lig ht. In the next few chapters, we investigate the beha vior of light when it interacts
with optical devices such as mirrors, lenses, and apertures.
This page titled 10.1: Prelude to The Nature of Light is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.1: Prelude to The Nature of Light by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

10.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8409910.2: Prelude to Geometric Optics and Image Formation
This chapter introduces the major ideas of geometric optics, which describe the formation of images due to reflection and
refraction. It is called “geometric” optics because t he images can be characterized using geometric const ructions, such as ray
diagrams. We have seen that visible light is an elect romagnetic wave; however, its wave nature becomes eviden t only when light
interacts with objects with dimensions comparable to the wavelength (about 500 nm for visible light). The refore, the laws of
geometric optics only apply to light interacting with obje cts much larger than the wavelength of the light.
Figure: Cloud Gate is a public sculpture by Anish Kapo or located in Millennium Park in Chicago. Its stainless steel plates
reflect and distort images around it, including the C hicago skyline. Dedicated in 2006, it has become a po pular tourist attraction,
illustrating how art can use the principles of physical optics to startle and entertain. (credit: modificati on of work by Dhilung Kirat)
This page titled 10.2: Prelude to Geometric Optics and Image Formation is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.1: Prelude to Geometric Optics and Image Formation by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

10.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410010.3: The Propagation of Light
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Determine the index of refraction, given the speed of l ight in a medium
List the ways in which light travels from a source to ano ther location
The Speed of Light: Early Measurements
The first measurement of the speed of light was made by the Danish astronomer Ole Roemer (1644–1710) in 1 675. He studied the
orbit of Io, one of the four large moons of Jupiter, and found that it had a period of revolution of 42.5 h around Jupiter. He also
discovered that this value fluctuated by a few secon ds, depending on the position of Earth in its orbit a round the Sun. Roemer
realized that this fluctuation was due to the finite speed of light and could be used to determine c.
Roemer found the period of revolution of Io by meas uring the time interval between successive eclipses by Jupiter. Figure
shows the planetary configurations when such a measure ment is made from Earth in the part of its orbit whe re it is receding from
Jupiter. When Earth is at point A, Earth, Jupiter, and Io are aligned. The next time th is alignment occurs, Earth is at point B, and the
light carrying that information to Earth must trave l to that point. Since B is farther from Jupiter than A, light takes more time to
reach Earth when Earth is at B. Now imagine it is about 6 months later, and the plan ets are arranged as in Figure. The
measurement of Io’s period begins with Earth at poin t A' and Io eclipsed by Jupiter. The next eclipse the n occurs when Earth is at
point B', to which the light carrying the information of this eclipse must travel. Since B' is closer to J upiter than A', light takes less
time to reach Earth when it is at B'. This time interv al between the successive eclipses of Io seen at A' an d B' is therefore less than
the time interval between the eclipses seen at A and B. By measuring the difference in these time interva ls and with appropriate
knowledge of the distance between Jupiter and Earth, R oemer calculated that the speed of light was, which i s only
33% below the value accepted today.
Figure: Roemer’s astronomical method for determining the speed of light. Measurements of Io’s period done wi th the
configurations of parts (a) and (b) differ, because th e light path length and associated travel time increa se from A to B (a) but
decrease from A'A′ to B'B′ (b).
The first successful terrestrial measurement of the sp eed of light was made by Armand Fizeau (1819–1896) in 1849. He placed a
toothed wheel that could be rotated very rapidly on one hilltop and a mirror on a second hilltop 8 km awa y (Figure). An
intense light source was placed behind the wheel, so t hat when the wheel rotated, it chopped the light beam into a succession of
pulses. The speed of the wheel was then adjusted until no light returned to the observer located behind t he wheel. This could only
happen if the wheel rotated through an angle corresp onding to a displacement of (n+½) teeth, while the pu lses traveled down to the
mirror and back. Knowing the rotational speed of the wh eel, the number of teeth on the wheel, and the distanc e to the mirror,
Fizeau determined the speed of light to be, which is onl y 5% too high.Learning Objectives

10.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84100
Figure: Fizeau’s method for measuring the speed of lig ht. The teeth of the wheel block the reflected ligh t upon return when
the wheel is rotated at a rate that matches the light travel time to and from the mirror.
The French physicist Jean Bernard Léon Foucault (1819 –1868) modified Fizeau’s apparatus by replacing the t oothed wheel with a
rotating mirror. In 1862, he measured the speed of li ght to be 2.98×10 m/s, which is within 0.6% of the presen tly accepted value.
Albert Michelson (1852–1931) also used Foucault’s metho d on several occasions to measure the speed of light. His first
experiments were performed in 1878; by 1926, he had refine d the technique so well that he found c to be (2.99796±4)×10 m/s.
Today, the speed of light is known to great precisio n. In fact, the speed of light in a vacuum c is so important that it is accepted as
one of the basic physical quantities and has the value
where the approximate value of 3.00×10 m/s is used whenever three-digit accuracy is sufficient.
Speed of Light in Matter
The speed of light through matter is less than it is in a vacuum, because light interacts with atoms in a material. The speed of light
depends strongly on the type of material, since its i nteraction varies with different atoms, crystal latti ces, and other substructures.
We can define a constant of a material that describes the sp eed of light in it, called the index of refraction n:
where is the observed speed of light in the material.
Since the speed of light is always less than c in matter and equals c only in a vacuum, the index of refraction is always g reater than
or equal to one; that is, n≥1. Table gives the indi ces of refraction for some representative substance s. The values are listed for
a particular wavelength of light, because they vary sl ightly with wavelength. (This can have important effe cts, such as colors
separated by a prism, as we will see in Dispersion.) Note that for gases, n is close to 1.0. This seems reasonable, since atoms in
gases are widely separated, and light travels at c in the vacuum between atoms. It is common to take for gases unless great
precision is needed. Although the speed of light v in a medium varies considerably from its value c in a vacuum, it is still a large
speed.
Figure: Index of Refraction in Various MediaFor ligh t with a wavelength of 589 nm in a vacuum8

10.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84100Medium n
Gases at 0°C, 1 atm
Air 1.000293
Carbon dioxide 1.00045
Hydrogen 1.000139
Oxygen 1.000271
Liquids at 20°C
Benzene 1.501
Carbon disulfide 1.628
Carbon tetrachloride 1.461
Ethanol 1.361
Glycerine 1.473
Water, fresh 1.333
Solids at 20°C
Diamond 2.419
Fluorite 1.434
Glass, crown 1.52
Glass, flint 1.66
Ice (at 0°C)0°C) 1.309
Polystyrene 1.49
Plexiglas 1.51
Quartz, crystalline 1.544
Quartz, fused 1.458
Sodium chloride 1.544
Zircon 1.923
Example: Speed of Light in Jewelry
Calculate the speed of light in zircon, a material used in jewelry to imitate diamond.
Strategy
We can calculate the speed of light in a material from th e index of refraction of the material, using Equation \ red{index}
Solution
Rearranging Equation for gives us
The index of refraction for zircon is given as 1.923 in Table, and is given in Equation. Entering th ese values in
the equation gives

10.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84100Significance
This speed is slightly larger than half the speed of light in a vacuum and is still high compared with spee ds we normally
experience. The only substance listed in Table that has a greater index of refraction than zircon is di amond. We shall see
later that the large index of refraction for zircon mak es it sparkle more than glass, but less than diamond.
Table shows that ethanol and fresh water have very si milar indices of refraction. By what percentage do th e speeds of
light in these liquids differ?
Answer
2.1% (to two significant figures)
The Ray Model of Light
You have already studied some of the wave characteris tics of light in the previous chapter on Electromagnetic Waves. In this
chapter, we start mainly with the ray characteristics. T here are three ways in which light can travel from a so urce to another
location (Figure). It can come directly from the sou rce through empty space, such as from the Sun to Ear th. Or light can
travel through various media, such as air and glass, to the observer. Light can also arrive after being ref lected, such as by a mirror.
In all of these cases, we can model the path of light as a st raight line called a ray.
Figure: Three methods for light to travel from a sour ce to another location. (a) Light reaches the upper atmosphere of Earth,
traveling through empty space directly from the sourc e. (b) Light can reach a person by traveling through media like air and glass.
(c) Light can also reflect from an object like a mir ror. In the situations shown here, light interacts with objects large enough that it
travels in straight lines, like a ray.
Experiments show that when light interacts with an obje ct several times larger than its wavelength, it travels in straight lines and
acts like a ray. Its wave characteristics are not pron ounced in such situations. Since the wavelength of visi ble light is less than a
micron (a thousandth of a millimeter), it acts like a ray in the many common situations in which it encou nters objects larger than a
micron. For example, when visible light encounters anyt hing large enough that we can observe it with unaided eyes, such as a coin,
it acts like a ray, with generally negligible wave charact eristics.
In all of these cases, we can model the path of light a s straight lines. Light may change direction when it encounters objects (such
as a mirror) or in passing from one material to ano ther (such as in passing from air to glass), but it th en continues in a straight line
or as a ray. The word “ray” comes from mathematics an d here means a straight line that originates at some p oint. It is acceptable to
visualize light rays as laser rays. The ray model of light describes the path of light as straight lines.
Since light moves in straight lines, changing direct ions when it interacts with materials, its path is des cribed by geometry and
simple trigonometry. This part of optics, where the ray aspect of light dominates, is therefore called ge ometric optics. Two lawsExercise

10.3.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84100govern how light changes direction when it interacts with matter. These are the law of reflection, for situations in which light
bounces off matter, and the law of refraction, for situations in which light passes through matter. W e will examine more about each
of these laws in upcoming sections of this chapter.
This page titled 10.3: The Propagation of Light is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.2: The Propagation of Light by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410110.4: The Law of Reflection
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the reflection of light from polished and rough s urfaces
Describe the principle and applications of corner reflec tors
Whenever we look into a mirror, or squint at sunlight glinting from a lake, we are seeing a reflection. Wh en you look at a piece of
white paper, you are seeing light scattered from it. L arge telescopes use reflection to form an image of st ars and other astronomical
objects.
The law of reflection states that the angle of reflection equals the angle o f incidence:
The law of reflection is illustrated in Figure, which also shows how the angle of incidence and angle of re flection are
measured relative to the perpendicular to the surface a t the point where the light ray strikes.
Figure: The law of reflection states that the angle o f reflection equals the angle of incidence—θ =θ. The angles are measured
relative to the perpendicular to the surface at the point where the ray strikes the surface.
We expect to see reflections from smooth surfaces, but Figure illustrates how a rough surface reflects light. Since the light
strikes different parts of the surface at different angles, it is reflected in many different directions, or diffused. Diffused light is what
allows us to see a sheet of paper from any angle, as shown in Figur e.
Figure: Light is diffused when it reflects from a roug h surface. Here, many parallel rays are incident, but they are reflected at
many different angles, because the surface is rough.
People, clothing, leaves, and walls all have rough surfac es and can be seen from all sides. A mirror, on the ot her hand, has a smooth
surface (compared with the wavelength of light) and r eflects light at specific angles, as illustrated in Fi gure. When the Moon
reflects from a lake, as shown in Figure, a combination of th ese effects takes place.Learning Objectives
r i

10.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84101
Figure: (a) When a sheet of paper is illuminated with many parallel incident rays, it can be seen at many different angles,
because its surface is rough and diffuses the light. (b) A mirror illuminated by many parallel rays reflects t hem in only one
direction, because its surface is very smooth. Only the observer at a particular angle sees the reflected ligh t. (c) Moonlight is spread
out when it is reflected by the lake, because the surf ace is shiny but uneven. (credit c: modification of w ork by Diego Torres
Silvestre)
When you see yourself in a mirror, it appears that the image is actually behind the mirror (Figure). We se e the light coming
from a direction determined by the law of reflection. The angles are such that the image is exactly the same distance behind the
mirror as you stand in front of the mirror. If the m irror is on the wall of a room, the images in it are a ll behind the mirror, which can
make the room seem bigger. Although these mirror imag es make objects appear to be where they cannot be (li ke behind a solid
wall), the images are not figments of your imaginatio n. Mirror images can be photographed and videotaped by instruments and
look just as they do with our eyes (which are optical instruments themselves). The precise manner in which im ages are formed by
mirrors and lenses is discussed in an upcoming chapter on Geometric Optics and Image Formation.
Figure: (a) Your image in a mirror is behind the mir ror. The two rays shown are those that strike the mirro r at just the correct
angles to be reflected into the eyes of the person. Th e image appears to be behind the mirror at the same d istance away as (b) if you
were looking at your twin directly, with no mirror.
Corner Reflectors (Retroreflectors)
A light ray that strikes an object consisting of two mutually perpendicular reflecting surfaces is reflec ted back exactly parallel to the
direction from which it came (Figure). This is true wh enever the reflecting surfaces are perpendicular, a nd it is independent
of the angle of incidence. Such an object is called a corner reflector, since the light bounces from its inside corner. Corn er
reflectors are a subclass of retroreflectors, which al l reflect rays back in the directions from which the y came. Although the
geometry of the proof is much more complex, corner r eflectors can also be built with three mutually perp endicular reflecting
surfaces and are useful in three-dimensional applications.

10.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84101
Figure: A light ray that strikes two mutually perpend icular reflecting surfaces is reflected back exactly p arallel to the
direction from which it came.
Many inexpensive reflector buttons on bicycles, cars, a nd warning signs have corner reflectors designed to ret urn light in the
direction from which it originated. Rather than simp ly reflecting light over a wide angle, retroreflecti on ensures high visibility if
the observer and the light source are located toget her, such as a car’s driver and headlights. The Apollo astronauts placed a true
corner reflector on the Moon (Figure). Laser signals from Earth can be bounced from that corner reflecto r to measure the
gradually increasing distance to the Moon of a few centimet ers per year.
Figure: (a) Astronauts placed a corner reflector on t he Moon to measure its gradually increasing orbital di stance. (b) The
bright spots on these bicycle safety reflectors are refl ections of the flash of the camera that took this pict ure on a dark night. (credit
a: modification of work by NASA; credit b: modificat ion of work by “Julo”/Wikimedia Commons)
Working on the same principle as these optical reflec tors, corner reflectors are routinely used as radar r eflectors (Figure) for
radio-frequency applications. Under most circumstance s, small boats made of fiberglass or wood do not str ongly reflect radio
waves emitted by radar systems. To make these boats v isible to radar (to avoid collisions, for example), ra dar reflectors are attached
to boats, usually in high places.
Figure: A radar reflector hoisted on a sailboat is a t ype of corner reflector. (credit: Tim Sheerman-Chase)

10.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84101As a counterexample, if you are interested in buildin g a stealth airplane, radar reflections should be mini mized to evade detection.
One of the design considerations would then be to avoid bui lding 90°90° corners into the airframe.
This page titled 10.4: The Law of Reflection is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.3: The Law of Reflection by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410210.5: Refraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how rays change direction upon entering a medium
Apply the law of refraction in problem solving
You may often notice some odd things when looking in to a fish tank. For example, you may see the same fish appearing to be in
two different places (Figure). This happens because lig ht coming from the fish to you changes direction when it leaves the
tank, and in this case, it can travel two different p aths to get to your eyes. The changing of a light r ay’s direction (loosely called
bending) when it passes through substances of differen t refractive indices is called refraction and is related to changes in the speed
of light,. Refraction is responsible for a tremendou s range of optical phenomena, from the action of lens es to data
transmission through optical fibers.
Figure: (a) Looking at the fish tank as shown, we can see the same fish in two different locations, because li ght changes
directions when it passes from water to air. In this case, the light can reach the observer by two different paths, so the fish seems to
be in two different places. This bending of light is c alled refraction and is responsible for many optical p henomena. (b) This image
shows refraction of light from a fish near the top of a fish tank.
Figure shows how a ray of light changes direction when it passes from one medium to another. As before, the an gles are
measured relative to a perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light ray crosses it. (Some of the incident light is reflected
from the surface, but for now we concentrate on the l ight that is transmitted.) The change in direction of the light ray depends on
the relative values of the indices of refraction of the two media involved. In the situations shown, me dium 2 has a greater index of
refraction than medium 1. Note that as shown in Figure, the direction of the ray moves closer to the perp endicular when it
progresses from a medium with a lower index of refrac tion to one with a higher index of refraction. Conve rsely, as shown in Figure
, the direction of the ray moves away from the perpe ndicular when it progresses from a medium with a higher index of
refraction to one with a lower index of refraction. The pat h is exactly reversible.Learning Objectives

10.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84102
Figure: The change in direction of a light ray depe nds on how the index of refraction changes when it cr osses from one
medium to another. In the situations shown here, the i ndex of refraction is greater in medium 2 than in me dium 1. (a) A ray of light
moves closer to the perpendicular when entering a med ium with a higher index of refraction. (b) A ray of light moves away from
the perpendicular when entering a medium with a low er index of refraction.
The amount that a light ray changes its direction d epends both on the incident angle and the amount th at the speed changes. For a
ray at a given incident angle, a large change in spe ed causes a large change in direction and thus a la rge change in angle. The exact
mathematical relationship is the law of refraction, or Snell’s law, after the Dutch mathematician Willebrord Snell (1591–1626), who
discovered it in 1621. The law of refraction is stated in eq uation form as
Here (n_1\) and are the indices of refraction for m edia 1 and 2, and and are the angles between the ray s and the
perpendicular in media 1 and 2. The incoming ray is c alled the incident ray, the outgoing ray is called t he refracted ray, and the
associated angles are the incident angle and the refra cted angle, respectively.
Snell’s experiments showed that the law of refraction is obeyed and that a characteristic index of refraction could be assigned to a
given medium and its value measured. Snell was not aware that the speed of light varied in different media, a key fact used when
we derive the law of refraction theoretically using Huygens’s Principle.
Find the index of refraction for medium 2 in Figure, assuming medium 1 is air and given that the inciden t angle is 30.0°
and the angle of refraction is 22.0°.
Strategy
The index of refraction for air is taken to be 1 in most cases (and up to four significant figures, it is 1.000). Thus,
here. From the given information, and. With this in formation, the only unknown in Snell’s law is, so we
can use Snell’s law (Equation) to find it.
Solution
From Snell’s law (Equation), we have
Entering known values,Example: Determining the Index of Refraction

10.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84102Significance
This is the index of refraction for water, and Snell cou ld have determined it by measuring the angles and p erforming this
calculation. He would then have found 1.33 to be the appropriate index of refraction for water in all oth er situations, such as
when a ray passes from water to glass. Today, we can verify that the index of refraction is related to the spe ed of light in a
medium by measuring that speed directly.
Explore bending of light between two media with different indices of refraction. Use the “Intro” simulation and see how
changing from air to water to glass changes the bendi ng angle. Use the protractor tool to measure the angle s and see if you can
recreate the configuration in Example. Also by measu rement, confirm that the angle of reflection equals the angle of
incidence.
Suppose that in a situation like that in Example, lig ht goes from air to diamond and that the incident a ngle is 30.0°.
Calculate the angle of refraction θ in the diamond.
Strategy
Again, the index of refraction for air is taken to be n =1.00, and we are given θ =30.0°. We can look up the index of refraction
for diamond, finding n =2.419. The only unknown in Snell’s law is, wh ich we wish to determine.
Solution
Solving Snell’s law (Equation) for yields
Entering known values,
The angle is thus
Significance
For the same 30.0° angle of incidence, the angle of re fraction in diamond is significantly smaller than in water (11.9° rather
than 22.0°—see Example). This means there is a larger change in direction in diamond. The cause of a larg e change in
direction is a large change in the index of refract ion (or speed). In general, the larger the change in speed, the greater the effect
on the direction of the ray.
The solid with the next highest index of refraction after diamond is zircon. If the diamond in Example were replaced
with a piece of zircon, what would be the new angle of refract ion?
Answer
15.1°
This page titled 10.5: Refraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
1.4: Refraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.Example: A Larger Change in Direction
1 1
Exercise: Zircon

10.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410310.6: Total Internal Reflection
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the phenomenon of total internal reflection
Describe the workings and uses of optical fibers
Analyze the reason for the sparkle of diamonds
A good-quality mirror may reflect more than 90% of the light that falls on it, absorbing the rest. But i t would be useful to have a
mirror that reflects all of the light that falls on it. I nterestingly, we can produce total reflection using an as pect of refraction.
Consider what happens when a ray of light strikes the surface between two materials, as shown in Figure. Part of the light
crosses the boundary and is refracted; the rest is r eflected. If, as shown in the figure, the index of ref raction for the second medium
is less than for the first, the ray bends away from th e perpendicular. (Since, the angle of refraction is greater than the angle
of incidence—that is,.) Now imagine what happens as the incident angle increases. This causes to increase also. The
largest the angle of refraction can be is, as shown in Figu re.
Figure: (a) A ray of light crosses a boundary where th e index of refraction decreases. That is,. The ray be nds away
from the perpendicular. (b) The critical angle θ is the angle of incidence for which the angle of refra ction is 90°. (c) Total internal
reflection occurs when the incident angle is greater than the critical angle.
The critical angle for a combination of materials is defined to be th e incident angle that produces an angle of refract ion of.
That is, is the incident angle for which. If the inci dent angle is greater than the critical angle, as sh own in Figure
, then all of the light is reflected back into mediu m 1, a condition called total internal reflection. (As Figure shows,
the reflected rays obey the law of reflection so that the angle of reflection is equal to the angle o f incidence in all three cases.)
Snell’s law states the relationship between angles and indices of refr action. It is given by
When the incident angle equals the critical angle (), the angle of refraction is (). Noting that, Snell’s
law in this case becomes
The critical angle for a given combination of materia ls is thus
for.
Total internal reflection occurs for any incident a ngle greater than the critical angle, and it can o nly occur when the second
medium has an index of refraction less than the firs t. Note that this equation is written for a light ray that travels in medium 1 and
reflects from medium 2, as shown in Figure.
l i i i i l lLearning Objectives
c

10.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84103Example: Determining a Critical Angle
What is the critical angle for light traveling in a polystyrene (a type of plastic) pipe surrounded by air? The index of refraction
for polystyrene is 1.49.
Strategy
The index of refraction of air can be taken to be 1.00, as before. Thus, the condition that the second me dium (air) has an index
of refraction less than the first (plastic) is satisfied, and we can use the equation
to find the critical angle, where and.
Solution
Substituting the identified values gives
Significance
This result means that any ray of light inside the pl astic that strikes the surface at an angle greater tha n 42.2° is totally
reflected. This makes the inside surface of the clea r plastic a perfect mirror for such rays, without any need for the silvering
used on common mirrors. Different combinations of mater ials have different critical angles, but any combina tion with
can produce total internal reflection. The same cal culation as made here shows that the critical angle for a ray going from water
to air is 48.6°, whereas that from diamond to air is 24.4°, a nd that from flint glass to crown glass is 66.3°.
At the surface between air and water, light rays can g o from air to water and from water to air. For which ray is there no
possibility of total internal reflection?
Answer
air to water, because the condition that the second me dium must have a smaller index of refraction is not satisfied
In the photo that opens this chapter, the image of a swimmer underwater is captured by a camera that is a lso underwater. The
swimmer in the upper half of the photograph, apparen tly facing upward, is, in fact, a reflected image of the swimmer below. The
circular ripple near the photograph’s center is actua lly on the water surface. The undisturbed water surro unding it makes a good
reflecting surface when viewed from below, thanks to to tal internal reflection. However, at the very top edge of this photograph,
rays from below strike the surface with incident angle s less than the critical angle, allowing the camera to capture a view of
activities on the pool deck above water.
Fiber optics is one application of total internal re flection that is in wide use. In communications, it is used to transmit
telephone, internet, and cable TV signals. Fiber opti cs employs the transmission of light down fibers of pl astic or glass.
Because the fibers are thin, light entering one is l ikely to strike the inside surface at an angle greate r than the critical angle and,
thus, be totally reflected (Figure). The index of re fraction outside the fiber must be smaller than insi de. In fact, most
fibers have a varying refractive index to allow more light to be guided along the fiber through total in ternal refraction. Rays are
reflected around corners as shown, making the fibers into ti ny light pipes.Exercise
Fiber Optics: Endoscopes to Telephones

10.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84103
Figure: Light entering a thin optic fiber may strike the inside surface at large or grazing angles and is c ompletely
reflected if these angles exceed the critical angle. Such rays continue down the fiber, even following it around corners, since
the angles of reflection and incidence remain large.
Bundles of fibers can be used to transmit an image wit hout a lens, as illustrated in Figure. The output o f a device called
an endoscope is shown in Figure. Endoscopes are used to explore the interior of the body through its natu ral orifices or
minor incisions. Light is transmitted down one fiber bundle to illuminate internal parts, and the reflec ted light is transmitted
back out through another bundle to be observed.
Figure: (a) An image “A” is transmitted by a bundle o f optical fibers. (b) An endoscope is used to probe the body, both
transmitting light to the interior and returning an image such as the one shown of a human epiglottis (a str ucture at the base of
the tongue). (credit b: modification of work by “Me d_Chaos”/Wikimedia Commons)
Fiber optics has revolutionized surgical techniques and observations within the body, with a host of medica l diagnostic and
therapeutic uses. Surgery can be performed, such as a rthroscopic surgery on a knee or shoulder joint, emp loying cutting tools
attached to and observed with the endoscope. Samples can also be obtained, such as by lassoing an intestinal polyp for external
examination. The flexibility of the fiber optic bund le allows doctors to navigate it around small and dif ficult-to-reach regions in
the body, such as the intestines, the heart, blood ves sels, and joints. Transmission of an intense laser beam to burn away
obstructing plaques in major arteries, as well as del ivering light to activate chemotherapy drugs, are b ecoming commonplace.
Optical fibers have in fact enabled microsurgery and remote surgery where the incisions are small and the surgeon’s fingers do
not need to touch the diseased tissue.
Optical fibers in bundles are surrounded by a cladding material that has a lower index of refraction than the core (Figure
). The cladding prevents light from being transmitte d between fibers in a bundle. Without cladding, light could pass

10.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84103between fibers in contact, since their indices of ref raction are identical. Since no light gets into the c ladding (there is total
internal reflection back into the core), none can b e transmitted between clad fibers that are in contac t with one another. Instead,
the light is propagated along the length of the fib er, minimizing the loss of signal and ensuring that a quality image is formed at
the other end. The cladding and an additional protectiv e layer make optical fibers durable as well as flexible.
Figure: Fibers in bundles are clad by a material that has a lower index of refraction than the core to ensu re total internal
reflection, even when fibers are in contact with one another.
Special tiny lenses that can be attached to the ends o f bundles of fibers have been designed and fabricat ed. Light emerging
from a fiber bundle can be focused through such a le ns, imaging a tiny spot. In some cases, the spot can be sc anned, allowing
quality imaging of a region inside the body. Special minute optical filters inserted at the end of the fiber bundle have the
capacity to image the interior of organs located te ns of microns below the surface without cutting the s urface—an area known
as nonintrusive diagnostics. This is particularly useful f or determining the extent of cancers in the stomach and bowe l.
In another type of application, optical fibers are commonly used to carry signals for telephone conversa tions and internet
communications. Extensive optical fiber cables have be en placed on the ocean floor and underground to ena ble optical
communications. Optical fiber communication systems off er several advantages over electrical (copper)-base d systems,
particularly for long distances. The fibers can be mad e so transparent that light can travel many kilomet ers before it becomes
dim enough to require amplification—much superior t o copper conductors. This property of optical fibers is called low loss.
Lasers emit light with characteristics that allow far mo re conversations in one fiber than are possible with electric signals on a
single conductor. This property of optical fibers is called high bandwidth. Optical signals in one fiber do not produce
undesirable effects in other adjacent fibers. This property of optical fibers is called reduced crosstal k. We shall explore the
unique characteristics of laser radiation in a later ch apter.
Corner Reflectors and Diamonds
Corner reflectors are perfectly efficient when the conditions for tota l internal reflection are satisfied. With common mat erials, it is
easy to obtain a critical angle that is less than 45°. One use of these perfect mirrors is in binoculars, as sh own in Figure.
Another use is in periscopes found in submarines.

10.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84103
Figure: These binoculars employ corner reflectors (pri sms) with total internal reflection to get light to t he observer’s eyes.
Total internal reflection, coupled with a large inde x of refraction, explains why diamonds sparkle more than other materials. The
critical angle for a diamond-to-air surface is only 24.4°, so when light enters a diamond, it has trouble gett ing back out (Figure
). Although light freely enters the diamond, it can ex it only if it makes an angle less than 24.4°. Facets on diamonds are
specifically intended to make this unlikely. Good dia monds are very clear, so that the light makes many in ternal reflections and is
concentrated before exiting—hence the bright sparkle. (Zircon is a natural gemstone that has an exception ally large index of
refraction, but it is not as large as diamond, so it is not as highly prized. Cubic zirconia is manufac tured and has an even higher
index of refraction (≈ 2.17), but it is still less than that of diamond.) The col ors you see emerging from a clear diamond are not due
to the diamond’s color, which is usually nearly color less, but result from dispersion. Colored diamonds get their color from
structural defects of the crystal lattice and the in clusion of minute quantities of graphite and other materials. The Argyle Mine in
Western Australia produces around 90% of the world’s pi nk, red, champagne, and cognac diamonds, whereas around 50% of the
world’s clear diamonds come from central and southern Afr ica.
Figure: Light cannot easily escape a diamond, because its critical angle with air is so small. Most reflection s are total, and the
facets are placed so that light can exit only in part icular ways—thus concentrating the light and making t he diamond sparkle
brightly.
Explore refraction and reflection of light between two media with different indices of refractio n. Try to make the refracted ray
disappear with total internal reflection. Use the protr actor tool to measure the critical angle and compar e with the prediction
from Equation.

10.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84103This page titled 10.6: Total Internal Reflection is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.5: Total Internal Reflection by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410410.7: Dispersion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the cause of dispersion in a prism
Describe the effects of dispersion in producing rainbo ws
Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of dispersi on
Everyone enjoys the spectacle of a rainbow glimmering against a dark stormy sky. How does sunlight falling on clear drops of rain
get broken into the rainbow of colors we see? The same process causes white light to be broken into colors by a clear glass prism or
a diamond (Figure).
Figure: The colors of the rainbow (a) and those produ ced by a prism (b) are identical. (credit a: modific ation of work by
“Alfredo55”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modificatio n of work by NASA)
We see about six colors in a rainbow—red, orange, yel low, green, blue, and violet; sometimes indigo is liste d, too. These colors are
associated with different wavelengths of light, as sho wn in Figure. When our eye receives pure-wavelength l ight, we tend to
see only one of the six colors, depending on wavelengt h. The thousands of other hues we can sense in other s ituations are our eye’s
response to various mixtures of wavelengths. White li ght, in particular, is a fairly uniform mixture of al l visible wavelengths.
Sunlight, considered to be white, actually appears to b e a bit yellow, because of its mixture of wavelengths, b ut it does contain all
visible wavelengths. The sequence of colors in rainbows i s the same sequence as the colors shown in the figure. This implies that
white light is spread out in a rainbow according to wav elength. Dispersion is defined as the spreading of whit e light into its full
spectrum of wavelengths. More technically, dispersion occu rs whenever the propagation of light depends on wavelength.
Figure: Even though rainbows are associated with six co lors, the rainbow is a continuous distribution of color s according to
wavelengths.
Any type of wave can exhibit dispersion. For example, so und waves, all types of electromagnetic waves, and water waves can be
dispersed according to wavelength. Dispersion may requir e special circumstances and can result in spectacula r displays such as in
the production of a rainbow. This is also true for so und, since all frequencies ordinarily travel at the s ame speed. If you listen to
sound through a long tube, such as a vacuum cleaner hose, you can easily hear it dispersed by interacti on with the tube. Dispersion,
in fact, can reveal a great deal about what the wave has encountered that disperses its wavelengths. The dispe rsion of
electromagnetic radiation from outer space, for exa mple, has revealed much about what exists between the stars—the so-called
interstellar medium.Learning Objectives

10.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84104Nick Moore’s video discusses dispersion of a pulse as he taps a long spring. Follow his explanation as Moore r eplays the highspeed footage showing high frequency waves outrunning the lower frequency waves. https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=KbmOcT5sX7I
Refraction is responsible for dispersion in rainbows and many other situations. The angle of refraction d epends on the index of
refraction, as we know from Snell’s law. We know that th e index of refraction n depends on the medium. But for a given medium,
n also depends on wavelength (Table).
Table: Index of Refraction () in Selected Media at Various Wavelengths
Medium Red (660 nm)Orange (610
nm)Yellow (580 nm) Green (550 nm) Blue (470 nm) Violet (410 nm)
Water 1.331 1.332 1.333 1.335 1.338 1.342
Diamond 2.410 2.415 2.417 2.426 2.444 2.458
Glass, crown 1.512 1.514 1.518 1.519 1.524 1.530
Glass, flint 1.662 1.665 1.667 1.674 1.684 1.698
Polystyrene 1.488 1.490 1.492 1.493 1.499 1.506
Quartz, fused 1.455 1.456 1.458 1.459 1.462 1.468
Note that for a given medium, n increases as wavelength decreases and is greatest for v iolet light. Thus, violet light is bent more
than red light, as shown for a prism in Figure. White light is dispersed into the same sequence of waveleng ths as seen in
Figures and.
Figure: (a) A pure wavelength of light falls onto a prism and is refracted at both surfaces. (b) White ligh t is dispersed by the
prism (shown exaggerated). Since the index of refracti on varies with wavelength, the angles of refraction v ary with wavelength. A
sequence of red to violet is produced, because the ind ex of refraction increases steadily with decreasing wav elength.
l i i f hi i h b li l
Acoustic Dispersion in a SpringAcoustic Dispersion in a Spring

10.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84104Example: Dispersion of White Light by Flint Glass
A beam of white light goes from air into flint glass at an incidence angle of 43.2°. What is the angle be tween the red (660 nm)
and violet (410 nm) parts of the refracted light?
Strategy
Values for the indices of refraction for flint glass at various wavelengths are listed in Table. Use these values for
calculate the angle of refraction for each color and th en take the difference to find the dispersion angle.
Solution
Applying the law of refraction for the red part of the be am
we can solve for the angle of refraction as
Similarly, the angle of incidence for the violet part of the beam is
The difference between these two angles is
Significance
Although 0.6° may seem like a negligibly small angle, i f this beam is allowed to propagate a long enough dist ance, the
dispersion of colors becomes quite noticeable.
In the preceding example, how much distance inside th e block of flint glass would the red and the violet r ays have to progress
before they are separated by 1.0 mm?
Answer
9.3 cmExercise

10.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84104Rainbows are produced by a combination of refraction and reflection. You may have noticed that you see a rainbow only when you
look away from the Sun. Light enters a drop of water and is ref lected from the back of the drop (Figure).
Figure: A ray of light falling on this water drop en ters and is reflected from the back of the drop. This light is refracted and
dispersed both as it enters and as it leaves the drop.
The light is refracted both as it enters and as it l eaves the drop. Since the index of refraction of water varies with wavelength, the
light is dispersed, and a rainbow is observed (Figure). (No dispersion occurs at the back surface, because the law of
reflection does not depend on wavelength.) The actua l rainbow of colors seen by an observer depends on th e myriad rays being
refracted and reflected toward the observer’s eyes fr om numerous drops of water. The effect is most spectac ular when the
background is dark, as in stormy weather, but can also be observed in waterfalls and lawn sprinklers. The arc o f a rainbow comes
from the need to be looking at a specific angle rel ative to the direction of the Sun, as illustrated in Figure. If two reflections
of light occur within the water drop, another “second ary” rainbow is produced. This rare event produces an a rc that lies above the
primary rainbow arc, as in Figure, and produces color s in the reverse order of the primary rainbow, with r ed at the lowest
angle and violet at the largest angle.
Figure: (a) Different colors emerge in different dir ections, and so you must look at different locations to see the various
colors of a rainbow. (b) The arc of a rainbow results from the fact that a line between the observer and a ny point on the arc must
make the correct angle with the parallel rays of sunl ight for the observer to receive the refracted rays. (c) Double rainbow. (credit c:
modification of work by “Nicholas”/Wikimedia Commons)
Dispersion may produce beautiful rainbows, but it can c ause problems in optical systems. White light used to t ransmit messages in
a fiber is dispersed, spreading out in time and eve ntually overlapping with other messages. Since a laser produces a nearly pure
wavelength, its light experiences little dispersion, an advantage over white light for transmission of informa tion. In contrast,
dispersion of electromagnetic waves coming to us from outer space can be used to determine the amount of matter they pass
through.
This page titled 10.7: Dispersion is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

10.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841041.6: Dispersion by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

10.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410510.8: Huygens’s Principle
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe Huygens’s principle
Use Huygens’s principle to explain the law of reflection
Use Huygens’s principle to explain the law of refraction
Use Huygens’s principle to explain diffraction
So far in this chapter, we have been discussing optical phenomena using the ray model of light. However, some phenomena require
analysis and explanations based on the wave characte ristics of light. This is particularly true when the wav elength is not negligible
compared to the dimensions of an optical device, suc h as a slit in the case of diffraction. Huygens’s principle is an indispensable
tool for this analysis.
Figure shows how a transverse wave looks as viewed from above and from the side. A light wave can be imagine d to
propagate like this, although we do not actually see it wiggling through space. From above, we view the wave fronts (or wave
crests) as if we were looking down on ocean waves. The side view would be a graph of the electric or magnetic fi eld. The view
from above is perhaps more useful in developing concepts a bout wave optics.
Figure: A transverse wave, such as an electromagnetic l ight wave, as viewed from above and from the side. Th e direction of
propagation is perpendicular to the wave fronts (or w ave crests) and is represented by a ray.
The Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) dev eloped a useful technique for determining in detail how and where waves
propagate. Starting from some known position, Huygens’s p rinciple states that every point on a wave front is a so urce of wavelets
that spread out in the forward direction at the same speed a s the wave itself. The new wave front is tangent to all of the wavelets.
Figure shows how Huygens’s principle is applied. A wave front is the long edge that moves, for example, with the crest or
the trough. Each point on the wave front emits a sem icircular wave that moves at the propagation speed. We can draw these
wavelets at a time later, so that they have moved a distance. The new wave front is a plane tangent to th e wavelets and is
where we would expect the wave to be a time later. Huyge ns’s principle works for all types of waves, including wat er waves,
sound waves, and light waves. It is useful not only in describing how light waves propagate but also in expla ining the laws of
reflection and refraction. In addition, we will see that Huyg ens’s principle tells us how and where light rays interfe re.Learning Objectives

10.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84105
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wave front. Each point on the wave front emits a semicirc ular wavelet that
moves a distance s=vt. The new wave front is a line tan gent to the wavelets.
Reflection
Figure shows how a mirror reflects an incoming wave at an angle equal to the incident angle, verifying th e law of reflection.
As the wave front strikes the mirror, wavelets are first e mitted from the left part of the mirror and then fro m the right. The wavelets
closer to the left have had time to travel farther, produc ing a wave front traveling in the direction shown.
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave f ront striking a mirror. The wavelets shown were emitte d as each point
on the wave front struck the mirror. The tangent to these wavelets shows that the new wave front has been re flected at an angle
equal to the incident angle. The direction of propa gation is perpendicular to the wave front, as shown by the downward-pointing
arrows.
Refraction
The law of refraction can be explained by applying Hu ygens’s principle to a wave front passing from one medi um to another
(Figure). Each wavelet in the figure was emitted when t he wave front crossed the interface between the media. Since the
speed of light is smaller in the second medium, the wav es do not travel as far in a given time, and the ne w wave front changes
direction as shown. This explains why a ray changes di rection to become closer to the perpendicular when l ight slows down.
Snell’s law can be derived from the geometry in Figure (Exa mple).

10.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84105
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave f ront traveling from one medium to another, where it s speed is less. The
ray bends toward the perpendicular, since the wavelet s have a lower speed in the second medium.
Example: Deriving the Law of Refraction
By examining the geometry of the wave fronts, derive the l aw of refraction.
Strategy
Consider Figure, which expands upon Figure. It shows t he incident wave front just reaching the surface at p oint A,
while point B is still well within medium 1. In the time it takes f or a wavelet from to reach on the surface at speed
, a wavelet from travels into medium 2 a distance of, where. Note that in this example, is
slower than because.
Figure: Geometry of the law of refraction from medi um 1 to medium 2.
Solution
The segment on the surface AB' is shared by both the triangle ABB' inside medium 1 and the triangle AA′B′ i nside medium 2.
Note that from the geometry, the angle ∠BAB' is equal to the angle of incidence,. Similarly, is.
The length of AB' is given in two ways as
Inverting the equation and substituting AA'=cΔt/n from ab ove and similarly, we obtain2

10.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84105Cancellation of allows us to simplify this equation int o the familiar form
Significance
Although the law of refraction was established experime ntally by Snell, its derivation here requires Huygens’s principle a nd
the understanding that the speed of light is different in di fferent media.
In Example, we had. If were decreased such that a nd the speed of light in medium 2 is faster than in
medium 1, what would happen to the length of AA'? What would happen to the wave front A'B' and the direction of the
refracted ray?
Answer
AA′ becomes longer, A'B' tilts further away from the surface, and the refracted ray tilts away from the normal.
This applet by Walter Fendt shows an animation of reflection and refraction using Huygens’s wavelets while you control t he
parameters. Be sure to click on “Next step” to display the wavelets. You can see the reflected and refracted wave fronts
forming.
Diffraction
What happens when a wave passes through an opening, su ch as light shining through an open door into a dar k room? For light, we
observe a sharp shadow of the doorway on the floor of the room, and no visible light bends around corners into other parts of the
room. When sound passes through a door, we hear it eve rywhere in the room and thus observe that sound spread s out when passing
through such an opening (Figure). What is the diffe rence between the behavior of sound waves and light wav es in this case?
The answer is that light has very short wavelengths and acts like a ray. Sound has wavelengths on the order of the size of the door
and bends around corners (for frequency of 1000 Hz,
about three times smaller than the width of the doorway).Exercise

10.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84105
Figure: (a) Light passing through a doorway makes a sha rp outline on the floor. Since light’s wavelength is v ery small
compared with the size of the door, it acts like a ra y. (b) Sound waves bend into all parts of the room, a wave effect, because their
wavelength is similar to the size of the door.
If we pass light through smaller openings such as slit s, we can use Huygens’s principle to see that light ben ds as sound does (Figure
). The bending of a wave around the edges of an open ing or an obstacle is called diffraction. Diffraction is a wave
characteristic and occurs for all types of waves. If diffraction is observed for some phenomenon, it is evidence that the phenomenon
is a wave. Thus, the horizontal diffraction of the l aser beam after it passes through the slits in Figure is evidence that light is a
wave.
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a plane wave f ront striking an opening. The edges of the wave front bend after passing
through the opening, a process called diffraction. Th e amount of bending is more extreme for a small openi ng, consistent with the
fact that wave characteristics are most noticeable for interactions with objects about the same size as the wa velength.
This page titled 10.8: Huygens’s Principle is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.7: Huygens’s Principle by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me3.

10.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410610.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how an image is formed by a plane mirror.
Distinguish between real and virtual images.
Find the location and characterize the orientation of an im age created by a plane mirror.
You only have to look as far as the nearest bathroom to find an example of an image formed by a mirror. I mages in a plane mirror
are the same size as the object, are located behind the mi rror, and are oriented in the same direction as the object (i.e., “upright”).
To understand how this happens, consider Figure. Two r ays emerge from point, strike the mirror, and refl ect into the
observer’s eye. Note that we use the law of reflection to construct the reflected rays. If the reflected ray s are extended backward
behind the mirror (see dashed lines), they seem to ori ginate from point. This is where the image of point is located. If we
repeat this process for point, we obtain its image at point. You should convince yourself by using basic geometry that the
image height (the distance from to) is the same as the object height (the distance from to). By formi ng images of all
points of the object, we obtain an upright image of the obje ct behind the mirror.
Figure. Two light rays originating from point P on a n object are reflected by a flat mirror into the ey e of an observer. The
reflected rays are obtained by using the law of refle ction. Extending these reflected rays backward, they seem to come from point Q
behind the mirror, which is where the virtual image is located. Repeating this process for point P′ gives the image point Q′. The
image height is thus the same as the object height, the image is upright, and the object distance d is the sam e as the image distance
d. (credit: modification of work by Kevin Dufendach)
Notice that the reflected rays appear to the observe r to come directly from the image behind the mirror. In reality, these rays come
from the points on the mirror where they are reflect ed. The image behind the mirror is called a virtual image because it cannot be
projected onto a screen—the rays only appear to ori ginate from a common point behind the mirror. If you walk behind the mirror,
you cannot see the image, because the rays do not go there. However, in front of the mirror, the rays behave exactly as if they come
from behind the mirror, so that is where the virtual im age is located.
Later in this chapter, we discuss real images; a real image can be projected onto a screen because the r ays physically go through the
image. You can certainly see both real and virtual im ages. The difference is that a virtual image cannot b e projected onto a screen,
whereas a real image can.
Locating an Image in a Plane Mirror
The law of reflection tells us that the angle of inci dence is the same as the angle of reflection. Applyi ng this to triangles and
in Figure and using basic geometry shows that they are congruent triangles. This means that the distanc e from the
object to the mirror is the same as the distance f rom the mirror to the image. The object distance (d enoted) is the distance
from the mirror to the object (or, more generally, f rom the center of the optical element that creates its image). Similarly, the imageLearning Objectives
o
i

10.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84106distance (denoted) is the distance from the mirror t o the image (or, more generally, from the center of the optical element that
creates it). If we measure distances from the mirror, t hen the object and image are in opposite directions, so for a plane mirror, the
object and image distances should have the opposite sign s:
An extended object such as the container in Figure ca n be treated as a collection of points, and we can a pply the method
above to locate the image of each point on the extend ed object, thus forming the extended image.
Multiple Images
If an object is situated in front of two mirrors, you m ay see images in both mirrors. In addition, the image in the first mirror may act
as an object for the second mirror, so the second mirr or may form an image of the image. If the mirrors ar e placed parallel to each
other and the object is placed at a point other than the midpoint between them, then this process of image -of-an-image continues
without end, as you may have noticed when standing in a hallway with mirrors on each side. This is shown in Fig ure, which
shows three images produced by the blue object. Notic e that each reflection reverses front and back, just like pulling a right-hand
glove inside out produces a left-hand glove (this is why a reflection of your right hand is a left hand). T hus, the fronts and backs of
images 1 and 2 are both inverted with respect to the object, and the front and back of image 3 is inver ted with respect to image 2,
which is the object for image 3.
Figure. Two parallel mirrors can produce, in theory, an infinite number of images of an object placed of f center between the
mirrors. Three of these images are shown here. The fron t and back of each image is inverted with respect to its object. Note that the
colors are only to identify the images. For normal mir rors, the color of an image is essentially the same as th at of its object.
You may have noticed that image 3 is smaller than th e object, whereas images 1 and 2 are the same size a s the object. The ratio of
the image height with respect to the object height is ca lled magnification. More will be said about magnification in the next section.
Infinite reflections may terminate. For instance, two mirrors at right angles form three images, as shown i n Figure. Images 1
and 2 result from rays that reflect from only a sin gle mirror, but image 1,2 is formed by rays that refl ect from both mirrors. This is
shown in the ray-tracing diagram in (\PageIndex{3b}\). To find image 1,2, you have to look behind the corner of the two mirrors.
Figure. Two mirrors can produce multiple images. (a) Three images of a plastic head are visible in the two mirrors at a right
angle. (b) A single object reflecting from two mirro rs at a right angle can produce three images, as shown by the green, purple, and
red images.

10.9.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84106This page titled 10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.2: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

10.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410710.10: Spherical Mirrors
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe image formation by spherical mirrors.
Use ray diagrams and the mirror equation to calculate the p roperties of an image in a spherical mirror.
The image in a plane mirror has the same size as the object, is upright, and is the same distance behind t he mirror as the object is in
front of the mirror. A curved mirror, on the other h and, can form images that may be larger or smaller than the object and may form
either in front of the mirror or behind it. In gener al, any curved surface will form an image, although so me images make be so
distorted as to be unrecognizable (think of fun hou se mirrors). Because curved mirrors can create such a rich variety of images,
they are used in many optical devices that find man y uses. We will concentrate on spherical mirrors for the most part, because they
are easier to manufacture than mirrors such as parabol ic mirrors and so are more common.
Curved Mirrors
We can define two general types of spherical mirrors. If the reflecting surface is the outer side of the s phere, the mirror is called a
convex mirror. If the inside surface is the reflecting surface, it is ca lled a concave mirror.
Symmetry is one of the major hallmarks of many optic al devices, including mirrors and lenses. The symmetry a xis of such optical
elements is often called the principal axis or optic al axis. For a spherical mirror, the optical axis passe s through the mirror’s center
of curvature and the mirror’s vertex, as shown in Figure.
Figure. A spherical mirror is formed by cutting out a piece of a sphere and silvering either the inside or outside surface. A
concave mirror has silvering on the interior surface (think “cave”), and a convex mirror has silvering on t he exterior surface.
Consider rays that are parallel to the optical axis of a parabolic mirror, as shown in Figure. Following th e law of reflection,
these rays are reflected so that they converge at a po int, called the focal point. Figure shows a spherical mirror that is large
compared with its radius of curvature. For this mirror, the reflected rays do not cross at the same point, so the mirror does not have
a well-defined focal point. This is called spherical aberration and results in a blurred image of an extended objec t. Figure
shows a spherical mirror that is small compared to it s radius of curvature. This mirror is a good approxima tion of a parabolic
mirror, so rays that arrive parallel to the optical axis are reflected to a well-defined focal point. The distance along the optical axis
from the mirror to the focal point is called the focal l ength of the mirror.Learning Objectives

10.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107
Figure: (a) Parallel rays reflected from a parabolic mirror cross at a single point called the focal point F. (b) Parallel rays
reflected from a large spherical mirror do not cross a t a common point. (c) If a spherical mirror is small c ompared with its radius of
curvature, it better approximates the central part o f a parabolic mirror, so parallel rays essentially cross at a common point. The
distance along the optical axis from the mirror to th e focal point is the focal length f of the mirror.
A convex spherical mirror also has a focal point, as s hown in Figure. Incident rays parallel to the optical axis are reflected
from the mirror and seem to originate from point a t focal length behind the mirror. Thus, the focal point is virtual because no
real rays actually pass through it; they only appear to or iginate from it.
Figure: (a) Rays reflected by a convex spherical mirr or: Incident rays of light parallel to the optical a xis are reflected from a
convex spherical mirror and seem to originate from a well-defined focal point at focal distance f on the opposite side of the mirror.
The focal point is virtual because no real rays pass thr ough it. (b) Photograph of a virtual image formed by a convex mirror. (credit
b: modification of work by Jenny Downing)
How does the focal length of a mirror relate to the m irror’s radius of curvature? Figure shows a single ray t hat is reflected
by a spherical concave mirror. The incident ray is p arallel to the optical axis. The point at which the reflected ray crosses the optical
axis is the focal point. Note that all incident rays t hat are parallel to the optical axis are reflected t hrough the focal point—we only
show one ray for simplicity. We want to find how the f ocal length (denoted by) relates to the radius of curvature of the mirror,
, whose length is
The law of reflection tells us that angles and are the same, and because the incident ray is parallel to the optical axis,
angles and are also the same. Thus, triangle is an iso sceles triangle with. If the angle is small then
which is called the “ small-angle approximation ”), then or. Inserting this into Equation for the radius
, we get

10.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107In other words, in the small-angle approximation, the focal length of a concave spherical mirror is half of its radius of curvature,
In this chapter, we assume that the small-angle approximation (also called the paraxial approximation) is always valid. In this
approximation, all rays are paraxial rays, which means t hat they make a small angle with the optical axis and are at a distance much
less than the radius of curvature from the optical axis. In this case, their angles of reflection are small angles, so
Figure: Reflection in a concave mirror. In the small -angle approximation, a ray that is parallel to the optical axis CP is
reflected through the focal point F of the mirror.
Using Ray Tracing to Locate Images
To find the location of an image formed by a spheri cal mirror, we first use ray tracing, which is the techni que of drawing rays and
using the law of reflection to determine the reflect ed rays (later, for lenses, we use the law of refractio n to determine refracted
rays). Combined with some basic geometry, we can use ray tracing to find the focal point, the image location, and other
information about how a mirror manipulates light. In fact, we already used ray tracing above to locate th e focal point of spherical
mirrors, or the image distance of flat mirrors. To loca te the image of an object, you must locate at least two points of the image.
Locating each point requires drawing at least two ray s from a point on the object and constructing their reflected rays. The point at
which the reflected rays intersect, either in real spac e or in virtual space, is where the corresponding poin t of the image is located.
To make ray tracing easier, we concentrate on four “princ ipal” rays whose reflections are easy to construct.
Figure shows a concave mirror and a convex mirror, ea ch with an arrow-shaped object in front of it. These a re the objects
whose images we want to locate by ray tracing. To do so, we draw rays from point that is on the object but n ot on the optical
axis. We choose to draw our ray from the tip of the obj ect. Principal ray 1 goes from point and travels para llel to the optical axis.
The reflection of this ray must pass through the foc al point, as discussed above. Thus, for the concave m irror, the reflection of
principal ray 1 goes through focal point, as shown i n Figure. For the convex mirror, the backward extensi on of the
reflection of principal ray 1 goes through the foca l point (i.e., a virtual focus). Principal ray 2 trave ls first on the line going through
the focal point and then is reflected back along a line parallel to the optical axis. Principal ray 3 tr avels toward the center of
curvature of the mirror, so it strikes the mirror at normal incidence and is reflected back along the li ne from which it came. Finally,
principal ray 4 strikes the vertex of the mirror and is re flected symmetrically about the optical axis.

10.10.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107
Figure: The four principal rays shown for both (a) a concave mirror and (b) a convex mirror. The image f orms where the
rays intersect (for real images) or where their backwa rd extensions intersect (for virtual images).
The four principal rays intersect at point, which i s where the image of point is located. To locate poi nt, drawing any two of
these principle rays would suffice. We are thus free to choose whichever of the principal rays we desire to l ocate the image.
Drawing more than two principal rays is sometimes useful to verif y that the ray tracing is correct.
To completely locate the extended image, we need to locate a second point in the image, so that we know ho w the image is
oriented. To do this, we trace the principal rays from the base of the object. In this case, all four princ ipal rays run along the optical
axis, reflect from the mirror, and then run back along the optical axis. The difficulty is that, because t hese rays are collinear, we
cannot determine a unique point where they intersect. All we know is that the base of the image is on the o ptical axis. However,
because the mirror is symmetrical from top to botto m, it does not change the vertical orientation of t he object. Thus, because the
object is vertical, the image must be vertical. Ther efore, the image of the base of the object is on the optical axis directly above the
image of the tip, as drawn in the figure.
For the concave mirror, the extended image in this ca se forms between the focal point and the center of c urvature of the mirror. It is
inverted with respect to the object, is a real image, and is smaller than the object. Were we to move the o bject closer to or farther
from the mirror, the characteristics of the image wo uld change. For example, we show, as a later exercise, tha t an object placed
between a concave mirror and its focal point leads t o a virtual image that is upright and larger than th e object. For the convex
mirror, the extended image forms between the focal p oint and the mirror. It is upright with respect to the object, is a virtual image,
and is smaller than the object.
Ray tracing is very useful for mirrors. The rules for ray tracing are summarized here for reference:
A ray traveling parallel to the optical axis of a spher ical mirror is reflected along a line that goes through t he focal point of
the mirror (ray 1 in Figure).
A ray traveling along a line that goes through the focal point of a spherical mirror is reflected along a line pa rallel to the
optical axis of the mirror (ray 2 in Figure).Ray-Tracing Rules

10.10.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107A ray traveling along a line that goes through the cente r of curvature of a spherical mirror is reflected back alo ng the same
line (ray 3 in Figure).
A ray that strikes the vertex of a spherical mirror is ref lected symmetrically about the optical axis of the mirro r (ray 4 in
Figure).
We use ray tracing to illustrate how images are forme d by mirrors and to obtain numerical information ab out optical properties
of the mirror. If we assume that a mirror is small comp ared with its radius of curvature, we can also use alge bra and geometry
to derive a mirror equation, which we do in the next section. Combining ray tracing with the mirror equat ion is a good way to
analyze mirror systems.
Image Formation by Reflection—The Mirror Equation
For a plane mirror, we showed that the image formed has the same height and orientation as the object, and it is located at the same
distance behind the mirror as the object is in fron t of the mirror. Although the situation is a bit more complicated for curved
mirrors, using geometry leads to simple formulas relat ing the object and image distances to the focal len gths of concave and
convex mirrors.
Figure: Image formed by a concave mirror.
Consider the object shown in Figure. The center of c urvature of the mirror is labeled and is a distance from the
vertex of the mirror, as marked in the figure. The object and image distances are labeled and, and t he object and image heights
are labeled and, respectively. Because the angles and are alternate interior angles, we know that they have the same
magnitude. However, they must differ in sign if we meas ure angles from the optical axis, so. An analogous sce nario holds
for the angles and. The law of reflection tells us that they have the same magnitude, but their signs m ust differ if we measure
angles from the optical axis. Thus,. Taking the tan gent of the angles and, and using the property th at,
gives us
or
Similarly, taking the tangent of and gives
or

10.10.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107Combining Equation and gives
After a little algebra, this becomes
No approximation is required for this result, so it i s exact. However, as discussed above, in the small-angle a pproximation, the focal
length of a spherical mirror is one-half the radius of curvature of the mirror, or. Inserting this into Equation gives
the mirror equation:
The mirror equation relates the image and object dis tances to the focal distance and is valid only in the small-angle approximation
(Equation). Although it was derived for a concave mi rror, it also holds for convex mirrors (proving this is left as an
exercise). We can extend the mirror equation to the case of a plane mirror by noting that a plane mirror has an infinite radius of
curvature. This means the focal point is at infinity, so th e mirror equation simplifies to
which is the same equation obtained earlier.
Notice that we have been very careful with the signs in deriving the mirror equation. For a plane mirror, th e image distance has the
opposite sign of the object distance. Also, the real image formed by the concave mirror in Figure is on the opposite side of
the optical axis with respect to the object. In this ca se, the image height should have the opposite sign of the object height. To keep
track of the signs of the various quantities in the m irror equation, we now introduce a sign convention.
Using a consistent sign convention is very important i n geometric optics. It assigns positive or negative va lues for the
quantities that characterize an optical system. Unde rstanding the sign convention allows you to describe an image without
constructing a ray diagram. This text uses the following sig n convention:
1. The focal length is positive for concave mirrors and negative for convex mirrors.
2. The image distance is positive for real images and negative for virtual images.
Notice that rule 1 means that the radius of curvature of a spherical mirror can be positive or negative. What does it mean to
have a negative radius of curvature? This means sim ply that the radius of curvature for a convex mirror is defined to be
negative.
Image Magnification
Let’s use the sign convention to further interpret the derivation of the mirror equation. In deriving t his equation, we found that the
object and image heights are related by
See Equation. Both the object and the image formed by the mirror in Figure are real, so the object and i mage
distances are both positive. The highest point of th e object is above the optical axis, so the object h eight is positive. The image,
however, is below the optical axis, so the image height is negative. Thus, this sign convention is consistent with our derivation of
the mirror equation.Sign convention for spherical mirrors

10.10.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107Equation in fact describes the linear magnification (often simply called “ magnification ”) of the image in terms of the
object and image distances. We thus define the dimensio nless magnification as follows:
If is positive, the image is upright, and if is ne gative, the image is inverted. If, the image is larg er than the object, and
if, the image is smaller than the object. With this definition of magnification, we get the following rela tion between the
vertical and horizontal object and image distances:
This is a very useful relation because it lets you ob tain the magnification of the image from the object and image distances, which
you can obtain from the mirror equation.
One of the solar technologies used today for generat ing electricity involves a device (called a paraboli c trough or concentrating
collector) that concentrates sunlight onto a blacken ed pipe that contains a fluid. This heated fluid is pumped to a heat
exchanger, where the thermal energy is transferred to another system that is used to generate steam and ev entually generates
electricity through a conventional steam cycle. Figu re shows such a working system in southern California. T he real
mirror is a parabolic cylinder with its focus located at the pipe; however, we can approximate the mirror as exactly one-quarter
of a circular cylinder.
Figure: Parabolic trough collectors are used to genera te electricity in southern California. (credit: “kjk olb”/Wikimedia
Commons)
1. If we want the rays from the sun to focus at 40.0 cm from t he mirror, what is the radius of the mirror?
2. What is the amount of sunlight concentrated onto the pipe, per meter of pipe length, assuming the insolation (i ncident solar
radiation) is 900 W/m?
3. If the fluid-carrying pipe has a 2.00-cm diameter, what is the temperature increase of the fluid per meter of pipe over a
period of 1 minute? Assume that all solar radiation inciden t on the reflector is absorbed by the pipe, and that the fl uid is
mineral oil.
Strategy
First identify the physical principles involved. Part (a) is related to the optics of spherical mirrors. Part (b) involves a little
math, primarily geometry. Part (c) requires an understan ding of heat and density.
Solution
a. The sun is the object, so the object distance is ess entially infinity:. The desired image distance is. We use
the mirror equation (Equation) to find the focal le ngth of the mirror:Example: Solar Electric Generating System

10.10.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107Thus, the radius of the mirror is
b. The insolation is 900 W/m. You must find the cro ss-sectional area of the concave mirror, since the power delivered is
. The mirror in this case is a quarter-section of a cylinder, so the area for a length of the mirror i s.
The area for a length of 1.00 m is then
The insolation on the 1.00-m length of pipe is then
c. The increase in temperature is given by. The mass o f the mineral oil in the one-meter section of pipe is
Therefore, the increase in temperature in one minute is
Significance
An array of such pipes in the California desert can p rovide a thermal output of 250 MW on a sunny day, with fluids reaching
temperatures as high as 400°C. We are considering only o ne meter of pipe here and ignoring heat losses along the pi pe.
A keratometer is a device used to measure the curvatu re of the cornea of the eye, particularly for fittin g contact lenses. Light is
reflected from the cornea, which acts like a convex m irror, and the keratometer measures the magnificati on of the image. The
smaller the magnification, the smaller the radius o f curvature of the cornea. If the light source is 1 2 cm from the cornea and the
image magnification is 0.032, what is the radius of curvatu re of the cornea?
Strategy
If you find the focal length of the convex mirror f ormed by the cornea, then you know its radius of curva ture (it’s twice the
focal length). The object distance is d =12cm and the magnification is m=0.032. First find the image distan ce and then solve
for the focal length.2
Example: Image in a Convex Mirror
o

10.10.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107Solution
Start with the equation for magnification (Equation) an d solving for and inserting the given values yields
where we retained an extra significant figure because this is an intermediate step in the calculation. Solv e the mirror equation
for the focal length and insert the known values for the o bject and image distances. The result is
The radius of curvature is twice the focal length, so
Significance
The focal length is negative, so the focus is virtual, as expected for a concave mirror and a real object. T he radius of curvature
found here is reasonable for a cornea. The distance from cornea to retina in an adult eye is about 2.0 cm. In practice, corneas
may not be spherical, which complicates the job of fit ting contact lenses. Note that the image distance her e is negative,
consistent with the fact that the image is behind th e mirror. Thus, the image is virtual because no rays ac tually pass through it.
In the problems and exercises, you will show that, for a fixed object distance, a smaller radius of curvatu re corresponds to a
smaller the magnification.
Step 1. First make sure that image formation by a spherical mirror is involved.
Step 2. Determine whether ray tracing, the mirror equation, or both are required. A sketch is very useful even if ray tracing
is not specifically required by the problem. Write symbo ls and known values on the sketch.
Step 3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns).
Step 4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
Step 5. If ray tracing is required, use the ray-tracing ru les listed near the beginning of this section.
Step 6. Most quantitative problems require using the mirror equation. Use the examples as guides for using the mirror
equation.
Step 7. Check to see whether the answer makes sense. Do the si gns of object distance, image distance, and focal length
correspond with what is expected from ray tracing? Is the si gn of the magnification correct? Are the object and im age
distances reasonable?
Departure from the Small-Angle Approximation
The small-angle approximation (Equation) is a corne rstone of the above discussion of image formation by a spherical
mirror. When this approximation is violated, then t he image created by a spherical mirror becomes disto rted. Such distortion is
called aberration. Here we briefly discuss two specific type s of aberrations: spherical aberration and coma.
Spherical aberration
Consider a broad beam of parallel rays impinging on a spherical mirror, as shown in Figure. The farther f rom the optical
axis the rays strike, the worse the spherical mirror ap proximates a parabolic mirror. Thus, these rays are no t focused at the same
point as rays that are near the optical axis, as shown in the figure. Because of spherical aberration, the image of an extended object
in a spherical mirror will be blurred. Spherical aberr ations are characteristic of the mirrors and lenses that we consider in the
following section of this chapter (more sophisticated mirrors and lenses are needed to eliminate spherical aberrations).PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY: SPHERICAL MIRRORS

10.10.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84107
Figure: (a) With spherical aberration, the rays that are farther from the optical axis and the rays that a re closer to the optical
axis are focused at different points. Notice that the aberration gets worse for rays farther from the optica l axis. (b) For comatic
aberration, parallel rays that are not parallel to t he optical axis are focused at different heights and a t different focal lengths, so the
image contains a “tail” like a comet (which is “coma” in Latin). Note that the colored rays are only to f acilitate viewing; the colors
do not indicate the color of the light.
Coma or Comatic Aberration
Coma is similar to spherical aberration, but arises when t he incoming rays are not parallel to the optical ax is, as shown in Figure
. Recall that the small-angle approximation holds f or spherical mirrors that are small compared to the ir radius. In this case,
spherical mirrors are good approximations of parabo lic mirrors. Parabolic mirrors focus all rays that ar e parallel to the optical axis
at the focal point. However, parallel rays that are not parallel to the optical axis are focused at differe nt heights and at different
focal lengths, as show in Figure. Because a spherical mirror is symmetric about the optical axis, the various colored rays in
this figure create circles of the corresponding color on the focal plane.
Although a spherical mirror is shown in Figure, comati c aberration occurs also for parabolic mirrors—it doe s not result
from a breakdown in the small-angle approximation (Eq uation). Spherical aberration, however, occurs only for spherical
mirrors and is a result of a breakdown in the small-an gle approximation. We will discuss both coma and sph erical aberration later
in this chapter, in connection with telescopes.
This page titled 10.10: Spherical Mirrors is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.3: Spherical Mirrors by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

10.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410810.11: Images Formed by Refraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe image formation by a single refracting surface
Determine the location of an image and calculate its pr operties by using a ray diagram
Determine the location of an image and calculate its pr operties by using the equation for a single refracting s urface
When rays of light propagate from one medium to anot her, these rays undergo refraction, which is when light waves are bent at the
interface between two media. The refracting surface can form an image in a similar fashion to a reflecting surface, except that the
law of refraction (Snell’s law) is at the heart of the proces s instead of the law of reflection.
Refraction at a Plane Interface—Apparent Depth
If you look at a straight rod partially submerged in water, it appears to bend at the surface. The reason be hind this curious effect is
that the image of the rod inside the water forms a li ttle closer to the surface than the actual position of the rod, so it does not line up
with the part of the rod that is above the water. The same phenomenon explains why a fish in water appears to be closer to the
surface than it actually is.
Figure: Bending of a rod at a water-air interface. Point o n the rod appears to be at point, which is where the image of
point P forms due to refraction at the air-water int erface.
To study image formation as a result of refraction, consi der the following questions:
1. What happens to the rays of light when they enter or pa ss through a different medium?
2. Do the refracted rays originating from a single poi nt meet at some point or diverge away from each other?
To be concrete, we consider a simple system consisting of two media separated by a plane interface (Figure). T he object is
in one medium and the observer is in the other. For i nstance, when you look at a fish from above the water surface, the fish is in
medium 1 (the water) with refractive index 1.33, and y our eye is in medium 2 (the air) with refractive ind ex 1.00, and the surface of
the water is the interface. The depth that you “see” is the image height and is called the apparent depth. The actual depth of the
fish is the object height.Learning Objectives

10.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84108
Figure: Apparent depth due to refraction. The real object at point P creates an image at point Q. The i mage is not at the same
depth as the object, so the observer sees the image at a n “apparent depth.”
The apparent depth h depends on the angle at which y ou view the image. For a view from above (the so-called “normal” view), we
can approximate the refraction angle to be small, a nd replace in Snell’s law by. With this approximati on, you can use
the triangles and to show that the apparent depth is g iven by
The derivation of this result is left as an exercise. Thu s, a fish appears at 3/4 of the real depth when viewed from ab ove.
Refraction at a Spherical Interface
Spherical shapes play an important role in optics pri marily because high-quality spherical shapes are fa r easier to manufacture than
other curved surfaces. To study refraction at a single spherical surface, we assume that the medium with the spherical surface at one
end continues indefinitely (a “semi-infinite” medium).
Refraction at a Convex Surface
Consider a point source of light at point P in front of a convex surface made of glass (Figure). Let be the radius of
curvature, n be the refractive index of the medium i n which object point P is located, and n be the refractive index of the med ium
with the spherical surface. We want to know what happens as a result of refraction at this interface.
Figure: Refraction at a convex surface ().
Because of the symmetry involved, it is sufficient t o examine rays in only one plane. The figure shows a ray of light that starts at
the object point, refracts at the interface, and goe s through the image point. We derive a formula rel ating the object distance
, the image distance, and the radius of curvature.
Applying Snell’s law to the ray emanating from point gives
Within the small-angle approximationi
1 2

10.11.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84108Snell’s law then takes the form
From the geometry of Figure, we see that
Inserting both expressions into Equation gives
Using Figure, we calculate the tangent of the angles,, and:
Again using the small-angle approximation, we find that, so the above relationships become
Putting these angles into Equation gives
We can write this more conveniently as
If the object is placed at a special point called t he first focus, or the object focus, then the imag e is formed at infinity, as shown
in Figure.
Figure: (a) First focus (called the “object focus”) for refraction at a convex surface. (b) Second focus (cal led “image focus”)
for refraction at a convex surface.
We can find the location of the first focus by setti ng in Equation.

10.11.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84108Similarly, we can define a second focus or image focus where the image is formed for an object that is fa r away (Figure
). The location of the second focus is obtained from Equation by setting:
Note that the object focus is at a different distance from t he vertex than the image focus because.
Although we derived this equation for refraction at a convex surface, the same expression holds for a concav e surface,
provided we use the following sign convention:
1. if surface is convex toward object; otherwise,.
2. if image is real and on opposite side from the object; otherwise,.
This page titled 10.11: Images Formed by Refraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.4: Images Formed by Refraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.Sign convention for single refracting surfaces

10.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8410910.12: Thin Lenses
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Use ray diagrams to locate and describe the image formed by a lens
Employ the thin-lens equation to describe and locate the image formed by a lens
Lenses are found in a huge array of optical instrument s, ranging from a simple magnifying glass to a camera’s zoom lens to the eye
itself. In this section, we use the Snell’s law to explore the properties of lenses and how they form images.
The word “lens” derives from the Latin word for a lent il bean, the shape of which is similar to a convex lens. However, not all
lenses have the same shape. Figure shows a variety of dif ferent lens shapes. The vocabulary used to describe l enses is the
same as that used for spherical mirrors: The axis of symmetry of a lens is called the optical axis, where this axis intersects the lens
surface is called the vertex of the lens, and so forth.
Figure: Various types of lenses: Note that a converging lens has a thicker “waist,” whereas a diverging lens ha s a thinner
waist.
A convex or converging lens is shaped so that all lig ht rays that enter it parallel to its optical axis i ntersect (or focus) at a single
point on the optical axis on the opposite side of the lens, as shown in Figure. Likewise, a concave or divergin g lens is
shaped so that all rays that enter it parallel to i ts optical axis diverge, as shown in part (b). To und erstand more precisely how a lens
manipulates light, look closely at the top ray that goes through the converging lens in part (a). Becau se the index of refraction of
the lens is greater than that of air, Snell’s law tell s us that the ray is bent toward the perpendicular to the interface as it enters the
lens. Likewise, when the ray exits the lens, it is bent awa y from the perpendicular. The same reasoning applie s to the diverging
lenses, as shown in Figure. The overall effect is that l ight rays are bent toward the optical axis for a conv erging lens and
away from the optical axis for diverging lenses. For a converging lens, the point at which the rays cross is the focal point F of the
lens. For a diverging lens, the point from which the ra ys appear to originate is the (virtual) focal point. The distance from the center
of the lens to its focal point is the focal length f of the lens.Learning Objectives

10.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109
Figure: Rays of light entering (a) a converging lens and (b) a diverging lens, parallel to its axis, conver ge at its focal point F.
The distance from the center of the lens to the focal point is the lens’s focal length f. Note that the lig ht rays are bent upon entering
and exiting the lens, with the overall effect being to bend the rays toward the optical axis.
A lens is considered to be thin if its thickness t is much less than the radii of curvature of both su rfaces, as shown in Figure.
In this case, the rays may be considered to bend onc e at the center of the lens. For the case drawn in th e figure, light ray 1 is
parallel to the optical axis, so the outgoing ray is bent once at the center of the lens and goes throug h the focal point. Another
important characteristic of thin lenses is that lig ht rays that pass through the center of the lens are undeviated, as shown by light ray
2.
Figure: In the thin-lens approximation, the thickness t of the lens is much, much less than the radii R and R of curvature of
the surfaces of the lens. Light rays are considered to b end at the center of the lens, such as light ray 1. Li ght ray 2 passes through
the center of the lens and is undeviated in the thin- lens approximation.
As noted in the initial discussion of Snell’s law, the pat hs of light rays are exactly reversible. This means tha t the direction of the
arrows could be reversed for all of the rays in Figure. For example, if a point-light source is placed at the focal point of a
convex lens, as shown in Figure, parallel light rays emerg e from the other side.1 2

10.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109
Figure in converging and diverging lenses. This techni que is used in lighthouses and sometimes in traffic light s to produce a
directional beam of light from a source that emits li ght in all directions.
Ray Tracing and Thin Lenses
Ray tracing is the technique of determining or following (tracin g) the paths taken by light rays. Ray tracing for thi n lenses is very
similar to the technique we used with spherical mirror s. As for mirrors, ray tracing can accurately describe the operation of a lens.
The rules for ray tracing for thin lenses are similar to those of spherical mirrors:
1. A ray entering a converging lens parallel to the optic al axis passes through the focal point on the other sid e of the lens (ray 1 in
part (a) of Figure). A ray entering a diverging lens p arallel to the optical axis exits along the line that passe s through the
focal point on the same side of the lens (ray 1 in part (b) of the figure).
2. A ray passing through the center of either a convergin g or a diverging lens is not deviated (ray 2 in parts (a) an d (b)).
3. For a converging lens, a ray that passes through the fo cal point exits the lens parallel to the optical axis (ray 3 in part (a)). For a
diverging lens, a ray that approaches along the line that p asses through the focal point on the opposite side exit s the lens parallel
to the axis (ray 3 in part (b)).
Figure: Thin lenses have the same focal lengths on eith er side. (a) Parallel light rays entering a convergin g lens from the
right cross at its focal point on the left. (b) Parall el light rays entering a diverging lens from the righ t seem to come from the focal
point on the right.
Thin lenses work quite well for monochromatic light (i. e., light of a single wavelength). However, for light tha t contains several
wavelengths (e.g., white light), the lenses work less wel l. The problem is that, as we learned in the previous chapter, the index of

10.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109refraction of a material depends on the wavelength o f light. This phenomenon is responsible for many color ful effects, such as
rainbows. Unfortunately, this phenomenon also leads to aberrations in images formed by lenses. In particul ar, because the focal
distance of the lens depends on the index of refrac tion, it also depends on the wavelength of the incid ent light. This means that light
of different wavelengths will focus at different point s, resulting is so-called “ chromatic aberrations.” In particular, the edges of an
image of a white object will become colored and blurr ed. Special lenses called doublets are capable of correcting chromatic
aberrations. A doublet is formed by gluing together a converging lens and a diverging lens. The combined d oublet lens produces
significantly reduced chromatic aberrations.
Image Formation by Thin Lenses
We use ray tracing to investigate different types of images that can be created by a lens. In some circums tances, a lens forms a real
image, such as when a movie projector casts an image onto a screen. In other cases, the image is a virtual image, which cannot be
projected onto a screen. Where, for example, is the image formed by eyeglasses? We use ray tracing for t hin lenses to illustrate how
they form images, and then we develop equations to analyze quantitatively the properties of thin lenses.
Consider an object some distance away from a converg ing lens, as shown in Figure. To find the location and size of the
image, we trace the paths of selected light rays orig inating from one point on the object, in this case, t he tip of the arrow. The figure
shows three rays from many rays that emanate from the tip of the arrow. These three rays can be traced b y using the ray-tracing
rules given above.
Ray 1 enters the lens parallel to the optical axis and p asses through the focal point on the opposite side (rule 1).
Ray 2 passes through the center of the lens and is not de viated (rule 2).
Ray 3 passes through the focal point on its way to the lens and exits the lens parallel to the optical axis (rule 3).
The three rays cross at a single point on the opposi te side of the lens. Thus, the image of the tip of the arrow is located at this point.
All rays that come from the tip of the arrow and enter the le ns are refracted and cross at the point shown.
After locating the image of the tip of the arrow, we n eed another point of the image to orient the entire image of the arrow. We
chose to locate the image base of the arrow, which is on the optical axis. As explained in the section on spherical mirrors, the base
will be on the optical axis just above the image of t he tip of the arrow (due to the top-bottom symmetry of the lens). Thus, the
image spans the optical axis to the (negative) height shown. Rays from another point on the arrow, such as the middle of the arrow,
cross at another common point, thus filling in the rest of the image.
Although three rays are traced in this figure, only t wo are necessary to locate a point of the image. It is best to trace rays for which
there are simple ray-tracing rules.
Figure: Ray tracing is used to locate the image forme d by a lens. Rays originating from the same point on t he object are
traced—the three chosen rays each follow one of the r ules for ray tracing, so that their paths are easy to d etermine. The image is
located at the point where the rays cross. In this case, a real image—one that can be projected on a screen— is formed.
Several important distances appear in the figure. As f or a mirror, we define dodo to be the object distance, or the distance of an
object from the center of a lens. The image distance d is defined to be the distance of the image from th e center of a lens. The
height of the object and the height of the image ar e indicated by h and h, respectively. Images that ap pear upright relative to thei
o i

10.12.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109object have positive heights, and those that are inve rted have negative heights. By using the rules of r ay tracing and making a scale
drawing with paper and pencil, like that in Figure, we can accurately describe the location and size of a n image. But the real
benefit of ray tracing is in visualizing how images are for med in a variety of situations.
Oblique Parallel Rays and Focal Plane
We have seen that rays parallel to the optical axis a re directed to the focal point of a converging lens. In the case of a diverging
lens, they come out in a direction such that they app ear to be coming from the focal point on the opposit e side of the lens (i.e., the
side from which parallel rays enter the lens). What ha ppens to parallel rays that are not parallel to the optical axis (Figure)?
In the case of a converging lens, these rays do not converge at the focal point. Instead, they come tog ether on another point in the
plane called the focal plane. The focal plane conta ins the focal point and is perpendicular to the opt ical axis. As shown in the figure,
parallel rays focus where the ray through the center of the lens crosses the focal plane.
Figure: Parallel oblique rays focus on a point in a fo cal plane.
Thin-Lens Equation
Ray tracing allows us to get a qualitative picture o f image formation. To obtain numeric information, we derive a pair of equations
from a geometric analysis of ray tracing for thin le nses. These equations, called the thin-lens equation an d the lens maker’s
equation, allow us to quantitatively analyze thin lenses.
Consider the thick bi-convex lens shown in Figure. Th e index of refraction of the surrounding medium is n (if the lens is in
air, then) and that of the lens is. The radii of c urvatures of the two sides are and. We wish to find a relation
between the object distance, the image distance, and the parameters of the lens.
Figure for deriving the lens maker’s equation. Here, is the thickness of lens, n is the index of refraction of the exterior
medium, and is the index of refraction of the lens. We take the limit of to obtain the formula for a t hin lens.
To derive the thin-lens equation, we consider the im age formed by the first refracting surface (i.e., left surface) and then use this
image as the object for the second refracting surfac e. In the figure, the image from the first refracting surface is, which is formed1

10.12.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109by extending backwards the rays from inside the lens (these rays result from refraction at the first surf ace). This is shown by the
dashed lines in the figure. Notice that this image i s virtual because no rays actually pass through the point Q′. To find the image
distance corresponding to the image Q′, we use Equat ion2.4.9. In this case, the object distance is, the image dist ance is d′idi′,
and the radius of curvature is. Inserting these into the relationship derived previous for refraction at curves surfa ces gives
The image is virtual and on the same side as the object, s o d ′<0 and d >0. The first surface is convex toward the objec t, so.
To find the object distance for the object formed b y refraction from the second interface, note that the role of the indices of
refraction n and n are interchanged in Equation 2.4.9. In Figure, the rays originate in the medium with i ndex, whereas in
Figure 2.4.3, the rays originate in the medium with index. Thus, we must interchange n and n in Equation 2.4.9. In addition, by
consulting again Figure, we see that the object dist ance is and the image distance is. The radius of c urvature is R
Inserting these quantities into Equation 2.4.9 gives
The image is real and on the opposite side from the o bject, so and. The second surface is convex away fr om the
object, so. Equation can be simplified by noting that
where we have taken the absolute value because is a ne gative number, whereas both and are positive. We can dispense with
the absolute value if we negate, which gives
Inserting this into Equation gives
Summing Equations and gives
In the thin-lens approximation, we assume that the le ns is very thin compared to the first image distance, or (or,
equivalently, and). In this case, the third and four th terms on the left-hand side of Equation cancel, l eaving us
with
Dividing by gives us finally
The left-hand side looks suspiciously like the mirror equation that we derived above for spherical mirrors. As done for spherical
mirrors, we can use ray tracing and geometry to show that, f or a thin lens,
where is the focal length of the thin lens (this de rivation is left as an exercise). This is the thin-lens equation. The focal length of a
thin lens is the same to the left and to the right of the lens. Combining Equations and givesi o
1 2
1 2

10.12.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109which is called the lens maker’s equation. It shows that the focal length of a thin lens depen ds only of the radii of curvature and
the index of refraction of the lens and that of the surrounding medium. For a lens in air, and, so the lens maker’s
equation reduces to
To properly use the thin-lens equation, the following sig n conventions must be obeyed:
is positive if the image is on the side opposite the object (i.e., real image); otherwise, is negative (i.e., virtual image).
is positive for a converging lens and negative for a d iverging lens.
is positive for a surface convex toward the object, an d negative for a s urface concave toward object.
Magnification
By using a finite-size object on the optical axis and ray tracing, you can show that the magnification of an im age is
(where the three lines mean “is defined as”). This is e xactly the same equation as we obtained for mirrors (see Equation 2.3.15). If
, then the image has the same vertical orientation a s the object (called an “upright” image). If m<0, the n the image has the
opposite vertical orientation as the object (called an “inverted ” image).
Using the Thin-Lens Equation
The thin-lens equation and the lens maker’s equation are broadly applicable to situations involving thi n lenses. We explore many
features of image formation in the following examples.
Consider a thin converging lens. Where does the ima ge form and what type of image is formed as the obje ct approaches the lens
from infinity? This may be seen by using the thin-l ens equation for a given focal length to plot the im age distance as a function of
object distance. In other words, we plot
for a given value of. For, the result is shown in Figure.
Figure: (a) Image distance for a thin converging len s with f=1.0 cm as a function of object distance. (b) Same thing but for a
diverging lens with f=−1.0 cm.
An object much farther than the focal length f from the lens should produce an image near the foc al plane, because the second term
on the right-hand side of the equation above becomes negligible compared to the first term, so we have. This can be seen inSign conventions for lenses

10.12.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109the plot of part (a) of the figure, which shows that th e image distance approaches asymptotically the foca l length of 1 cm for larger
object distances. As the object approaches the focal p lane, the image distance diverges to positive infinit y. This is expected because
an object at the focal plane produces parallel rays that form an image at infinity (i.e., very far from the lens). When the object is
farther than the focal length from the lens, the im age distance is positive, so the image is real, on th e opposite side of the lens from
the object, and inverted (because via Equation). Whe n the object is closer than the focal length from th e lens,
the image distance becomes negative, which means that the image is virtual, on the same side of the lens as the ob ject, and upright.
For a thin diverging lens of focal length, a similar plot of image distance vs. object distance is shown in Figure
. In this case, the image distance is negative for a ll positive object distances, which means that the i mage is virtual, on the
same side of the lens as the object, and upright. These cha racteristics may also be seen by ray-tracing diagrams (Figu re).
Figure: The red dots show the focal points of the lense s. (a) A real, inverted image formed from an object that is farther
than the focal length from a converging lens. (b) A virtual, upright image formed from an object that i s closer than a focal length
from the lens. (c) A virtual, upright image formed f rom an object that is farther than a focal length fr om a diverging lens.
To see a concrete example of upright and inverted im ages, look at Figure, which shows images formed by co nverging
lenses when the object (the person’s face in this case) is place at different distances from the lens. In par t (a) of the figure, the
person’s face is farther than one focal length from the lens, so the image is inverted. In part (b), the p erson’s face is closer than one
focal length from the lens, so the image is upright.
Figure: (a) When a converging lens is held farther th an one focal length from the man’s face, an inverted image is formed.
Note that the image is in focus but the face is not, b ecause the image is much closer to the camera taking t his photograph than the
face. (b) An upright image of the man’s face is produ ced when a converging lens is held at less than one foc al length from his face.
(credit a: modification of work by “DaMongMan”/Flick r; credit b: modification of work by Casey Fleser)
Work through the following examples to better understand how thin lenses work.
Step 1. Determine whether ray tracing, the thin-lens equat ion, or both would be useful. Even if ray tracing is not us ed, a
careful sketch is always very useful. Write symbols and v alues on the sketch.
Step 2. Identify what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns).
Step 3. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem (identify the knowns).
Step 4. If ray tracing is required, use the ray-tracing ru les listed near the beginning of this section.PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY: LENSES

10.12.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109Step 5. Most quantitative problems require the use of the t hin-lens equation and/or the lens maker’s equation. So lve these
for the unknowns and insert the given quantities or use bot h together to find two unknowns.
Step 7. Check to see if the answer is reasonable. Are the signs c orrect? Is the sketch or ray tracing consistent with the
calculation?
Example: Using the Lens Maker’s Equation
Find the radius of curvature of a biconcave lens symme trically ground from a glass with index of refractive 1.55 so that its
focal length in air is 20 cm (for a biconcave lens, both su rfaces have the same radius of curvature).
Strategy
Use the thin-lens form of the lens maker’s equation:
where and. Since we are making a symmetric biconcave lens, we have.
Solution
We can determine the radius of curvature from
Solving for and inserting,, and gives
Example: Converging Lens and Different Object Distances
Find the location, orientation, and magnification of the image for an 3.0 cm high object at each of the following positions in
front of a convex lens of focal length 10.0 cm. (a), (b), and (c).
Strategy
We start with the thin-lens equation (Equation)
Solve this for the image distance and insert the given obje ct distance and focal length.
Solution
a. For and, this gives
The image is positive, so the image, is real, is on t he opposite side of the lens from the object, and is 12.6 cm from the lens. To
find the magnification and orientation of the image, u se

10.12.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109The negative magnification means that the image is i nverted. Since, the image is smaller than the object. The size of
the image is given by
b. For and
The image distance is negative, so the image is virtu al, is on the same side of the lens as the object, and is 10 cm from the lens.
The magnification and orientation of the image are foun d from
The positive magnification means that the image is upright (i.e., it has the same orientation as the obj ect). Since, the
image is larger than the object. The size of the image is
c. For and
The image distance is positive, so the image is real, is on the opposite side of the lens from the object, and is 20.0 cm from the
lens. The magnification is
The negative magnification means that the image is invert ed. Since, the image is the same size as the object.
When solving problems in geometric optics, we often ne ed to combine ray tracing and the lens equations. The following example
demonstrates this approach.
l h i h l h d f

10.12.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84109Example: Choosing the Focal Length and Type of Lens
To project an image of a light bulb on a screen 1.50 m away, you need to choose what type of lens to use (c onverging or
diverging) and its focal length (Figure). The distanc e between the lens and the light bulb is fixed at 0.7 5 m. Also, what
is the magnification and orientation of the image?
Figure: A light bulb placed 0.75 m from a lens havin g a 0.50-m focal length produces a real image on a sc reen, as
discussed in the example. Ray tracing predicts the imag e location and size.
Strategy
The image must be real, so you choose to use a conv erging lens. The focal length can be found by using the thin-lens equation
and solving for the focal length. The object distance i s and the image distance is.
Solution
Solve the thin lens for the focal length and insert the de sired object and image distances:
The magnification is
Significance
The minus sign for the magnification means that the image is inverted. The focal length is positive, as exp ected for a
converging lens. Ray tracing can be used to check the calculation (Figure). As expected, the image is inve rted, is real,
and is larger than the object.
This page titled 10.12: Thin Lenses is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.5: Thin Lenses by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

10.13.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411010.13: The Simple Magnifier
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Understand the optics of a simple magnifier
Characterize the image created by a simple magnifier
The apparent size of an object perceived by the eye depends on the angle the object subtends from the eye. As shown in Figure
, the object at subtends a larger angle from the ey e than when it is position at point. Thus, the object at forms a larger
image on the retina (see) than when it is positioned at (see). Thus, objects that subtend large angles fr om the eye appear
larger because they form larger images on the retina.
Figure: Size perceived by an eye is determined by the angle subtended by the object. An image formed on t he retina by an
object at is larger than an image formed on the ret ina by the same object positioned at B (compared imag e heights to).
We have seen that, when an object is placed within a f ocal length of a convex lens, its image is virtual, u pright, and larger than the
object (see ฀part (b) of this Figure). Thus, when such an image produced by a convex lens serves as the object for the eye, as
shown in Figure, the image on the retina is enlarged, because the image produced by the lens subtends a l arger angle in the
eye than does the object. A convex lens used for this purpose is called a magnifying glass or a simple magnifier.
Figure: The simple magnifier is a convex lens used to p roduce an enlarged image of an object on the retina. (a) With no
convex lens, the object subtends an angle from the ey e. (b) With the convex lens in place, the image prod uced by the convex
lens subtends an angle from the eye, with. Thus, the image on the retina is larger with the convex lens in place.Learning Objectives

10.13.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84110To account for the magnification of a magnifying le ns, we compare the angle subtended by the image (creat ed by the lens) with the
angle subtended by the object (viewed with no lens), as shown in Figure. We assume that the object is situ ated at the near
point of the eye, because this is the object distance at which the unaided eye can form the largest image on the retina. We will
compare the magnified images created by a lens with this maximum image size for the unaided eye. The mag nification of an image
when observed by the eye is the angular magnificatio n, which is defined by the ratio of the angle subte nded by the image
to the angle subtended by the object:
Consider the situation shown in Figure. The magnifyi ng lens is held a distance from the eye, and the ima ge produced by
the magnifier forms a distance from the eye. We want to calculate the angular magnification for any arbitrary and. In the
small-angle approximation, the angular size of the image is. The angular size of the object at the ne ar point is
. The angular magnification is then
Using the definition of linear magnification
and the thin-lens equation
we arrive at the following expression for the angular mag nification of a magnifying lens:
From Figure, we see that the absolute value of the imag e distance is. Note that because the image is
virtual, so we can dispense with the absolute value by expli citly inserting the minus sign:
Inserting Equation into Equation gives us the final equation for the angular magnification of a magnifying lens:
Note that all the quantities in this equation have t o be expressed in centimeters. Often, we want the image to be at the near-point
distance (e.g.,) to get maximum magnification, and we hold the magnifying lens close to the eye (). In th is case,
Equation gives
which shows that the greatest magnification occurs for the lens with the shortest focal length. In addition, whe n the image is at the
near-point distance and the lens is held close to the eye (), then and Equation becomes

10.13.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84110where is the linear magnification (Equation) previously derived for spherical mirrors and thin lenses. Another useful
situation is when the image is at infinity (). Equation t hen takes the form
The resulting magnification is simply the ratio of t he near-point distance to the focal length of the m agnifying lens, so a lens with a
shorter focal length gives a stronger magnification. Although this magnification is smaller by 1 than t he magnification obtained
with the image at the near point, it provides for the most comfortable viewing conditions, because the eye is relaxed when viewing
a distant object.
By comparing Equations and, we see that the range of ang ular magnification of a given converging lens is
A jeweler wishes to inspect a 3.0-mm-diameter diamond with a magnifier. The diamond is held at the jeweler’s near point (25
cm), and the jeweler holds the magnifying lens close to his eye.
a. What should the focal length of the magnifying lens be to see a 15-mm-diameter image of the diamond?
b. What should the focal length of the magnifying lens be to obtain 10× magnification?
Strategy
We need to determine the requisite magnification of the magnifier. Because the jeweler holds the magnif ying lens close to his
eye, we can use Equation to find the focal length of th e magnifying lens.
Solution
a. The required linear magnification is the ratio of the desired image diameter to the diamond’s actual di ameter (Equation
). Because the jeweler holds the magnifying lens close to his eye and the image forms at his near point, th e linear
magnification is the same as the angular magnification, so
The focal length f of the magnifying lens may be calculated by solving Equa tion for, which gives
b. To get an image magnified by a factor of ten, we again solve Equation for, but this time we use. Th e result
is
SignificanceExample: Magnifying a Diamond

10.13.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84110Note that a greater magnification is achieved by using a lens with a smaller focal length. We thus need to u se a lens with radii
of curvature that are less than a few centimeters and hold it very close to our eye. This is not very conve nient. A compound
microscope, explored in the following section, can overco me this drawback.
This page titled 10.13: The Simple Magnifier is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.8: The Simple Magnifier by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.14.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411110.14: The Camera
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the optics of a camera
Characterize the image created by a camera
Cameras are very common in our everyday life. Between 1825 a nd 1827, French inventor Nicéphore Niépce successfully
photographed an image created by a primitive camera. Since then, enormous progress has been achieved in th e design of cameras
and camera-based detectors.
Initially, photographs were recorded by using the ligh t-sensitive reaction of silver-based compounds such a s silver chloride or silver
bromide. Silver-based photographic paper was in common use until the advent of digital photography in the 1 980s, which is
intimately connected to charge-coupled device (CCD) detectors. In a nutshell, a CCD is a semiconductor chi p that records images
as a matrix of tiny pixels, each pixel located in a “bin” in the surface. Each pixel is capable of dete cting the intensity of light
impinging on it. Color is brought into play by putti ng red-, blue-, and green-colored filters over the p ixels, resulting in colored
digital images (Figure). At its best resolution, one C CD pixel corresponds to one pixel of the image. To red uce the
resolution and decrease the size of the file, we can “bin ” several CCD pixels into one, resulting in a smaller but “pixe lated” image.
Figure: A charge-coupled device (CCD) converts light signals into electronic signals, enabling electronic p rocessing and
storage of visual images. This is the basis for electronic imaging in all digital cameras, from cell phones to movie cameras. (credit
left: modification of work by Bruce Turner)
Clearly, electronics is a big part of a digital camer a; however, the underlying physics is basic optics. As a m atter of fact, the optics
of a camera are pretty much the same as those of a si ngle lens with an object distance that is significantl y larger than the lens’s
focal distance (Figure).Learning Objectives

10.14.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84111
Figure: Modern digital cameras have several lenses to p roduce a clear image with minimal aberration and use red, blue, and
green filters to produce a color image.
For instance, let us consider the camera in a smartpho ne. An average smartphone camera is equipped with a stat ionary wide-angle
lens with a focal length of about 4–5 mm. (This focal length is about equal to the thickness of the phon e.) The image created by the
lens is focused on the CCD detector mounted at the op posite side of the phone. In a cell phone, the lens an d the CCD cannot move
relative to each other. So how do we make sure that both the ima ges of a distant and a close object are in focus?
Recall that a human eye can accommodate for distant and close images by changing its focal distance. A cell phone camera cannot
do that because the distance from the lens to the det ector is fixed. Here is where the small focal distance b ecomes important. Let us
assume we have a camera with a 5-mm focal distance. Wh at is the image distance for a selfie? The object di stance for a selfie (the
length of the hand holding the phone) is about 50 cm. Usi ng the thin-lens equation, we can write
We then obtain the image distance:
Note that the object distance is 100 times larger tha n the focal distance. We can clearly see that the 1/ (500 mm) term is significantly
smaller than 1/(5 mm), which means that the image dis tance is pretty much equal to the lens’s focal leng th. An actual calculation
gives us the image distance d =5.05mm. This value is extre mely close to the lens’s focal distance.
Now let us consider the case of a distant object. Let u s say that we would like to take a picture of a person standing about 5 m from
us. Using the thin-lens equation again, we obtain the image distance of 5.005 mm. The farther the object is from the lens, the closer
the image distance is to the focal distance. At the l imiting case of an infinitely distant object, we obtai n the image distance exactly
equal to the focal distance of the lens.
As you can see, the difference between the image distan ce for a selfie and the image distance for a distan t object is just about 0.05
mm or 50 microns. Even a short object distance such as the length of your hand is two orders of magnitude larger than the lens’s
focal length, resulting in minute variations of the image distance. (The 50-micron difference is smaller than the thickness of an
average sheet of paper.) Such a small difference can b e easily accommodated by the same detector, positio ned at the focal distance
of the lens. Image analysis software can help improve image q uality.i

10.14.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84111Conventional point-and-shoot cameras often use a mov able lens to change the lens-to-image distance. Comp lex lenses of the more
expensive mirror reflex cameras allow for superb qual ity photographic images. The optics of these camera le nses is beyond the
scope of this textbook.
This page titled 10.14: The Camera is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.7: The Camera by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

10.15.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411210.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the physics behind the operation of microscopes and telescopes
Describe the image created by these instruments and calcul ate their magnifications
Microscopes and telescopes are major instruments that h ave contributed hugely to our current understanding of the micro- and
macroscopic worlds. The invention of these devices le d to numerous discoveries in disciplines such as phys ics, astronomy, and
biology, to name a few. In this section, we explain the bas ic physics that make these instruments work.
Microscopes
Although the eye is marvelous in its ability to see objects large and small, it obviously is limited in t he smallest details it can detect.
The desire to see beyond what is possible with the nake d eye led to the use of optical instruments. We have seen that a simple
convex lens can create a magnified image, but it is h ard to get large magnification with such a lens. A m agnification greater than 5×
is difficult without distorting the image. To get hi gher magnification, we can combine the simple magnifyi ng glass with one or
more additional lenses. In this section, we examine microsc opes that enlarge the details that we cannot see with the naked eye.
Microscopes were first developed in the early 1600s by eyeglass makers in The Netherlands and Denmark. The simplest compound
microscope is constructed from two convex lenses (Figure). The objective lens is a convex lens of short focal length (i.e.,
high power) with typical magnification from 5× to 100 ×. The eyepiece, also referred to as the ocular, is a convex lens of longer
focal length.
The purpose of a microscope is to create magnified images of small objects, and both lenses contribute to the final magnification.
Also, the final enlarged image is produced sufficient ly far from the observer to be easily viewed, since th e eye cannot focus on
objects or images that are too close (i.e., closer tha n the near point of the eye).
Figure: A compound microscope is composed of two lenses: an objective and an eyepiece. The objective forms t he first
image, which is larger than the object. This first ima ge is inside the focal length of the eyepiece and serv es as the object for the
eyepiece. The eyepiece forms final image that is furt her magnified.
To see how the microscope in Figure forms an image, consider its two lenses in succession. The object is just beyond the
focal length of the objective lens, producing a re al, inverted image that is larger than the object. Thi s first image serves as theLearning Objectives

10.15.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84112object for the second lens, or eyepiece. The eyepie ce is positioned so that the first image is within its f ocal length, so that it can
further magnify the image. In a sense, it acts as a m agnifying glass that magnifies the intermediate ima ge produced by the
objective. The image produced by the eyepiece is a m agnified virtual image. The final image remains inve rted but is farther from
the observer than the object, making it easy to view.
The eye views the virtual image created by the eyepi ece, which serves as the object for the lens in the ey e. The virtual image
formed by the eyepiece is well outside the focal length o f the eye, so the eye forms a real image on the retina.
The magnification of the microscope is the product o f the linear magnification by the objective and th e angular magnification
by the eyepiece. These are given by
Here, and are the focal lengths of the objective and the eyepiece, respectively. We assume that the fina l image is formed at
the near point of the eye, providing the largest ma gnification. Note that the angular magnification of the eyepiece is the same as
obtained earlier for the simple magnifying glass. This should not be surprising, because the eyepie ce is essentially a magnifying
glass, and the same physics applies here. The net magnification of the compound microscope is the product of the l inear
magnification of the objective and the angular magnific ation of the eyepiece:
Calculate the magnification of an object placed 6.2 0 mm from a compound microscope that has a 6.00 mm-f ocal length
objective and a 50.0 mm-focal length eyepiece. The obje ctive and eyepiece are separated by 23.0 cm.
Strategy
This situation is similar to that shown in Figure. To find the overall magnification, we must know the lin ear
magnification of the objective and the angular magn ification of the eyepiece. We can use Equation, but we need to use
the thin-lens equation to find the image distance of the objective.
Solution
Solving the thin-lens equation for gives
Inserting this result into Equation along with the known values
givesExample: Microscope Magnification

10.15.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84112Significance
Both the objective and the eyepiece contribute to t he overall magnification, which is large and negative, consistent with Figure
, where the image is seen to be large and inverted. In this case, the image is virtual and inverted, whic h cannot happen
for a single element.
Figure: A compound microscope with the image created at infinity.
We now calculate the magnifying power of a microscope when the image is at infinity, as shown in Figure, becau se this
makes for the most relaxed viewing. The magnifying po wer of the microscope is the product of linear magni fication of the
objective and the angular magnification of the eyepie ce. We know that
and from the thin-lens equation we obtain
If the final image is at infinity, then the image cre ated by the objective must be located at the focal p oint of the eyepiece. This may
be seen by considering the thin-lens equation with o r by recalling that rays that pass through the focal point exit the lens
parallel to each other, which is equivalent to focus ing at infinity. For many microscopes, the distance bet ween the image-side focal
point of the objective and the object-side focal po int of the eyepiece is standardized at L = 16 cm. Th is distance is called the tube
length of the microscope. From Figure, we see that
Inserting this into Equation gives

10.15.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84112We now need to calculate the angular magnification o f the eyepiece with the image at infinity. To do so, we take the ratio of the
angle subtended by the image to the angle subtend ed by the object at the near point of the eye (this is the closest that
the unaided eye can view the object, and thus this is the position where the object will form the largest im age on the retina of the
unaided eye). Using Figure and working in the small-angle approximation, we have
and
where is the height of the image formed by the obje ctive, which is the object of the eyepiece. Thus, the ang ular magnification
of the eyepiece is
The net magnifying power of the compound microscope with th e image at infinity is therefore
The focal distances must be in centimeters. The minu s sign indicates that the final image is inverted. Note that the only variables in
the equation are the focal distances of the eyepiece and the objective, which makes this equation particula rly useful.
Telescopes
Telescopes are meant for viewing distant objects and p roduce an image that is larger than the image produ ced in the unaided eye.
Telescopes gather far more light than the eye, allowi ng dim objects to be observed with greater magnifica tion and better resolution.
Telescopes were invented around 1600, and Galileo was th e first to use them to study the heavens, with monume ntal consequences.
He observed the moons of Jupiter, the craters and moun tains on the moon, the details of sunspots, and the fact that the Milky Way
is composed of a vast number of individual stars.

10.15.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84112
Figure: (a) Galileo made telescopes with a convex obj ective and a concave eyepiece. These produce an upri ght image and
are used in spyglasses. (b) Most simple refracting telescop es have two convex lenses. The objective forms a real, inverted image at
(or just within) the focal plane of the eyepiece. Th is image serves as the object for the eyepiece. The eye piece forms a virtual,
inverted image that is magnified.
Figure shows a refracting telescope made of two lenses. T he first lens, called the objective, forms a real image within the
focal length of the second lens, which is called the eyepiece. The image of the objective lens serves as the obje ct for the eyepiece,
which forms a magnified virtual image that is observed by the eye. This design is what Galileo used to observe the h eavens.
Although the arrangement of the lenses in a refracti ng telescope looks similar to that in a microscope, ther e are important
differences. In a telescope, the real object is far awa y and the intermediate image is smaller than the ob ject. In a microscope, the
real object is very close and the intermediate imag e is larger than the object. In both the telescope an d the microscope, the eyepiece
magnifies the intermediate image; in the telescope, howev er, this is the only magnification.
The most common two-lens telescope is shown in Figure. Th e object is so far from the telescope that it is essenti ally at
infinity compared with the focal lengths of the lense s, so the incoming rays are essentially parallel an d focus on the focal
plane. Thus, the first image is produced at
as shown in the figure, and is not large compared wit h what you might see by looking directly at the obje ct. However, the eyepiece
of the telescope eyepiece (like the microscope eyepie ce) allows you to get nearer than your near point to this first image and so
magnifies it (because you are near to it, it subtends a larger angle from your eye and so forms a larger image on your retina). As for
a simple magnifier, the angular magnification of a telescope is the ratio of the angle subtended by the image (in) to
the angle subtended by the real object (in):

10.15.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84112To obtain an expression for the magnification that i nvolves only the lens parameters, note that the foca l plane of the objective lens
lies very close to the focal plan of the eyepiece. I f we assume that these planes are superposed, we have t he situation shown in
Figure.
Figure: The focal plane of the objective lens of a t elescope is very near to the focal plane of the eyepi ece. The angle
subtended by the image viewed through the eyepiece i s larger than the angle subtended by the object when viewed with the
unaided eye.
We further assume that the angles and are small, so that the small-angel approximation holds (). If the i mage
formed at the focal plane has height then
where the minus sign is introduced because the height is negative if we measure both angles in the counterc lockwise direction.
Inserting these expressions into Equation gives
Thus, to obtain the greatest angular magnification, i t is best to have an objective with a long focal leng th and an eyepiece with a
short focal length. The greater the angular magnifi cation, the larger an object will appear when viewed through a telescope,
making more details visible. Limits to observable det ails are imposed by many factors, including lens qua lity and atmospheric
disturbance. Typical eyepieces have focal lengths of 2.5 cm or 1.25 cm. If the objective of the telescop e has a focal length of 1
meter, then these eyepieces result in magnifications of 40× and 80×, respectively. Thus, the angular magnif ications make the image
appear 40 times or 80 times closer than the real object.
The minus sign in the magnification indicates the im age is inverted, which is unimportant for observing t he stars but is a real
problem for other applications, such as telescopes on ships or telescopic gun sights. If an upright image i s needed, Galileo’s
arrangement in can be used. But a more common arran gement is to use a third convex lens as an eyepiece, i ncreasing the
distance between the first two and inverting the image once again, as seen in Figure.

10.15.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84112
Figure: This arrangement of three lenses in a telescope produces an upright final image. The first two lenses are far enough
apart that the second lens inverts the image of the fi rst. The third lens acts as a magnifier and keeps the im age upright and in a
location that is easy to view.
The largest refracting telescope in the world is the 4 0-inch diameter Yerkes telescope located at Lake Gen eva, Wisconsin (Figure
), and operated by the University of Chicago.
It is very difficult and expensive to build large r efracting telescopes. You need large defect-free lense s, which in itself is a
technically demanding task. A refracting telescope b asically looks like a tube with a support structure to rotate it in different
directions. A refracting telescope suffers from sever al problems. The aberration of lenses causes the imag e to be blurred. Also, as
the lenses become thicker for larger lenses, more ligh t is absorbed, making faint stars more difficult to observe. Large lenses are
also very heavy and deform under their own weight. Some of these problems with refracting telescopes are addr essed by avoiding
refraction for collecting light and instead using a curved mirror in its place, as devised by Isaac Newton. These telescopes are
called reflecting telescopes.
Figure: In 1897, the Yerkes Observatory in Wisconsin (U SA) built a large refracting telescope with an object ive lens that is
40 inches in diameter and has a tube length of 62 fee t. (credit: Yerkes Observatory, University of Chicago)
Reflecting Telescopes
Isaac Newton designed the first reflecting telescope around 1670 to solve the problem of chromatic aberra tion that happens in all
refracting telescopes. In chromatic aberration, light of different colors refracts by slightly different a mounts in the lens. As a result,
a rainbow appears around the image and the image app ears blurred. In the reflecting telescope, light ray s from a distant source fall
upon the surface of a concave mirror fixed at the b ottom end of the tube. The use of a mirror instead of a lens eliminates chromatic
aberration. The concave mirror focuses the rays on its focal plane. The design problem is how to observe the focused image.
Newton used a design in which the focused light from th e concave mirror was reflected to one side of the tu be into an eyepiece
(Figure). This arrangement is common in many amateur tel escopes and is called the Newtonian design.

10.15.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84112Some telescopes reflect the light back toward the midd le of the concave mirror using a convex mirror. In th is arrangement, the
light-gathering concave mirror has a hole in the mi ddle (). The light then is incident on an eyepiece l ens. This arrangement
of the objective and eyepiece is called the Cassegrain design. Most big telescopes, including the Hubble space telesco pe, are of
this design. Other arrangements are also possible. In so me telescopes, a light detector is placed right at the spot where light is
focused by the curved mirror.
Figure: Reflecting telescopes: (a) In the Newtonian d esign, the eyepiece is located at the side of the tele scope; (b) in the
Cassegrain design, the eyepiece is located past a hole i n the primary mirror.
Most astronomical research telescopes are now of the r eflecting type. One of the earliest large telescopes of this kind is the Hale
200-inch (or 5-meter) telescope built on Mount Palom ar in southern California, which has a 200 inch-diamet er mirror. One of the
largest telescopes in the world is the 10-meter Keck te lescope at the Keck Observatory on the summit of the d ormant Mauna Kea
volcano in Hawaii. The Keck Observatory operates two 10-me ter telescopes. Each is not a single mirror, but is ins tead made up of
36 hexagonal mirrors. Furthermore, the two telescopes o n the Keck can work together, which increases their po wer to an effective
85-meter mirror. The Hubble telescope (Figure) is anot her large reflecting telescope with a 2.4 meter-diame ter primary
mirror. The Hubble was put into orbit around Earth in 1990.
Figure: The Hubble space telescope as seen from the Spac e Shuttle Discovery. (credit: modification of work b y NASA)
The angular magnification of a reflecting telescop e is also given by Equation. For a spherical mirror, the focal length is
half the radius of curvature, so making a large obj ective mirror not only helps the telescope collect m ore light, but also increases
the magnification of the image.

10.15.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84112This page titled 10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.9: Microscopes and Telescopes by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

10.16.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411310.16: The Eye
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Understand the basic physics of how images are formed by t he human eye
Recognize several conditions of impaired vision as well as the optics principles for treating these conditions
Physics of the Eye
The eye is remarkable in how it forms images and in th e richness of detail and color it can detect. However, our eyes often need
some correction to reach what is called “normal” visio n. Actually, normal vision should be called “ideal” vi sion because nearly
one-half of the human population requires some sort of eyesight correction, so requiring glasses is by n o means “abnormal.” Image
formation by our eyes and common vision correction can be analyzed with the optics discussed earlier in this chapter.
Figure shows the basic anatomy of the eye. The cornea and lens form a system that, to a good approximation, acts as a
single thin lens. For clear vision, a real image must be projected onto the light-sensitive retina, which lies a fixed distance from the
lens. The flexible lens of the eye allows it to adjust the radius of curvature of the lens to produce an im age on the retina for objects
at different distances. The center of the image falls on the fovea, which has the greatest density of light receptors and the greatest
acuity (sharpness) in the visual field. The variable opening (i.e., the pupil) of the eye, along with chem ical adaptation, allows the
eye to detect light intensities from the lowest obse rvable to 10 times greater (without damage). This is an incredible range of
detection. Processing of visual nerve impulses begins with interconnections in the retina and continues in the brain. The optic nerve
conveys the signals received by the eye to the brain.
Figure: The cornea and lens of the eye act together to form a real image on the light-sensing retina, whi ch has its densest
concentration of receptors in the fovea and a blind spot over the optic nerve. The radius of curvature of the lens of an eye is
adjustable to form an image on the retina for differ ent object distances. Layers of tissues with varying indi ces of refraction in the
lens are shown here. However, they have been omitted from other pictures for clarity.
The indices of refraction in the eye are crucial to its ability to form images. Table lists the indice s of refraction relevant to
the eye. The biggest change in the index of refracti on, which is where the light rays are most bent, occurs at the air-cornea interface
rather than at the aqueous humor-lens interface. The ray diagram in Figure shows image formation by the cornea and lens of
the eye. The cornea, which is itself a converging len s with a focal length of approximately 2.3 cm, provid es most of the focusing
power of the eye. The lens, which is a converging lens wit h a focal length of about 6.4 cm, provides the finer focus needed to
produce a clear image on the retina. The cornea and lens can be treated as a single thin lens, even though the light rays pass through
several layers of material (such as cornea, aqueous humor, several layers in the lens, and vitreous humor), changing direction at
each interface. The image formed is much like the on e produced by a single convex lens (i.e., a real, inve rted image). Although
images formed in the eye are inverted, the brain inverts them once more to make them seem upright.
Table: Refractive Indices Relevant to the Eye*This i s an average value. The actual index of refraction v aries throughout the lens and is
greatest in center of the lens.Learning Objectives

10.16.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84113Material Index of Refraction
Water 1.33
Air 1.0
Cornea 1.38
Aqueous humor 1.34
Lens 1.41
Vitreous humor 1.34
Figure: In the human eye, an image forms on the reti na. Rays from the top and bottom of the object are t raced to show how
a real, inverted image is produced on the retina. Th e distance to the object is not to scale.
As noted, the image must fall precisely on the retina t o produce clear vision—that is, the image distance d must equal the lens-toretina distance. Because the lens-to-retina distance does not change, the image distance d must be the same for objects at all
distances. The ciliary muscles adjust the shape of t he eye lens for focusing on nearby or far objects. By changing the shape of the
eye lens, the eye changes the focal length of the lens. This mechanism of the eye is called accommodation.
The nearest point an object can be placed so that th e eye can form a clear image on the retina is called the near point of the eye.
Similarly, the far point is the farthest distance at which an object is clearly visible. A person with norma l vision can see objects
clearly at distances ranging from 25 cm to essentiall y infinity. The near point increases with age, becomi ng several meters for some
older people. In this text, we consider the near point to be 25 cm.
We can use the thin-lens equations to quantitatively examine image formation by the eye. First, we define the optical power of a
lens as
with the focal length f given in meters. The units of optical power are call ed “diopters” (D). That is, 1D=1/m,or 1m. Optometrists
prescribe common eyeglasses and contact lenses in unit s of diopters. With this definition of optical power, we can rewrite the thinlens equations as
Working with optical power is convenient because, for two or more lenses close together, the effective opti cal power of the lens
system is approximately the sum of the optical power of the individual lenses:*
i
i
−1

10.16.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84113The cornea and eye lens have focal lengths of 2.3 an d 6.4 cm, respectively. Find the net focal length and optical power of the
eye.
Strategy
The optical powers of the closely spaced lenses add, so.
Solution
Writing the equation for power in terms of the focal leng ths gives
Hence, the focal length of the eye (cornea and lens toget her) is
The optical power of the eye is
For clear vision, the image distance must equal the lens-to-retina distance. Normal vision is possible for objects at distances
to infinity. The following example shows how to calcul ate the image distance for an object placed at the n ear point of the
eye.
The net focal length of a particular human eye is 1.7 cm. An object is placed at the near point of the eye. How far behind the
lens is a focused image formed?
Strategy
The near point is 25 cm from the eye, so the object distance is d =25 cm. We determine the image distan ce from the lens
equation:
Solution
Therefore, the image is formed 1.8 cm behind the lens.
Significance
From the magnification formula, we find. Since m<0, th e image is inverted in orientation with respect to
the object. From the absolute value of m we see that the image is much smaller than the objec t; in fact, it is only 7% of the size
of the object.
Vision Correction
The need for some type of vision correction is very common. Typical vision defects are easy to understand with geometric optics,
and some are simple to correct. Figure illustrates t wo common vision defects. Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the ability toExample: Effective Focal Length of the Eye
Example: Image of an object placed at the near point
o

10.16.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84113see near objects, whereas distant objects are blurry. The eye over converges the nearly parallel rays fro m a distant object, and the
rays cross in front of the retina. More divergent ra ys from a close object are converged on the retina for a clear image. The distance
to the farthest object that can be seen clearly is c alled the far point of the eye (normally the far poi nt is at infinity). Farsightedness,
or hyperopia, is the ability to see far objects clear ly, whereas near objects are blurry. A farsighted eye does not sufficiently converge
the rays from a near object to make the rays meet on the re tina.
Figure: (a) The nearsighted (myopic) eye converges ra ys from a distant object in front of the retina, so th ey have diverged
when they strike the retina, producing a blurry imag e. An eye lens that is too powerful can cause nearsight edness, or the eye may be
too long. (b) The farsighted (hyperopic) eye is unabl e to converge the rays from a close object on the ret ina, producing blurry nearfield vision. An eye lens with insufficient optical po wer or an eye that is too short can cause farsightedness.
Since the nearsighted eye over converges light rays, the correction for nearsightedness consists of placin g a diverging eyeglass lens
in front of the eye, as shown in Figure. This reduce s the optical power of an eye that is too powerful (reca ll that the focal
length of a diverging lens is negative, so its optical power is negative). Another way to understand this correc tion is that a diverging
lens will cause the incoming rays to diverge more to c ompensate for the excessive convergence caused by the lens system of the
eye. The image produced by the diverging eyeglass le ns serves as the (optical) object for the eye, and bec ause the eye cannot focus
on objects beyond its far point, the diverging lens mu st form an image of distant (physical) objects at a p oint that is closer than the
far point.

10.16.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84113
Figure: Correction of nearsightedness requires a diverg ing lens that compensates for over convergence by the eye. The
diverging lens produces an image closer to the eye tha n the physical object. This image serves as the optical object for the eye, and
the nearsighted person can see it clearly because it is closer than their far point.
What optical power of eyeglass lens is needed to cor rect the vision of a nearsighted person whose far poin t is 30.0 cm? Assume
the corrective lens is fixed 1.50 cm away from the eye.
Strategy
You want this nearsighted person to be able to see dis tant objects clearly, which means that the eyeglass l ens must produce an
image 30.0 cm from the eye for an object at infinit y. An image 30.0 cm from the eye will be 30.0 cm−1.50 cm =28.5 cm from
the eyeglass lens. Therefore, we must have d =−28.5cm whe n d =. The image distance is negative because it is on the same
side of the eyeglass lens as the object.
Solution
Since d and dodo are known, we can find the optical power o f the eyeglass lens by using Equation:
Significance
The negative optical power indicates a diverging (or concave) lens, as expected. If you examine eyeglasses for nearsighted
people, you will find the lenses are thinnest in the c enter. Additionally, if you examine a prescription fo r eyeglasses for
nearsighted people, you will find that the prescribed optic al power is negative and given in units of diopters.
Correcting farsightedness consists simply of using the opposite type of lens as for nearsightedness (i.e., a converging lens), as
shown in Figure.
Such a lens will produce an image of physical objects t hat are closer than the near point at a distance th at is between the near point
and the far point, so that the person can see the i mage clearly. To determine the optical power needed f or correction, you must
therefore know the person’s near point, as explained in Ex ample.Example: Correcting Nearsightedness
i o
i

10.16.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84113
Figure: Correction of farsightedness uses a converging l ens that compensates for the under convergence by the eye. The
converging lens produces an image farther from the ey e than the object, so that the farsighted person can se e it clearly.
What optical power of eyeglass lens is needed to all ow a farsighted person, whose near point is 1.00 m, to se e an object clearly
that is 25.0 cm from the eye? Assume the corrective lens i s fixed 1.5 cm from the eye.
Strategy
When an object is 25.0 cm from the person’s eyes, the eyeglass lens must produce an image 1.00 m away (the near point), so
that the person can see it clearly. An image 1.00 m f rom the eye will be 100cm−1.5cm=98.5cm from the eyegl ass lens because
the eyeglass lens is 1.5 cm from the eye. Therefore, d =−98.5cm, where the minus sign indicates that the imag e is on the same
side of the lens as the object. The object is 25.0cm−1.5cm =23.5cm from the eyeglass lens, so d =23.5cm.
Solution
Since d and dodo are known, we can find the optical power o f the eyeglass lens by using Equation:
Significance
The positive optical power indicates a converging (c onvex) lens, as expected. If you examine eyeglasses o f farsighted people,
you will find the lenses to be thickest in the center. In addition, prescription eyeglasses for farsighted people have a prescribed
optical power that is positive.
This page titled 10.16: The Eye is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
2.6: The Eye by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.Example: Correcting Farsightedness
i
o
i

10.17.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411410.17: A_Vision
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the followi ng:
Explain how electromagnetic waves differ from sound waves
Trace the path of light through the eye to the point of the optic nerve
Explain tonic activity as it is manifested in photorecep tors in the retina
Vision is the ability to detect light patterns from the outside environment and interpret them into imag es. Animals are bombarded
with sensory information, and the sheer volume of vis ual information can be problematic. Fortunately, the visual systems of species
have evolved to attend to the most-important stimuli. The importance of vision to humans is further substan tiated by the fact that
about one-third of the human cerebral cortex is dedicate d to analyzing and perceiving visual information.
Light
As with auditory stimuli, light travels in waves. The co mpression waves that compose sound must travel in a me dium—a gas, a
liquid, or a solid. In contrast, light is composed of e lectromagnetic waves and needs no medium; light can travel in a vacuum
(Figure 36.17). The behavior of light can be discussed in terms of the behavior of waves and also in terms o f the behavior of the
fundamental unit of light—a packet of electromagnet ic radiation called a photon. A glance at the elect romagnetic spectrum shows
that visible light for humans is just a small slice of the entire spectrum, which includes radiation tha t we cannot see as light because
it is below the frequency of visible red light and above the frequency of visible violet light.
Certain variables are important when discussing perce ption of light. Wavelength (which varies inversely with frequency) manifests
itself as hue. Light at the red end of the visible s pectrum has longer wavelengths (and is lower frequency), while light at the violet
end has shorter wavelengths (and is higher frequency). The wavelength of light is expressed in nanometers (nm); one nanometer is
one billionth of a meter. Humans perceive light that r anges between approximately 380 nm and 740 nm. Some ot her animals,
though, can detect wavelengths outside of the human ra nge. For example, bees see near-ultraviolet light in o rder to locate nectar
guides on flowers, and some non-avian reptiles sense infrared light (heat that prey gives off).
Figure 36.17 In the electromagnetic spectrum, visible li ght lies between 380 nm and 740 nm. (credit: modificatio n of work by
NASA)
Wave amplitude is perceived as luminous intensity, or brightness. The standard unit of intensity of light is the candela, which is
approximately the luminous intensity of one common can dle.
Light waves travel 299,792 km per second in a vacuum, (and somewhat slower in various media such as air and water), and those
waves arrive at the eye as long (red), medium (green), and short (blue) waves. What is termed “white light” is light that is
perceived as white by the human eye. This effect is pr oduced by light that stimulates equally the color r eceptors in the human eye.
The apparent color of an object is the color (or col ors) that the object reflects. Thus a red object refle cts the red wavelengths in
mixed (white) light and absorbs all other wavelengths of li ght.
Anatomy of the Eye
The photoreceptive cells of the eye, where transducti on of light to nervous impulses occurs, are located in the retina (shown in
Figure 36.18) on the inner surface of the back of the eye. But light does not impinge on the retina unal tered. It passes through other
layers that process it so that it can be interpreted by the retina (Figure 36.18b). The cornea, the front transparent layer of the eye,Learning Objectives

10.17.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114and the crystalline lens, a transparent convex struc ture behind the cornea, both refract (bend) light to focus the image on the retina.
The iris, which is conspicuous as the colored part o f the eye, is a circular muscular ring lying between t he lens and cornea that
regulates the amount of light entering the eye. In conditi ons of high ambient light, the iris contracts, reducing the size of the pupil at
its center. In conditions of low light, the iris relaxes an d the pupil enlarges.
Visual Connection
Figure 36.18 (a) The human eye is shown in cross section. (b) A blowup shows the layers of the retina.
Which of the following statements about the human eye is false?
a. Rods detect color, while cones detect only shades of gray.
b. When light enters the retina, it passes the ganglion cel ls and bipolar cells before reaching photoreceptors at the rear of the eye.
c. The iris adjusts the amount of light coming into the ey e.
d. The cornea is a protective layer on the front of the ey e.
The main function of the lens is to focus light on the retina and fovea centralis. The lens is dynamic, fo cusing and re-focusing light
as the eye rests on near and far objects in the vis ual field. The lens is operated by muscles that stre tch it flat or allow it to thicken,
changing the focal length of light coming through i t to focus it sharply on the retina. With age comes t he loss of the flexibility of
the lens, and a form of farsightedness called presbyop ia results. Presbyopia occurs because the image focuses behind the retina.
Presbyopia is a deficit similar to a different type of farsightedness called hyperopia caused by an eyeba ll that is too short. For both
defects, images in the distance are clear but images nearby are blurry. Myopia (nearsightedness) occurs when an eyeball is
elongated and the image focus falls in front of the retin a. In this case, images in the distance are blurry but im ages nearby are clear.
There are two types of photoreceptors in the retina: rods and cones, named for their general appearance as illustrated in Figure
36.19. Rods are strongly photosensitive and are locate d in the outer edges of the retina. They detect dim l ight and are used
primarily for peripheral and nighttime vision. Cones are weakly photosensitive and are located near the c enter of the retina. They
respond to bright light, and their primary role is in da ytime, color vision.Visual Connection

10.17.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114
Figure 36.19 Rods and cones are photoreceptors in the re tina. Rods respond in low light and can detect only shad es of gray. Cones
respond in intense light and are responsible for color vi sion. (credit: modification of work by Piotr Sliwa)
The fovea is the region in the center back of the eye that is responsible for acute vision. The fovea has a high density of cones.
When you bring your gaze to an object to examine it intently in bright light, the eyes orient so that t he object’s image falls on the
fovea. However, when looking at a star in the night sky o r other object in dim light, the object can be bette r viewed by the
peripheral vision because it is the rods at the edg es of the retina, rather than the cones at the center, that operate better in low light.
In humans, cones far outnumber rods in the fovea.
Link to Learning
Review the anatomical structure of the eye, clicking on each part to practice identifi cation.
Transduction of Light
The rods and cones are the site of transduction of l ight to a neural signal. Both rods and cones contain p hotopigments. In
vertebrates, the main photopigment, rhodopsin, has t wo main parts (Figure 36.20): an opsin, which is a memb rane protein (in the
form of a cluster of α-helices that span the membran e), and retinal—a molecule that absorbs light. When l ight hits a photoreceptor,
it causes a shape change in the retinal, altering its structure from a bent (cis) form of the molecule to its linear (trans) isomer. This
isomerization of retinal activates the rhodopsin, sta rting a cascade of events that ends with the closing of Na channels in the
membrane of the photoreceptor. Thus, unlike most othe r sensory neurons (which become depolarized by exposur e to a stimulus)
visual receptors become hyperpolarized and thus driven awa y from threshold (Figure 36.21).Link to Learning

10.17.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114
Figure 36.20 (a) Rhodopsin, the photoreceptor in verteb rates, has two parts: the trans-membrane protein opsin, an d retinal. When
light strikes retinal, it changes shape from (b) a cis to a trans form. The signal is passed to a G-protein called transd ucin, triggering
a series of downstream events.
Figure 36.21 When light strikes rhodopsin, the G-protein tra nsducin is activated, which in turn activates phosphodies terase.
Phosphodiesterase converts cGMP to GMP, thereby closing sodiu m channels. As a result, the membrane becomes hyperpolarized.
The hyperpolarized membrane does not release glutamat e to the bipolar cell.
Trichromatic Coding
There are three types of cones (with different photo psins), and they differ in the wavelength to which the y are most responsive, as
shown in Figure 36.22. Some cones are maximally respons ive to short light waves of 420 nm, so they are call ed S cones (“S” for
“short”); others respond maximally to waves of 530 nm (M cones, for “medium”); a third group responds maxi mally to light of
longer wavelengths, at 560 nm (L, or “long” cones). Wi th only one type of cone, color vision would not be p ossible, and a twocone (dichromatic) system has limitations. Primates use a three-cone (trichromatic) system, resulting in ful l color vision.
The color we perceive is a result of the ratio of ac tivity of our three types of cones. The colors of the visual spectrum, running from
long-wavelength light to short, are red (700 nm), ora nge (600 nm), yellow (565 nm), green (497 nm), blue (470 nm), indigo (450

10.17.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114nm), and violet (425 nm). Humans have very sensitive pe rception of color and can distinguish about 500 leve ls of brightness, 200
different hues, and 20 steps of saturation, or about 2 mil lion distinct colors.
Figure 36.22 Human rod cells and the different types of cone c ells each have an optimal wavelength. However, there is
considerable overlap in the wavelengths of light detected.
Retinal Processing
Visual signals leave the cones and rods, travel to t he bipolar cells, and then to ganglion cells. A large degree of processing of visual
information occurs in the retina itself, before visual i nformation is sent to the brain.
Photoreceptors in the retina continuously undergo to nic activity. That is, they are always slightly active even when not stimulated
by light. In neurons that exhibit tonic activity, the absence of stimuli maintains a firing rate at a baseli ne; while some stimuli
increase firing rate from the baseline, and other st imuli decrease firing rate. In the absence of light, the bipolar neurons that connect
rods and cones to ganglion cells are continuously a nd actively inhibited by the rods and cones. Exposu re of the retina to light
hyperpolarizes the rods and cones and removes their inhibition of bipolar cells. The now active bipolar cells in turn stimulate the
ganglion cells, which send action potentials along th eir axons (which leave the eye as the optic nerve). T hus, the visual system
relies on change in retinal activity, rather than t he absence or presence of activity, to encode visual signals for the brain. Sometimes
horizontal cells carry signals from one rod or cone t o other photoreceptors and to several bipolar cells. When a rod or cone
stimulates a horizontal cell, the horizontal cell in hibits more distant photoreceptors and bipolar cells, creating lateral inhibition.
This inhibition sharpens edges and enhances contrast i n the images by making regions receiving light appe ar lighter and dark
surroundings appear darker. Amacrine cells can distribute information from one bipolar cell to many ganglion c ells.
You can demonstrate this using an easy demonstration t o “trick” your retina and brain about the colors you are observing in your
visual field. Look fixedly at Figure 36.23 for about 4 5 seconds. Then quickly shift your gaze to a sheet of blank white paper or a
white wall. You should see an afterimage of the Norwegi an flag in its correct colors. At this point, close y our eyes for a moment,
then reopen them, looking again at the white paper or wall; the afterimage of the flag should continue to appear as red, white, and
blue. What causes this? According to an explanation called opponent process theory, as you gazed fixedly at the green, black, and
yellow flag, your retinal ganglion cells that respond positively to green, black, and yellow increased their firing dramatically. When
you shifted your gaze to the neutral white ground, th ese ganglion cells abruptly decreased their activity and the brain interpreted
this abrupt downshift as if the ganglion cells were resp onding now to their “opponent” colors: red, white, and blue, respectively, in
the visual field. Once the ganglion cells return to their baseline activity state, the false perception of color wil l disappear.
Figure 36.23 View this flag to understand how retinal process ing works. Stare at the center of the flag (indicated by the whi te dot)
for 45 seconds, and then quickly look at a white background, noticing how colors appear.

10.17.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114Higher Processing
The myelinated axons of ganglion cells make up the o ptic nerves. Within the nerves, different axons carry different qualities of the
visual signal. Some axons constitute the magnocellula r (big cell) pathway, which carries information about f orm, movement, depth,
and differences in brightness. Other axons constitute th e parvocellular (small cell) pathway, which carries i nformation on color and
fine detail. Some visual information projects directly back into the brain, while other information crosses to the opposite side of the
brain. This crossing of optical pathways produces the distinctive optic chiasma (Greek, for “crossing”) fo und at the base of the
brain and allows us to coordinate information from both eyes.
Once in the brain, visual information is processed in several places, and its routes reflect the complexity and importance of visual
information to humans and other animals. One route take s the signals to the thalamus, which serves as the rou ting station for all
incoming sensory impulses except olfaction. In the thalamus, the magnocellular and parvocellular distin ctions remain intact, and
there are different layers of the thalamus dedicated to each. When visual signals leave the thalamus, they travel to the primary
visual cortex at the rear of the brain. From the visu al cortex, the visual signals travel in two direction s. One stream that projects to
the parietal lobe, in the side of the brain, carries magnocellular (“where”) information. A second stream projects to the temporal
lobe and carries both magnocellular (“where”) and parv ocellular (“what”) information.
Another important visual route is a pathway from the retina to the superior colliculus in the midbrain, wh ere eye movements are
coordinated and integrated with auditory information. Finally, there is the pathway from the retina to the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) of the hypothalamus. The SCN is a cluster of cells that is considered to be the body’s internal clock, which controls our
circadian (day-long) cycle. The SCN sends information t o the pineal gland, which is important in sleep/wake p atterns and annual
cycles.
Link to Learning
View this interactive presentation to review what you have learned about how vision functio ns.
The human eye is wrapped in three layers of tissue:
the sclerotic coat. This tough layer creates the "white" of the eye except in the front where it forms the transparent cornea. The
corneaThe surface of the cornea is kept moist and dust-f ree by secretions from the tear glands.
admits light to the interior of the eye and
bends the light rays to that they can be brought to a focu s.
the choroid coat. This middle layer is deeply pigmented with melanin. It reduces reflection of stray light within the eye. Th e
choroid coat forms the iris in the front of the eye. This, too, is pigmented and is r esponsible for eye "color". The size of its
opening, the pupil, is variable and under the control of the autonomic nervo us system. In dim light (or when danger threatens),
the pupil opens wider letting more light into the eye. In bright light the pupil closes down. This not only reduces the amount of
light entering the eye but also improves its image-forming ability (as does "stopping down" the iris diaphragm of a cam era).
the retina The retina is the inner layer of the eye. It contains the l ight receptors, the rods and cones (and thus serves as the
"film" of the eye). The retina also has many interneuro ns that process the signals arising in the rods and cones befo re passing
them back to the brain. (Note: the rods and cones are not at the surface of the retina but lie underneath the layer of
interneurons.)Link to Learning

10.17.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114
Figure 15.9.3.1 Human eye
All the nerve impulses generated in the retina travel back to the brain by way of the axons in the optic n erve (above). At the
point on the retina where the approximately 1 millio n axons converge on the optic nerve, there are no r ods or cones. This spot,
called the blind spot, is thus insensitive to light.
Figure 15.9.3.2 Blind spot
You can demonstrate the presence of the blind spot. C over your right eye with your hand and stare at the red circle as you
move closer to the screen (the square will disappear). Or cover your left eye and stare at the red square as you mov e.
The Lens
The lens is located just behind the iris. It is held in position by zonules extending from an encircling ring of muscle. When thi s
ciliary muscle is relaxed, its diameter increases, the zonules are put under tension, and the lens is flattened and when contracted,
its diameter is reduced, the zonules relax, and the l ens becomes more spherical. These changes enable the e ye to adjust its focus
between far objects and near objects.
Figure 15.9.3.3 Eye corrections
Farsightedness. If the eyeball is too short or the lens too flat or i nflexible, the light rays entering the eye — particula rly those from
nearby objects — will not be brought to a focus by th e time they strike the retina. Eyeglasses with convex lenses can correct the
problem. Farsightedness is called hypermetropia.
Nearsightedness. If the eyeball is too long or the lens too spherical, the image of distant objects is brought to a focus in front of the
retina and is out of focus again before the light s trikes the retina. Nearby objects can be seen more ea sily. Eyeglasses with concave
lenses correct this problem by diverging the light rays bef ore they enter the eye. Nearsightedness is called myopia.
Cataracts One or both lenses often become cloudy as one ages. When a cataract seriously interferes with seeing, the c loudy lens is
easily removed and a plastic one substituted. The entir e process can be done in a few minutes as an outpatie nt under local
anesthesia.
The iris and lens divide the eye into two main chambers:
the front chamber is filled with a watery liquid, the aqueous humor
the rear chamber is filled with a jellylike material, the vitreous bodyThe blind spot

10.17.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114The Retina
Four kinds of light-sensitive receptors are found in the retina:
rods
three kinds of cones, each "tuned" to respond best to light from a portion of th e spectrum of visible light
cones that absorb long-wavelength light (red)
cones that absorb middle-wavelength light (green)
cones that absorb short-wavelength light (blue)
This scanning electron micrograph (courtesy of Scott Mittman and David R. Copenhagen) shows rods and cones in the retina of the
tiger salamander. Each type of receptor has its own special pigment for absorbing light. Each consists of a transmembrane protein
called opsin coupled to the prosthetic group retinal. Retinal is a derivative of vitamin A (which explai ns why night blindness is one
sign of vitamin A deficiency) and is used by all four t ypes of receptors.
Figure 15.9.3.4 The retina
The amino acid sequence of each of the four types o f opsin are similar, but the differences account for their differences in
absorption spectrum. The retina also contains a complex a rray of interneurons:
bipolar cells and ganglion cells that together form a path from the rods and cones to the b rain
a complex array of other interneurons that form synapses with t he bipolar and ganglion cells and modify their activity.
Ganglion cells are always active. Even in the dark th ey generate trains of action potentials and conduct them back to the brain
along the optic nerve. Vision is based on the modulation of these nerve impulses. There is not the direct relationship between
visual stimulus and an action potential that is found in the senses of hearing, taste, and smell. In fact, acti on potentials are not even
generated in the rods and cones.
Rod Vision
Rhodopsin is the light-absorbing pigment of the rod s. This G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) is incorporat ed in the membranes of
disks that are neatly stacked (some 1000 or more of them) in the outer portion of the rod. This arrang ement is reminiscent of the
organization of thylakoids, another light-absorbing dev ice.
Fig.15.9.3.5 Rod cells of kangaroo bat

10.17.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114
The electron micrograph (courtesy of Keith Porter) sh ows the rod cells of the kangaroo rat. The outer segme nts of the rods contain
the orderly stacks of membranes which incorporate rho dopsin. The inner portion contain many mitochondria. The two parts of the
rod are connected by a stalk (arrow) that has the same structure as a primary cilium. Although the disks are initially formed from
the plasma membrane, they become separated from it. Th us signals generated in the disks must be transmitted by a chemical
mediator (a "second messenger" called cyclic GMP (cGMP) to alter the potential of the plasma membrane o f the rod. Rhodopsin
consists of an opsin of 348 amino acids coupled to retinal. Like all G-protein-coupled receptors, opsin has 7 seg ments of alpha
helix that pass back and forth through the lipid bilay er of the disk membrane.
Retinal
Figure 15.9.3.6 Retinal
Retinal consists of a system of alternating single and double bonds. In the dark, the hydrogen atoms attached to the #11 and #12
carbon atoms of retinal (red arrows) point in the same direction producing a kink in th e molecule. This configuration is designated
cis. When light is absorbed by retinal, the molecule straig htens out forming the all- trans isomer.
This physical change in retinal triggers the following chain of events culminating in a change in the
pattern of impulses sent back along the optic nerve.
1. Formation of all- trans retinal activates its opsin.
2. Activated rhodopsin, in turn, activates many molecul es of a G protein called transducin.
3. Transducin activates an enzyme that breaks down cyclic GMP.
4. The drop in cGMP closes Na channels in the plasma membrane of the rod. Because the se positive ions can no longer enter, the
interior of the cell becomes more negative (hyperpolar ized) increasing its membrane potential from about −30 to so me −70 mV.
5. This slows the release of the neurotransmitter glutamate at syn apses between the rod and interneurons (e.g., bipolar cel ls).
6. This reduction in glutamate release activates some inte rneuron pathways, inhibits others.
7. The interplay of excited and inhibited interneuron s modulates the spontaneous firing of the ganglion cells to which they are
connected and gives rise to the ability of the retina to dis criminate shapes.
So the retina is not simply a sheet of photocells, but a tiny brain center that carries out complex informa tion processing before
sending signals back along the optic nerve. In fact, the retina really is part of the brain and grows out from it during embr yonic
development.
Rod vision is acute but coarse
Rods do not provide a sharp image for several reasons.
Adjacent rods are connected by gap junctions and so sha re their changes in membrane potential.
Several nearby rods often share a single circuit to one g anglion cell.
A single rod can send signals to several different gangli on cells.
So if only a single rod is stimulated, the brain has n o way of determining exactly where on the retina it wa s. However, rods are
extremely sensitive to light. A single photon (the m inimum unit of light) absorbed by a small cluster of adjacent rods is sufficient to
send a signal to the brain. So although rods provide us with a relatively grainy, colorless image, they pe rmit us to detect light that is
over a billion times dimmer than what we see on a bright sun ny day.+

10.17.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114Cone Vision
Although cones operate only in relatively bright lig ht, they provide us with our sharpest images and enabl e us to see colors. Most
of the 3 million cones in each retina are confined to a small region just opposite the lens called the fovea. So our sharpest and
colorful images are limited to a small area of view. Because we can quickly direct our eyes to anything in view that interests us, we
tend not to be aware of just how poor our peripheral vision is.
The three types of cones provide us the basis of color v ision. Cones are "tuned" to different portions of the visib le spectrum.
red absorbing cones; those that absorb best at the relative ly long wavelengths peaking at 565 nm
green absorbing cones with a peak absorption at 535 nm
blue absorbing cones with a peak absorption at 440 nm.
Retinal is the prosthetic group for each pigment. Dif ferences in the amino acid sequence of their opsins accounts for the differences
in absorption. The response of cones is not all-or-non e. Light of a given wavelength (color), say 500 nm (gre en), stimulates all
three types of cones, but the green-absorbing cones wil l be stimulated most strongly. Like rods, the absor ption of light does not
trigger action potentials but modulates the membrane pote ntial of the cones.
Color Blindness
The term color blindness is something of a misnomer. Very few (~1 in 10) people cannot distinguish color s at all. Most "colorblind" people actually have abnormal color vision su ch as confusing the red and green of traffic lights. As high as 8% of the males
in some populations have an inherited defect in their ability to discriminate reds and greens. These defe cts are found almost
exclusively in males because the genes that encode the r ed-absorbing and green-absorbing opsins are on the X chromo some.
Figure 15.9.3.7 Red - Green genes
The X chromosome normally carries a cluster of from 2 to 9 opsin genes. The minimum basis for normal red-gr een vision is one
gene whose opsin absorbs efficiently in the red and on e that absorbs well in the green (chromosome 1 in the figure). Multiple
copies of these genes are also fine (2 and 3). Males with either a "green gene" or "red gene" miss ing are severely color blind (4 and
5). However, if all the red genes carry mutations (this seldom seems to be the case for the green genes — n obody knows why), then
they may have red-green color blindness that ranges from mild to severe depending on the particular muta tions involved (6). The
rule seems to be that the more the mutations shift th e pigment towards green, the more serious the defect. Ho wever, a large number
of mutations don't always produce serious defects. Mul tiple mutations in a single gene may offset each oth er producing only mild
defects. And as long as one normal copy of each gene is present, the presence of additional mutated genes sel dom produce a serious
problem (7).
Why do some males have as many as 9 copies of genes encoding the red and green opsins, when two are enoug h? The sequences of
the red and green genes are the same at 98% of thei r nucleotides. This high degree of similarity creates the risk of mismatches in
synapsis during meiosis with unequal crossing over.5

10.17.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84114Blue vision
Abnormal blue sensitivity occasionally occurs in huma ns but is much rarer than abnormalities in red-gree n vision. The gene for the
blue-cone opsin is located on chromosome 7. Thus this trait shows an autosomal pattern of inheritance bein g found in females as
often as in males.
This page titled 10.17: A_Vision is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.
15.9C: Vision by John W. Kimball is licensed CC BY 3.0. Original source: https://www.biology-pages.info/.

10.18.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411510.18: Processing_Visual_Information
Figure 15.9.4.2 Ganglion cells
By inserting an electrode in a single ganglion cell, it was shown (by Stephen W. Kuffler) that
Even in the dark, ganglion cells have a slow, steady rate o f firing.
Diffuse light directed on the retina has little effect on this rate.
But a tiny spot of light falling on a small circular area of the retina can greatly increase the firing rate of some ganglion cells
(left) while
a spot directed around the perimeter of such an " on" area suppresses that ganglion cell (center).
Light shining on both areas produces no effect (right).
Other ganglion cells have a central " off" area surrounded by an " on" area.
Figure 15.9.4.3 Lateral geniculate nucleus
Two associates of Kuffler, David H. Hubel and Torsten N. Wi esel inserted electrodes in these areas but instead of directing light
into the eye, they projected images on a screen in f ront of the animal (an anesthetized cat or monkey). Us ing this procedure, they
found that
cells of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) respond about the same way that ganglion cells do; that is, to circular spots of
light.
But the cells in the visual cortex receiving input from the LGN no longer respond to circles of light but only to bars of light (or
dark) or to straight-line edges between dark and light ar eas.
One of these "simple cortical cells" will only respond when the stimulus is directed at a particular area of the sc reen and at a
specific angle. However, an ineffective position for one of these cortical cells is an effective position for another.
Figure 15.9.4.4 LGN

10.18.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84115The diagram shows this mechanism by which the circular response areas of ganglion and LGN cells can be converted into the
rectangular response areas found in the cells of the visual cortex. Other cells ("complex cortical cells") still want th eir edges
oriented in one direction, but the edges can now be moved across the screen. As the figure shows, this can be explained if a set of
simple cortical cells all responding to an edge of th e same slope but each responsible for a different p art of the visual field converge
on a single "complex cortical cell". Thus these com plex cortical cells continue to respond to the stimu lus even though its absolute
position on the retina changes.
While these studies provide only the tiniest glimpse in to the workings of the brain, they provide some clues of wh at will be found:
At each step of processing, the inputs of a number of inte rneurons are funneled into a single output.
So, at each step, some of the information is selectively d estroyed.
A simple cortical cell, for example, fires only if a numbe r of LGN cells converging on it are simultaneously active. Otherwise,
the excitation dies out at the synapses.
In this way, each level of the brain acts as a filtering devi ce and, in doing so, provides a mechanism by which certain feat ures of
what might be a very complex stimulus can be discriminat ed..
So instead of responding to particular impulses in particular circuits, the mammalian brain seems to respond to the sp atial and
temporal organization of many impulses passing along many converging circuits.
The importance of these studies was recognized by th e award of a Nobel Prize in 1981 to Hubel and Wiesel (t oo late for Kuffler,
who died in 1980).
This page titled 10.18: Processing_Visual_Information is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
This page titled 10.18: Processing_Visual_Information is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by John W.
Kimball via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.9D: Processing Visual Information by John W. Kimball is licensed CC BY 3.0. Original source: https://www.biology-pages.info/.

10.19.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411610.19: Chemistry_of_Vision
This page titled 10.19: Chemistry_of_Vision is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

10.20.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411710.20: VISION_-_ANATOMY_OF_THE_EYE
Many structures in the human eye, such as the cornea and fovea,
process light so it can be deciphered by rods and cones in the retina.
Explain how eyes have evolved to benefit organisms
KEY POINTS
The cornea and the lens bend light to focus the image on the
retina; the iris and pupil regulate the amount of light entering the
eye.
The aqueous humour maintains the convex shape of the cornea;
the vitreous humour supports the lens and maintains the shape of
the entire eye.
Presbyopia occurs because the image focuses behind the retina; it
is similar to hyperopia (farsightedness), which is caused by an
eyeball that is too short.
Myopia (nearsightedness) occurs when an eyeball is elongated;
images in the distance appear blurry, but images nearby are clear.
Rods are used for peripheral and nighttime vision; cones are used
for daytime and color vision.
The fovea is responsible for acute vision because it has a high
density of cones.
KEY TERMS
rod: a rod-shaped cell located in the outer retina of the eye that is
extremely sensitive to light
retina: the thin layer of cells at the back of the eyeball where
light is converted into neural signals sent to the brain
cone: cell located near the center of the retina that is weakly
photosensitive and is responsible for color vision in relatively
bright light
ANATOMY OF THE EYE
The retina, a thin layer of cells located on the inner surface of the
back of the eye, consists of photoreceptive cells, which are
responsible for the transduction of light into nervous impulses.
However, light does not enter the retina unaltered; it must first pass
through other layers that process it so that it can be interpreted by
the retina.
Figure: Retina: (a) The human eye is shown in cross sectio n.
The human eye contains structures, such as the cornea, ir is, lens, and
fovea, that process light so it can be deciphered by the retina. Other
structures like the aqueous humor and the vitreous humor h elp
maintain the shape of the eye. (b) A blowup shows the lay ers of the
retina. The retina contains photoreceptive cells. In the retina, light is
converted into neural signals sent to the brain.
The cornea, the front transparent layer of the eye, along with the
crystalline lens, refract (bend) light to focus the image on the retina.
After passing through the cornea, light passes through the aqueous
humour, which connects the cornea to the lens. This clear gelatinous
mass also provides the corneal epithelium with nutrients and helps
maintain the convex shape of the cornea. The iris, which is visible as
the colored part of the eye, is a circular muscular ring lying between
the lens and the aqueous humour that regulates the amount of light
entering the eye. Light passes through the center of the iris, the
pupil, which actively adjusts its size to maintain a constant level of
light entering the eye. In conditions of high ambient light, the iris
contracts, reducing the size of the pupil. In conditions of low light,
the iris relaxes and the pupil enlarges.
The main function of the lens is to focus light on the retina and
fovea centralis. The lens is a transparent, convex structure located
behind the cornea. On the other side of the lens is the vitreous
humour, which lets light through without refraction, maintains the
shape of the eye, and suspends the delicate lens. The lens focuses
and re-focuses light as the eye rests on near and far objects in the
visual field. The lens is operated by muscles that stretch it flat or
allow it to thicken, changing the focal length of light coming
through to focus it sharply on the retina. With age comes the loss of
the flexibility of the lens; a form of farsightedness called presbyopia
results. Presbyopia occurs because the image focuses behind the
retina. It is a deficit similar to a different type of farsightedness,
hyperopia, caused by an eyeball that is too short. For both defects,
images in the distance are clear, but images nearby are blurry.
Myopia (nearsightedness) occurs when an eyeball is elongated and
the image focus falls in front of the retina. In this case, images in the
distance are blurry, but images nearby are clear.
There are two types of photoreceptors in the retina: rods and cones.
Both are named for their general appearance. Rods, strongly
photosensitive, are located in the outer edges of the retina. They
detect dim light and are used primarily for peripheral and nighttime
vision. Cones, weakly photosensitive, are located near the center ofLEARNING OBJECTIVES

10.20.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84117the retina. They respond to bright light; their primary role is in
daytime, color vision.
Figure: Rods and cones: Rods and cones are photorecep tors
in the retina. Rods respond in low light and can detect o nly shades of
gray. Cones respond in intense light and are responsi ble for color
vision.
The fovea is the region in the center back of the eye that is
responsible for acute (central) vision. The fovea has a high density
of cones. When you bring your gaze to an object to examine it
intently in bright light, the eyes orient so that the object’s image falls
on the fovea. However, when looking at a star in the night sky or
other object in dim light, the object can be better viewed by the
peripheral vision because it is the rods at the edges of the retina,
rather than the cones at the center, that operate better in low light. In
humans, cones far outnumber rods in the fovea.
This page titled 10.20: Vision_-_Anatomy_of_the_Eye is shared under a CC
BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

10.21.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411810.21: VISION_-_TRANSDUCTION_OF_LIGHT
Light is tranduced in rods and cones; visual information is processed
in the retina before entering the brain.
Explain retinal processing and the process of transduction of
light
KEY POINTS
When light hits the photoreceptor, the retinal changes shape,
which activates the photopigment rhodoposin.
Primates have full color vision because of the three- cone
(trichromatic) system; color is a result of the ratio of activity of
the three types of cones.
There are three types of cones with different photopsins: S cones
respond to short waves; M cones respond to medium waves; L
cones respond to light to long waves.
If light is not present, neurons are inhibited by rods and cones;
once light is introduced, rods and cones are hyperpolarized,
which activates the neurons.
Activated neurons stimulate ganglion cells, which send action
potentials via the optic nerve.
Horizontal cells can create lateral inhibition, which enhances
light and dark contrast in images.
KEY TERMS
tonic activity: when photoreceptors become slightly active even
when not stimulated by light
rhodopsin: a light-sensitive pigment in the rod cells of the
retina; it consists of an opsin protein bound to the carotenoid
retinal
TRANSDUCTION OF LIGHT
The rods and cones are the site of transduction of light into a neural
signal. Both rods and cones contain photopigments, which are
pigments that undergo a chemical change when they absorb light. In
vertebrates, the main photopigment, rhodopsin, has two main parts:
an opsin, which is a membrane protein (in the form of a cluster of αhelices that span the membrane); and retinal, a molecule that absorbs
light. When light hits a photoreceptor, it causes a shape change in
the retinal, altering its structure from a bent (cis) form of the
molecule to its linear (trans) isomer. This isomerization of retinal
activates the rhodopsin, starting a cascade of events that ends with
the closing of Na channels in the membrane of the photoreceptor.
Thus, unlike most other sensory neurons (which become depolarized
by exposure to a stimulus), visual receptors become hyperpolarized
and are driven away from the threshold.
Figure: Hyperpolarized visual receptors: When light stri kes
rhodopsin, the G-protein transducin is activated, which in turn
activates phosphodiesterase. Phosphodiesterase converts cGMP to
GMP, thereby closing sodium channels. As a result, the me mbrane
becomes hyperpolarized. The hyperpolarized membrane does not
release glutamate to the bipolar cell.LEARNING OBJECTIVES

10.21.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84118
Figure: Rhodopsin: (a) Rhodopsin, the photoreceptor in
vertebrates, has two parts: the trans-membrane protein opsin and
retinal. When light strikes the retinal, it changes s hape from (b) a cis
to a trans form. The signal is passed to a G-protein calle d transducin,
triggering a series of downstream events.
TRICHROMATIC CODING
There are three types of cones (with different photopsins) that differ
in the wavelength to which they are most responsive. Some cones
are maximally responsive to short light waves of 420 nm; they are
called S cones (“S” for “short”). Other cones (M cones, for
“medium”) respond maximally to waves of 530 nm. A third group (L
cones, or “long” cones) responds maximally to light of longer
wavelengths at 560 nm. With only one type of cone, color vision
would not be possible; a two-cone (dichromatic) system has
limitations. Primates use a three-cone (trichromatic) system,
resulting in full color vision.
Figure: Rod and cone cells: Human rod cells and the
different types of cone cells each have an optimal wave length.
However, there is considerable overlap in the wavelengt hs of light
detected.The color we perceive is a result of the ratio of activity of our three
types of cones. The colors of the visual spectrum, running from
long-wavelength light to short are:
red (700 nm)
orange (600 nm)
yellow (565 nm)
green (497 nm)
blue (470 nm)
indigo (450 nm)
violet (425 nm).
Humans have very sensitive perception of color and can distinguish
about 500 levels of brightness, 200 different hues, and 20 steps of
saturation; in all, about 2 million distinct colors.
RETINAL PROCESSING
Visual signals leave the cones and rods, travel to the bipolar cells,
and then to ganglion cells. A large degree of processing of visual
information occurs in the retina itself, before visual information is
sent to the brain.
Photoreceptors in the retina continuously undergo tonic activity.
That is, they are always slightly active even when not stimulated by
light. In neurons that exhibit tonic activity, the absence of stimuli
maintains a firing rate at an equilibrium; while some stimuli increase
firing rate from the baseline, other stimuli decrease firing rate. In the
absence of light, the bipolar neurons that connect rods and cones to
ganglion cells are continuously and actively inhibited by the rods
and cones. Exposure of the retina to light hyperpolarizes the rods
and cones, removing the inhibition of their bipolar cells. The nowactive bipolar cells in turn stimulate the ganglion cells, which send
action potentials along their axons (which leave the eye as the optic
nerve). Thus, the visual system relies on changein retinal activity,
rather than the absence or presence of activity, to encode visual
signals for the brain. Sometimes horizontal cells carry signals from
one rod or cone to other photoreceptors and to several bipolar cells.
When a rod or cone stimulates a horizontal cell, the horizontal cell
inhibits more-distant photoreceptors and bipolar cells, creating
lateral inhibition. This inhibition sharpens edges and enhances
contrast in the images by making regions receiving light appear
lighter and dark surroundings appear darker. Amacrine cells can
distribute information from one bipolar cell to many ganglion cells.
This page titled 10.21: Vision_-_Transduction_of_Light is shared under a
CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax.

10.22.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8411910.22: VISUAL_PROCESSING
Visual signals are processed in the brain through several different
pathways.
Describe the complexity of visual processing in the brain
KEY POINTS
The magnocellular pathway carries information about form,
movement, depth, and differences in brightness; the parvocellular
pathway carries information on color and fine detail.
The optic chiasma allows us to coordinate information between
both eyes and is produced by crossing optical information across
the brain.
Visual signals move from the visual cortex to either the parietal
lobe or the temporal lobe.
Some signals move to the thalamus, which sends the visual
signals to the primary cortex.
Visual signals can also travel from the retina to the superior
colliculus, where eye movements are coordinated with auditory
information.
Visual signals can move from the retina to the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN), the body’s internal clock, which is involved in
sleep/wake patterns and annual cycles.
KEY TERMS
superior colliculus: the primary area of the brain where eye
movements are coordinated and integrated with auditory
information
optic chiasma: found at the base of the brain and coordinates
information from both eyes
suprachiasmatic nucleus: cluster of cells that is considered to
be the body’s internal clock, which controls our circadian (daylong) cycle
HIGHER PROCESSING
The myelinated axons of ganglion cells make up the optic nerves.
Within the nerves, different axons carry different parts of the visual
signal. Some axons constitute the magnocellular (big cell) pathway,
which carries information about form, movement, depth, and
differences in brightness. Other axons constitute the parvocellular
(small cell) pathway, which carries information on color and fine
detail. Some visual information projects directly back into the brain,
while other information crosses to the opposite side of the brain.
This crossing of optical pathways produces the distinctive optic
chiasma (Greek, for “crossing”) found at the base of the brain and
allows us to coordinate information from both eyes.
Once in the brain, visual information is processed in several places.
Its routes reflect the complexity and importance of visual
information to humans and other animals. One route takes the
signals to the thalamus, which serves as the routing station for allincoming sensory impulses except smell. In the thalamus, the
magnocellular and parvocellular distinctions remain intact; there are
different layers of the thalamus dedicated to each. When visual
signals leave the thalamus, they travel to the primary visual cortex at
the rear of the brain. From the visual cortex, the visual signals travel
in two directions. One stream that projects to the parietal lobe, in the
side of the brain, carries magnocellular (“where”) information. A
second stream projects to the temporal lobe and carries both
magnocellular (“where”) and parvocellular (“what”) information.
Another important visual route is a pathway from the retina to the
superior colliculus in the midbrain, where eye movements are
coordinated and integrated with auditory information. Finally, there
is the pathway from the retina to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)
of the hypothalamus. The SCN is a cluster of cells that is considered
to be the body’s internal clock, which controls our circadian (daylong) cycle. The SCN sends information to the pineal gland, which
is important in sleep/wake patterns and annual cycles.
Figure: The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SNC): The presence o f
light and darkness influences circadian rhythms and rela ted
physiology and behavior through the SCN.
CONTRIBUTIONS AND ATTRIBUTIONS
OpenStax College, Biology. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...ol11448/late st. License: CC
BY: Attribution
wavelength. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at:
en.wiktionary.org/wiki/wavelength. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
photon. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/photon.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at:
www.boundless.com//biology/de...netic-spectrum. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at:
www.boundless.com//biology/de...tion/nanometer. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_01.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Biology. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...ol11448/late st. License: CC
BY: Attribution
Ophthalmology/Anatomy of the Eye. Provided by: Wikibooks. Located at:
en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ophthal...omy_of_the_Eye. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
rod. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rod.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
cone. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cone.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlikeLEARNING OBJECTIVES

10.22.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84119retina. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at: en.wiktionary.org/wiki/retina.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_01.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_02.p ng. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_03.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Biology. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...ol11448/late st. License: CC
BY: Attribution
transduction. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at:
en.wiktionary.org/wiki/transduction. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at:
www.boundless.com//biology/de...tonic-activity. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
rhodopsin. Provided by: Wiktionary. Located at:
en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rhodopsin. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_01.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_02.p ng. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_03.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_06.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_04.j pg. License:
CC BY: AttributionOpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_05.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Biology. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...ol11448/late st. License: CC
BY: Attribution
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at:
www.boundless.com//biology/de.../optic-chiasma. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at:
www.boundless.com//biology/de...smatic-nucleus. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
Boundless. Provided by: Boundless Learning. Located at:
www.boundless.com//biology/de...ior-colliculus. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_01.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_02.p ng. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_03.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_06.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_04.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
OpenStax College, Vision. October 17, 2013. Provided by: OpenStax CNX.
Located at: http://cnx.org/content/m44761/latest...e_36_05_05.j pg. License:
CC BY: Attribution
Suprachiasmatic nucleus. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at:
http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Suprachiasmatic_nucleu s. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
This page titled 10.22: Visual_Processing is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0
license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

10.23.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412010.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
Anatomy of the Eye
Our sense of vision occurs due to transduction of li ght stimuli received through the eyes. The eyes are l ocated within either orbit in
the skull. See Figure for an illustration of the eye. The eyelids, with lashes at their leading edges, help to protect the eye
from abrasions by blocking particles that may land o n the surface of the eye. The inner surface of each l id is a thin membrane
known as the conjunctiva. The conjunctiva extends over the white areas of the eye called the sclera, connecting the eyelids to the
eyeball. The iris is the colored part of the eye. The iris is a smoot h muscle that opens and closes the pupil, the hole at the center of
the eye that allows light to enter. The iris constri cts the pupil in response to bright light and dilate s the pupil in response to dim
light. The cornea is the transparent front part of the eye that cove rs the iris, pupil, and anterior chamber. The cornea, wi th the
anterior chamber and lens, refracts light and contributes to vision. The corn ea can be reshaped by surgical procedures such as
LASIK. The innermost layer of the eye is the retina that contains the nervous tissue and specialized cells called photoreceptors for
the initial processing of visual stimuli. Two types o f photoreceptors within the retina are the rods and t he cones. The cones are
sensitive to different wavelengths of light and prov ide color vision. These nerve cells of the retina le ave the eye and enter the brain
via the optic nerve (cranial nerve II).
Figure: The Eye
Tears are produced by the lacrimal gland that is loc ated beneath the lateral edges of the nose. Tears fl ow through the lacrimal duct
to the medial corner of the eye and flow over the co njunctiva to wash away foreign particles. Movement of the eye within the orbit
occurs by the contraction of six extraocular muscles that originate from the bones of the orbit and ins ert into the surface of the
eyeball. The extraocular muscles are innervated by the abducens nerve, the trochlear nerve, and the ocu lomotor nerve (cranial
nerves III, IV, and V). See the illustration of the extraocul ar muscles in Figure.
Figure: Extraocular Muscles[1]
[2]
[3] [4]

10.23.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120Common Disorders of the Eye
Eye disorders that nurses commonly see in practice include myopia, presbyopia, color blindness, dry eye, conjunctivitis, styes,
cataracts, macular degeneration, and glaucoma.
Myopia
Myopia is impaired vision, also known as nearsightedness tha t makes far-away objects look blurry. It happens when the eyeball
grows too long from front to back or when there are pr oblems with the shape of the cornea or the lens. These problems make light
focus in front of the retina, instead of on it, causi ng blurriness. See Figure for a simulated image of a person’s vision with
myopia. Nearsightedness usually becomes apparent between ages 6 and 14. It is corrected with glasses, contacts, or LASIK surgery.
Figure: Simulated Vision with Myopia
Presbyopia
Presbyopia is impaired near vision. It commonly occurs in midd le-aged and older adults, making it difficult to clea rly see objects
up close. As people age, the lens in the eye gets hard er and less flexible and stops focusing light correctl y on the retina.Video Review for Anatomy of the Eye[5]
Anatomy of the Ey e (v2.0)Anatomy of the Ey e (v2.0)
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

10.23.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120Presbyopia can be corrected with glasses and/or contact s. See Figure for a simulated image of a person’s vision with
presbyopia.
Figure: Simulated Vision with Presbyopia
Color Blindness
Color blindness makes it difficult to differentiate b etween certain colors. Color blindness can occur due to damage to the eye or to
the brain. There’s no cure for color blindness, but sp ecial glasses and contact lenses can help people diff erentiate between colors.
Most people who have color blindness are able to use vis ual strategies related to color selection and don’t h ave problems
participating in everyday activities.
Dry Eye
Dry eye is a very common eye condition that occurs wh en the eyes don’t make enough tears to stay wet or th e tears don’t work
correctly. Symptoms of dry eye include a scratchy fee ling, stinging, and burning. Treatment includes over- the-counter and
prescription eye drops, as well as lifestyle changes to decrease the dryness of the eyes.
Conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis is a viral or bacterial infection that causes swelli ng and redness in the conjunctiva and sclera. See Figur e
for an image of conjunctivitis. The eye may feel it chy and painful with crusty yellow drainage present. C onjunctivitis is very
contagious, so the nurse should educate the patient an d family caregivers to wash hands frequently. Additiona lly, the patient should
not share items like pillowcases, towels, or makeup. Bacteria l conjunctivitis is treated with antibiotic eye drops.
Figure: Conjunctivitis
Stye
A stye is a bacterial infection of an oil gland in the eyelid, causing a red, tender bump at the edge of the eyelid. See Figure
for an image of a stye. Treatment includes applying warm c ompresses to the eyelid and prescription eyedrops.[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

10.23.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120
Figure: Stye
Cataracts
A cataract is a cloudy area on the lens of the eye. Cataracts are very common in older adults. Over half of all Americans age 80 or
older either have cataracts or have had surgery to re move cataracts. See Figure for an image of a cataract. Cataracts
develop slowly and symptoms include faded colors, blur red or double vision, halos around light, and trouble seeing at night. See
Figure for a simulated image of a person’s vision wit h cataracts. Decreased vision due to cataracts may resu lt in trouble
reading and driving and increases the risk of fallin g. Patients often undergo surgery for cataracts. Duri ng cataract surgery, the
doctor removes the clouded lens and replaces it with a new, artificial lens.
Figure: Cataracts[16]
[17]
[18]

10.23.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120
Figure: Simulated Vision with Cataracts
Macular Degeneration
Age-related macular degeneration is a common conditi on that causes blurred central vision. It is the le ading cause of vision loss for
people 50 and older. See Figure for a simulated image of a person’s vision with macular degeneration. There are two
types of macular degeneration: dry (nonexudative) an d wet (exudative). During dry macular degeneration, c ellular debris called
drusen accumulates and scars the retina. In the wet (exudative) form, which is more severe, blood vessels grow behind the retina
that leak exudate fluid, causing hemorrhaging and sc arring. There is no treatment for dry macular degen eration, but laser therapy
can be used to help treat wet (exudative) macular degener ation.
Figure: Simulated Vision with Macular Degeneration
Glaucoma
Glaucoma is a group of eye diseases that causes vision loss by damaging the optic nerve due to increased in traocular pressure.
Treatment includes prescription eye drops to lower th e pressure inside the eye and slow the progression of the disease. If not treated
appropriately, glaucoma can cause blindness. Symptoms of glaucoma include gradual loss of peripheral vision. See Figure
for a simulated image of a person’s vision with glau coma. Because the loss of vision occurs so slowly, man y people don’t realize
they have symptoms until the disease is well-progressed o r it is discovered during an eye exam.[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

10.23.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120
Figure: Simulated Vision with Glaucoma
Screening Tools for Eye Exams
Common screening tools used during an eye exam are t he Snellen chart, a near vision chart, and Ishihara p lates. Nurses working in
outpatient settings or school settings use these tool s when screening patients for vision problems. If a visio n problem is identified,
the patient is referred to an optometrist for furthe r testing. When performing a vision assessment, be sur e to provide adequate
lighting.
Snellen Chart
Distant vision is tested by using the Snellen chart. See Figure for an image of the Snellen chart. Place t he patient 20 feet
away from the Snellen chart. Ask them to cover one eye and read the letters from the lowest line they can s ee clearly. Record the
corresponding fraction in the furthermost right-hand column. Repeat with the other eye. If the patient is we aring glasses or contact
lens during this assessment, document the results as “correct ed vision” when wearing these assistive devices.
A person with no visual impairment is documented as h aving 20/20 vision. A person with impaired vision ha s a different lower
denominator of this fraction. For example, a vision me asurement of 20/30 indicates the patient can see le tters clearly at 20 feet that
a person with normal vision can see clearly at 30 fee t. Alternative charts are also available for childre n or adults who can’t read
letters in English. See Figure for an alternative eye chart.[23]
[24]
[25]

10.23.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120
Figure: Snellen Chart
Figure: Alternative Eye Chart
Near Vision
Near vision is assessed by having a patient read from a prepared card that is held 14 inches away from the eyes. If a card is not
available, the patient can be asked to read from a n ewspaper as an alternative quick screening tool. See Figure for an
image of a prepared card used to assess near vision.[26]

10.23.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120
Figure: Assessing Near Vision
Ishihara Plates
Ishihara plates are commonly used to assess color v ision. Each of the colored dotted plates shows either a number or a path. See
Figure for an example of Ishihara plates. A person with color blindness is not able to distinguish the numb ers or paths
from the other colored dots on the plate.
Figure: Ishihara Color Test Plates
Anatomy of the Ear
Hearing is the transduction of sound waves into a neur al signal by the structures of the ear. See Figure f or an image of
the anatomy of the ear. The large, fleshy structure o n the lateral aspect of the head is known as the auricle. The C-shaped curves of
the auricle direct sound waves toward the ear canal. At the end of the ear canal is the tympanic membrane, commonly referred to
as the eardrum, that vibrates after it is struck by sound waves. The auricle, ear canal, and tympanic mem brane are referred to as the
external ear. The middle ear consists of a space wit h three small bones called the malleus, incus, and stap es, the Latin names that
roughly translate to “hammer,” “anvil,” and “stirrup.” The malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane an d articulates with the
incus. The incus, in turn, articulates with the stapes. The stapes is attached to the inner ear, where the sound waves are transduced
into a neural signal. The middle ear is also connect ed to the pharynx through the Eustachian tube that helps equilibrate air pressure
across the tympanic membrane. The Eustachian tube is n ormally closed but will pop open when the muscles of t he pharynx
contract during swallowing or yawning. The inner ear i s often described as a bony labyrinth because it is composed of a series of
semicircular canals. The semicircular canals have t wo separate regions, the cochlea and the vestibule, t hat are responsible for
hearing and balance. The neural signals from these two regions are relayed to the brain stem through separa te fiber bundles.
However, they travel together from the inner ear to the b rain stem as the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII).[27]
[28]
[29]

10.23.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120
Figure: The Ear
Hearing
Sound waves cause the tympanic membrane to vibrate. Th is vibration is amplified as it moves across the mall eus, incus, and stapes
and into the cochlea. Within the inner ear, the coch lear duct contains sound-transducing neurons. As the fr equency of a sound
changes, different hair cells within the cochlear du ct are sensitive to a particular frequency. In this manner, the cochlea separates
auditory stimuli by frequency and sends impulses to th e brain stem via the cochlear nerve. The cochlea en codes auditory stimuli for
frequencies between 20 and 20,000 Hz, the range of sound that h uman ears can detect.
Balance
Along with hearing, the inner ear is also responsible for the sense of balance. Semicircular canals in the vestibule have three ringlike extensions. One extension is oriented in the hor izontal plane, and the other two are oriented in the vertical plane. Hair cells
within the vestibule sense head position, head movemen t, and body motion. By comparing the relative movemen ts of both the
horizontal and vertical planes, the vestibular system can detect the direction of most head movements with in three-dimensional
space. However, medical conditions affecting the semic ircular canals cause incorrect signals to be sent to the brain, resulting in a
spinning type of dizziness called vertigo.
Common Ear Disorders
Hearing Loss
Hearing loss is classified as conductive hearing los s or sensorineural hearing loss. Conductive hearing loss occurs when
something in the external or middle ear is obstruct ing the transmission of sound. For example, cerumen i mpaction or a perforated
tympanic membrane can cause conductive hearing loss. Sensorineural hearing loss is caused by pathology of the inner ear, cranial
nerve VIII, or auditory areas of the cerebral cortex. Presbycusis is sensorineural hearing loss that occurs with aging due to gradual
nerve degeneration. Ototoxic medications can also cause sensorineural hearing loss by affecting the hair cells in the cochlea.[30]
Video Review of Anatomy of the Ear[31]
Anatomy of the Ear (v2.0)Anatomy of the Ear (v2.0)

10.23.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120Acute Otitis Media
Acute otitis media is the medical diagnosis for an middle ear infection. Ear infections are a common illness in the pediatri c
population. Children between the ages of 6 months and 2 years are more susceptible to ear infections becaus e of the size and shape
of their Eustachian tubes. Acute otitis media typica lly occurs after an upper respiratory infection when the Eustachian tube becomes
inflamed and the middle ear fills with fluid, causin g ear pain and irritability. This fluid can become i nfected, causing purulent fluid
and low-grade fever. Acute otitis media is diagnosed by a health care provider using an otoscope to examine the tympanic
membrane for bulging and purulent fluid. If not tre ated, acute otitis media can potentially cause perfo ration of the tympanic
membrane. Treating early acute otitis media with ant ibiotics is controversial in the United States due to the effort to prevent
antibiotic resistance. However, the treatment goals are to control pain and treat infection with antibiotics if a bacterial infection is
present.
Some children develop recurrent ear infections that can cause hearing loss affecting their language devel opment. For children
experiencing recurring cases, a surgery called myrin gotomy surgery is performed by an otolaryngologist. Dur ing myringotomy
surgery, a tympanostomy tube is placed in the tympan ic membrane to drain fluid from the middle ear and prevent infection from
developing. If a child has a tympanostomy tube in pla ce, it is expected to see clear fluid in their ear canal as it drains out of the
tube. See Figure for an image of a tympanostomy tube in th e ear.
Figure: Tympanostomy Tube
Otitis Externa
Otitis externa is the medical diagnosis for external ear inflammat ion and/or infection. See Figure for an image of otit is
externa. It is commonly known as “swimmer’s ear” because it commonly occurs in swimmers, especially in summer months. Otitis
externa can occur in all age groups and causes an ery thematous and edematous ear canal with associated yello w, white, or grey
debris. Patients often report itching in the ear canal with pain that is worsened by pulling upwards and outwa rds on the auricle.
Otitis externa is treated with antibiotic drops placed in the e ar canals.[32]
[33] [34]
[35]
[36]

10.23.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120
Figure: Otitis Externa
Cerumen Impaction
Cerumen impaction refers to a buildup of earwax causing occlusion of t he ear canal. This occlusion often causes symptoms such
as hearing loss, ear fullness, and itching. See Figure for an image of cerumen impaction. Cerumen can be r emoved via
irrigation of the ear canal, ear drops to dissolve th e wax, or manual removal. In outpatient settings, nur ses often assist with ear
irrigation to remove cerumen impaction according to agency policy. See Figure for an image of an ear irr igation
procedure.
Figure: Cerumen Impaction
Figure: Ear Irrigation to Remove Cerumen Impaction[37]
[38]
[39]

10.23.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84120Tinnitus
Tinnitus is a ringing, buzzing, roaring, hissing, or whistling s ound in the ears. The noise may be intermittent or continuous.
Tinnitus can be caused by cerumen impaction, noise trauma, or ototoxic medications, such as diuretics o r high doses of aspirin.
Military personnel have a high incidence of tinnitus due to noise trauma from loud explosions and gunfire. There are no
medications to treat tinnitus, but patients can be re ferred to an otolaryngologist for treatment such as cognitive therapy or noise
masking.
Vertigo
Vertigo is a type of dizziness that is often described by pati ents as, “the room feels as if it is spinning.” Benign positional vertigo
(BPV) is a common condition caused by crystals becoming lodged in the semicircular canals in the vestibule of the inner ear that
send false movement signals to the brain. BPV can be treated by trained professionals using a specific set of maneuvers that guide
the crystals back to the chamber where they are supposed to b e in the inner ear.
1. “1411 Eye in The Orbit.jpg ” by OpenStax College is licensed under CC BY 3.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /14-1-sensory-perception ↵
2. Giddens, J. (2007). A survey of physical examination te chniques performed by RNs: Lessons for nursing education. Journal of
Nursing Education, 46 (2), 83-87. ↵
3. This work is a derivative of Anatomy & Physiology by OpenStax and is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /1-introduction ↵
4. “1412 Extraocular Muscles.jpg ” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 3.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /14-1-sensory-perception ↵
5. Forciea, B. (2015, May 12). Anatomy of the eye (v2.0). [Video]. YouTube. All rights reserved. Video used with per mission.
https://youtu.be/HmKGyJUcRLw ↵
6. “Eye disease simulation, myopia.jpg ” by National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health is in the Public Domain ↵
7. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 9). Types of refractive errors. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eyeconditions-and-diseases/refractive-errors/types-refra ctive-errors#section-id-6802 ↵
8. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 9). Types of refractive errors. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eyeconditions-and-diseases/refractive-errors/types-refra ctive-errors#section-id-6802 ↵
9. “Pesto ingredients - blurred.jpg ” by Colin is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
10. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 3). Color blindness. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/color-blindness ↵
11. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 5). Dry eye. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/dry-eye ↵
12. “ Swollen eye with conjunctivitis.jpg ” by Tanalai at English Wikipedia is licensed under CC BY 3.0 ↵
13. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 8). Causes of pink eye. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/pink-eye/causes-pink-eye ↵
14. “ External hordeolum.jpg ” by Inrankabirhossain is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
15. National Eye Institute. (2019, July 2). Blepharitis. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/blepharitis ↵
16. “Cataract in human eye.png” by Rakesh Ajuja, MD is licen sed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ↵
17. “Eye disease simulation, cataract.jpg” by National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health is in the Public Domain ↵
18. National Eye Institute. (2019, August 3). Cataracts. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/cataracts ↵
19. “Eye disease simulation, age-related macular degenera tion.jpg” by National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health is in the
Public Domain ↵
20. National Eye Institute. (2020, August 17). Age-related macular degeneration. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eyehealth/eye-conditions-and-diseases/age-related-macula r-degeneration ↵
21. “Eye disease simulation, glaucoma.jpg” by National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health is in the Public Domain ↵
22. National Eye Institute. (2020, July 28). Glaucoma. https://www.nei.nih.gov/learn-about-eye-health/eye-condi tions-anddiseases/glaucoma ↵[40]
[41]

10.23.13 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412023. “ Snellen chart.jpg ” by Jeff Dahl is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ↵
24. Sue, S. (2007). Test distance vision by using a Snellen c hart. Community Eye Health, 20 (63), 52.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2040251/ ↵
25. “ US Navy 070808-N-6278K-128 Hospital Corpsman 3rd Class Edward Ma ce, an optician attached to the Military Sealift
Command (MSC) hospital ship USNS Comfort (T-AH 20), instructs a p atient on how to read an eye chart.jpg ” by Mass
Communication Specialist 2nd Class Joan E. Kretschmer for U.S. Na vy is in the Public Domain ↵
26. “111012-F-ZT401-067.JPG” by Airman 1st Class Brooke P. Be ers for U.S. Air Force is in the Public Domain. Access for free at
https://www.pacaf.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/593609/ keeping-sight-all-right/ ↵
27. This work is derivative of “ Ishihara 9.png ” and " Ishihara_1.png " by Shinobu Ishihara are in the Public Domain ↵
28. “1404 The Structure of the Ear.jpg” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
29. This work is a derivative of Anatomy & Physiology by OpenStax and is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /1-introduction ↵
30. This work is a derivative of Anatomy & Physiology by OpenStax and is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Access for free at
https://openstax.org/books/anatomy-and-physiology/pages /1-introduction ↵
31. Forciea, B. (2105, May 12). Anatomy of the ear (v2.0). [Video]. YouTube. All rights reserved. Video used with per mission.
https://youtu.be/A2ji_Vd8cuE ↵
32. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Danishyar and Ashurst and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
33. “Ear Tube.png” by BruceBlaus is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
34. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Danishyar and Ashurst and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
35. “Otitis externa.gif” by S. Bhjimji MD is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Access for free at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK556055/ ↵
36. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Medina-Blasi ni and Sharman and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
37. “Ear Wax.JPG” by Anand2202 is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 ↵
38. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Mankowski and R aggio and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
39. “150915-F-GO352-025.jpg” by Staff Sgt. Jason Huddleston for U.S. Air Force is licensed under CC0. Access for free at
https://www.59mdw.af.mil/News/Article-Display/Article/647342 /photo-essay-559th-medical-group-at-a-glance/ ↵
40. This work is a derivative of StatPearls by Grossan and Pet erson and is licensed under CC BY 4.0 ↵
41. Woodhouse, S. (n.d.). Benign paraoxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). Vestibular Disorders Association.
https://vestibular.org/article/diagnosis-treatment/ty pes-of-vestibular-disorders/benign-paroxysmal-positiona l-vertigo-bppv/ ↵
This page titled 10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
This page titled 10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Ernstmeyer & Christman (Eds.) (OpenRN) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.2: Eye and Ear Basic Concepts by Ernstmeyer & Christman (Eds.) is licensed CC BY-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://wtcs.pressbooks.pub/nursingskills.

10.24.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412110.24: Vision
Vision is the special sense of sight that is based on the transduction of light stimuli received through the e yes. The eyes are located
within either orbit in the skull. The bony orbits surro und the eyeballs, protecting them and anchoring the s oft tissues of the eye (Figure
). The eyelids, with lashes at their leading edges, hel p to protect the eye from abrasions by blocking parti cles that may land on
the surface of the eye. The inner surface of each lid is a thin membrane known as the palpebral conjunctiva. The conjunctiva extends
over the white areas of the eye (the sclera), connect ing the eyelids to the eyeball. Tears are produced by the lacrimal gland, located
beneath the lateral edges of the nose. Tears produced by this gland flow through the lacrimal duct to the medial corner of the eye,
where the tears flow over the conjunctiva, washing away forei gn particles.
Figure
The E
in
Orbit T
eye
located
within
orbit a
surround
by s
tissues t
protect a
support
function
The or
is
surround
by cran
bones
the sk
(CC-BY
4.0,
OpenSta
Human
Anatom
Movement of the eye within the orbit is accomplished by the contraction of six extraocular muscles that originate from the bones of
the orbit and insert into the surface of the eyeball (Figure). Four of the muscles are arranged at the ca rdinal points around the
eye and are named for those locations. They are the superior rectus, medial rectus, inferior rectus, and lateral rectus. When each of
these muscles contract, the eye to moves toward the c ontracting muscle. For example, when the superior rectu s contracts, the eye
rotates to look up. The superior oblique originates at the posterior orbit, near the origin of the four rectus muscles. However, the
tendon of the oblique muscles threads through a pulle y-like piece of cartilage known as the trochlea. The tendon inserts obliquely into
the superior surface of the eye. The angle of the ten don through the trochlea means that contraction of the superior oblique rotates the
eye medially. The inferior oblique muscle originates from the floor of the orbit and in serts into the inferolateral surface of the eye.
When it contracts, it laterally rotates the eye, in opposition to the superior oblique. Rotation of the eye by the two oblique muscles is
necessary because the eye is not perfectly aligned on the sagittal plane. When the eye looks up or down, th e eye must also rotate
slightly to compensate for the superior rectus pulling at approximately a 20-degree angle, rather than stra ight up. The same is true for
the inferior rectus, which is compensated by contract ion of the inferior oblique. A seventh muscle in the orbit is the levator palpebrae
superioris, which is responsible for elevating and retracting t he upper eyelid, a movement that usually occurs in c oncert with
elevation of the eye by the superior rectus (see Figure).

10.24.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84121
Figure: Extraocular Muscles The extraocular muscles move the eye within the orbit. (CC-BY-4.0, OpenStax, Human
Anatomy)
Figure
Structu
of the E
The sph
of the e
can
divided
into
anterior
and
posterio
chamber
The w
of the e
is
compose
of th
layers:
fibrous
tunic,
vascular
tunic, a
neural
tunic.
Within
neural
tunic is
retina,
with th
layers
cells a
two
synaptic
layers
between
The cen
of
retina
a sm
indentat
known
the fov
(CC-BY
4.0,
OpenSta
Human
Anatom

10.24.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84121Light falling on the retina causes chemical changes to pigment molecules in the photoreceptors, ultima tely leading to a change in the
activity of the RGCs. Photoreceptor cells have two part s, the inner segment and the outer segment (Figure). The inner
segment contains the nucleus and other common organel les of a cell, whereas the outer segment is a speciali zed region in which
photoreception takes place. There are two types of ph otoreceptors—rods and cones—which differ in the shap e of their outer segment.
The rod-shaped outer segments of the rod photoreceptor contain a stack of membrane-bound discs that contai n the photosensitive
pigment rhodopsin. The cone-shaped outer segments of the cone photoreceptor contain their photosensitive pigments in infoldings
of the cell membrane. There are three cone photopig ments, called opsins, which are each sensitive to a particular wavelength of light.
The wavelength of visible light determines its color. The pigments in human eyes are specialized in perce iving three different primary
colors: red, green, and blue.
Figure: Photoreceptor (a) All photoreceptors have inner segments containing the nucleus and other important organelles and
outer segments with membrane arrays containing the pho tosensitive opsin molecules. Rod outer segments are long columnar shapes
with stacks of membrane-bound discs that contain the rh odopsin pigment. Cone outer segments are short, tapered shapes with folds of
membrane in place of the discs in the rods. (b) Tissue o f the retina shows a dense layer of nuclei of the rods and cones. LM × 800.
(Micrograph provided by the Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012) (CC-BY-4.0, OpenSta x, Human Anatomy)
This page titled 10.24: Vision is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

10.25.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412210.25: Physics_of_the_Eye
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the image formation by the eye.
Explain why peripheral images lack detail and color.
Define refractive indices.
Analyze the accommodation of the eye for distant and near vision.
The eye is perhaps the most interesting of all optic al instruments. The eye is remarkable in how it forms images and in the richness
of detail and color it can detect. However, our eyes co mmonly need some correction, to reach what is called “normal” vision, but
should be called ideal rather than normal. Image for mation by our eyes and common vision correction are easy to analyze with the
optics discussed in "Geometric Optics."
Figure 1 shows the basic anatomy of the eye. The cornea and lens form a system that, to a good approximatio n, acts as a single thin
lens. For clear vision, a real image must be projected o nto the light-sensitive retina, which lies at a fixed d istance from the lens. The
lens of the eye adjusts its power to produce an image o n the retina for objects at different distances. The c enter of the image falls on
the fovea, which has the greatest density of light rece ptors and the greatest acuity (sharpness) in the visua l field. The variable
opening (or pupil) of the eye along with chemical ad aptation allows the eye to detect light intensities f rom the lowest observable to
times greater (without damage). This is an incredible range of detection. Our eyes perform a vast number of functions, such as
sense direction, movement, sophisticated colors, and distance. Processing of visual nerve impulses begins with interconnections in
the retina and continues in the brain. The optic nerve conveys signals received by the eye to the brain.
Figure: The cornea and lens of an eye act together t o form a real image on the light-sensing retina, whic h has its densest
concentration of receptors in the fovea and a blind spot over the optic nerve. The power of the lens of a n eye is adjustable to
provide an image on the retina for varying object d istances. Layers of tissues with varying indices of refrac tion in the lens are
shown here. However, they have been omitted from oth er pictures for clarity.
Refractive indices are crucial to image formation u sing lenses. The table shows refractive indices relevan t to the eye. The biggest
change in the refractive index, and bending of rays, occurs at the cornea rather than the lens. The ray d iagram in Figure 2 shows
image formation by the cornea and lens of the eye. T he rays bend according to the refractive indices provi ded in the table. The
cornea provides about two-thirds of the power of the e ye, owing to the fact that speed of light changes cons iderably while traveling
from air into cornea. The lens provides the remaini ng power needed to produce an image on the retina. Th e cornea and lens can be
treated as a single thin lens, even though the light rays pass through several layers of material (such as cornea, aqueous humor,
several layers in the lens, and vitreous humor), chang ing direction at each interface. The image formed is much like the oneLearning Objectives

10.25.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84122produced by a single convex lens. This is a case 1 ima ge. Images formed in the eye are inverted but the br ain inverts them once
more to make them seem upright.
Material Index of Refraction
Water 1.33
Air 1.0
Comea 1.38
Aqueous humor 1.34
Lens 1.41 average (varies throughout the lens, greatest in center)
Vitreous humor 1.34
Refractive Indices Relevant to the Eye
Figure: An image is formed on the retina with light rays converging most at the cornea and upon entering and exiting the
lens. Rays from the top and bottom of the object are traced and produce an inverted real image on the re tina. The distance to the
object is drawn smaller than scale.
As noted, the image must fall precisely on the retina to produce clear vision -- that is, the image distance must equal the lens-toretina distance. Because the lens-to-retina distance d oes not change, the image distance must be the same for objects at all
distances. The eye manages this by varying the power (and focal length) of the lens to accommodate for obj ects at various
distances. The process of adjusting the eye’s focal le ngth is called accommodation. A person with normal (ideal) vision can see
objects clearly at distances ranging from 25 cm to essentially infinity. However, although the near point (the shortest distance at
which a sharp focus can be obtained) increases with age (becoming meters for some older people), we will consid er it to be 25 cm
in our treatment here.
Figure 3 shows the accommodation of the eye for dista nt and near vision. Since light rays from a nearby ob ject can diverge and still
enter the eye, the lens must be more converging (mor e powerful) for close vision than for distant vision. To be more converging,
the lens is made thicker by the action of the cilia ry muscle surrounding it. The eye is most relaxed wh en viewing distant objects,
one reason that microscopes and telescopes are designe d to produce distant images. Vision of very distant ob jects is called totally
relaxed, while close vision is termed accommodated, with the closest vision being fully accommodated.

10.25.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84122
Figure: Relaxed and accommodated vision for distant a nd close objects. (a) Light rays from the same point on a distant
object must be nearly parallel while entering the ey e and more easily converge to produce an image on th e retina. (b) Light rays
from a nearby object can diverge more and still ente r the eye. A more powerful lens is needed to converge them on the retina than if
they were parallel.
We will use the thin lens equations to examine image formation by the eye quantitatively. First, note the power of a lens is given as
, so we rewrite the thin lens equations as
and
We understand that must equal the lens-to-retina di stance to obtain clear vision, and that normal visio n is possible for objects at
distances to infinity.
Look at the central transparent area of someone’s ey e, the pupil, in normal room light. Estimate the diamet er of the pupil. Now
turn off the lights and darken the room. After a few m inutes turn on the lights and promptly estimate the diameter of the pupil.
What happens to the pupil as the eye adjusts to the room light? Explain your observations.
The eye can detect an impressive amount of detail, co nsidering how small the image is on the retina. To get some idea of how small
the image can be, consider the following example.
What is the size of the image on the retina of a c m diameter human hair, held at arm’s length (60.0 cm) away? Take
the lens-to-retina distance to be 2.00 cm.
Strategy:
We want to find the height of the image, given the height of the object is cm. We also know that the o bject
is 60.0 cm away, so that. For clear vision, the image distance must equal the lens-to-retina distance, and so
. The equation can be used to find with the known informa tion.TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: THE PUPIL
Example:Size of Image on Retina

10.25.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84122Solution
The only unknown variable in the equation is:
Rearranging to isolate yields
Substituting the known values gives
Discussion:
This truly small image is not the smallest discernible -- that is, the limit to visual acuity is even sma ller than this. Limitations
on visual acuity have to do with the wave properties of light and will be discussed in the next chapter. So me limitation is also
due to the inherent anatomy of the eye and processing tha t occurs in our brain.
Calculate the power of the eye when viewing objects at the greatest and smallest distances possible with norm al vision,
assuming a lens-to-retina distance of 2.00 cm (a typical value).
Strategy:
For clear vision, the image must be on the retina, and so here. For distant vision,, and for close vision,
, as discussed earlier. The equation as written just above, can be used directly to solve for in both ca ses,
since we know and. Power has units of diopters, where, and so we should express all distances in meters.
Solution
For distant vision,
Since, this gives
Now, for close vision,
Discussion:
For an eye with this typical 2.00 cm lens-to-retina d istance, the power of the eye ranges from 50.0 D (for d istant totally relaxed
vision) to 54.0 D (for close fully accommodated visio n), which is an 8% increase. This increase in power fo r close vision is
consistent with the preceding discussion and the ray t racing in Figure 3. An 8% ability to accommodate is co nsidered normal
but is typical for people who are about 40 years old. Younger people have greater accommodation ability, whereas older people
gradually lose the ability to accommodate. When an o ptometrist identifies accommodation as a problem in elder people, it is
most likely due to stiffening of the lens. The lens of the eye changes with age in ways that tend to preser ve the ability to seeExample:Power Range of the Eye

10.25.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84122distant objects clearly but do not allow the eye to accommodate for close vision, a condition called presbyopia (literally, elder
eye). To correct this vision defect, we place a conver ging, positive power lens in front of the eye, such as found in reading
glasses. Commonly available reading glasses are rated by the ir power in diopters, typically ranging from 1.0 to 3.5 D.
Summary
Image formation by the eye is adequately described by the thin lens equations:
The eye produces a real image on the retina by adjusti ng its focal length and power in a process called accomm odation.
For close vision, the eye is fully accommodated and has its greatest power, whereas for distant vision, it is totally r elaxed and
has its smallest power.
The loss of the ability to accommodate with age is call ed presbyopia, which is corrected by the use of a converg ing lens to add
power for close vision.
Glossary
accommodation
the ability of the eye to adjust its focal length is kn own as accommodation
presbyopia
a condition in which the lens of the eye becomes progress ively unable to focus on objects close to the viewer
This page titled 10.25: Physics_of_the_Eye is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
26.1: Physics of the Eye by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

10.26.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412310.26: Vision_Correction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Identify and discuss common vision defects.
Explain nearsightedness and farsightedness corrections.
Explain laser vision correction.
The need for some type of vision correction is very common. Common vision defects are easy to understand, and some are simple
to correct. Figure illustrates two common vision def ects. Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the inability to see distant objects
clearly while close objects are clear. The eye overcon verges the nearly parallel rays from a distant obje ct, and the rays cross in front
of the retina. More divergent rays from a close object are converged on the retina for a clear image. The distance to the farthest
object that can be seen clearly is called the far p oint of the eye (normally infinity). Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the inability to
see close objects clearly while distant objects may be clear. A farsighted eye does not converge sufficien t rays from a close object to
make the rays meet on the retina. Less diverging ray s from a distant object can be converged for a clea r image. The distance to the
closest object that can be seen clearly is called the near point of the eye (normally 25 cm).
Figure: (a) The nearsighted (myopic) eye converges ra ys from a distant object in front of the retina; thus, they are diverging
when they strike the retina, producing a blurry imag e. This can be caused by the lens of the eye being too powerful or the length of
the eye being too great. (b) The farsighted (hyperop ic) eye is unable to converge the rays from a close ob ject by the time they strike
the retina, producing blurry close vision. This can be caused by insufficient power in the lens or by the ey e being too short.
Since the nearsighted eye over converges light rays, the correction for nearsightedness is to place a d iverging spectacle lens in front
of the eye. This reduces the power of an eye that is too powerful. Another way of thinking about this is th at a diverging spectacle
lens produces a case 3 image, which is closer to the e ye than the object (Figure). To determine the specta cle power needed
for correction, you must know the person’s far point -- that is, you must know the greatest distance at whic h the person can see
clearly. Then the image produced by a spectacle lens must be at this distance or closer for the nearsigh ted person to be able to see it
clearly. It is worth noting that wearing glasses does no t change the eye in any way. The eyeglass lens is si mply used to create an
image of the object at a distance where the nearsigh ted person can see it clearly. Whereas someone not wea ring glasses can see
clearly objects that fall between their near point and their far poi nt, someone wearing glasses can see images that fall between their
near point and their far point.Learning Objectives

10.26.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84123
Figure: Correction of nearsightedness requires a diverg ing lens that compensates for the overconvergence by t he eye. The
diverging lens produces an image closer to the eye tha n the object, so that the nearsighted person can see it clearly.
What power of spectacle lens is needed to correct the vision of a nearsighted person whose far point is 30.0 cm? Assume the
spectacle (corrective) lens is held 1.50 cm away from the e ye by eyeglass frames.
Strategy:
You want this nearsighted person to be able to see ver y distant objects clearly. That means the spectacle l ens must produce an
image 30.0 cm from the eye for an object very far awa y. An image 30.0 cm from the eye will be 28.5 cm to the left of the
spectacle lens (Figure). Therefore, we must get when. The image distance is negative, because it
is on the same side of the spectacle as the object.
Solution
Since and are known, the power of the spectacle lens can be found using as written earlier:
Since, we obtain:
Discussion:
The negative power indicates a diverging (or concave) lens, as expected. The spectacle produces a case 3 ima ge closer to the
eye, where the person can see it. If you examine eyegl asses for nearsighted people, you will find the lenses are thinnest in the
center. Additionally, if you examine a prescription f or eyeglasses for nearsighted people, you will find that the prescribed
power is negative and given in units of diopters.
Since the farsighted eye under converges light rays, the correction for farsightedness is to place a convergin g spectacle lens in front
of the eye. This increases the power of an eye that is to o weak. Another way of thinking about this is that a conv erging spectacle
lens produces a case 2 image, which is farther from th e eye than the object (Figure). To determine the spec tacle power
needed for correction, you must know the person’s nea r point -- that is, you must know the smallest distance at which the person
can see clearly. Then the image produced by a specta cle lens must be at this distance or farther for the farsighted person to be able
to see it clearly.Example: Correcting Nearsightedness

10.26.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84123
Figure: Correction of farsightedness uses a converging l ens that compensates for the under convergence by the eye. The
converging lens produces an image farther from the ey e than the object, so that the farsighted person can se e it clearly.
What power of spectacle lens is needed to allow a far sighted person, whose near point is 1.00 m, to see an o bject clearly that is
25.0 cm away? Assume the spectacle (corrective) lens is held 1.50 cm away from the eye by eyeglass frames.
Strategy
When an object is held 25.0 cm from the person’s ey es, the spectacle lens must produce an image 1.00 m awa y (the near point).
An image 1.00 m from the eye will be 98.5 cm to the le ft of the spectacle lens because the spectacle lens i s 1.50 cm from the
eye (Figure). Therefore,. The image distance is neg ative, because it is on the same side of the spectac le as
the object. The object is 23.5 cm to the left of the spec tacle, so that.
Solution
Since and are known, the power of the spectacle lens can be found using:
Discussion
The positive power indicates a converging (convex) le ns, as expected. The convex spectacle produces a cas e 2 image farther
from the eye, where the person can see it. If you exa mine eyeglasses of farsighted people, you will find the lenses to be thickest
in the center. In addition, a prescription of eyeglasses for farsighted people has a prescribed power that is positiv e.
Another common vision defect is astigmatism an unevenness or asymmetry in the focus of the eye. For example, rays passing
through a vertical region of the eye may focus closer than ra ys passing through a horizontal region, resulting in the i mage appearing
elongated. This is mostly due to irregularities in th e shape of the cornea but can also be due to lens i rregularities or unevenness in
the retina. Because of these irregularities, different parts of the lens system produce images at different locations. The eye-brain
system can compensate for some of these irregulariti es, but they generally manifest themselves as less dis tinct vision or sharper
images along certain axes. Figure shows a chart used to detect astigmatism. Astigmatism can be at least partial ly corrected
with a spectacle having the opposite irregularity of the eye. If an eyeglass prescription has a cylindr ical correction, it is there to
correct astigmatism. The normal corrections for short- or farsightedness are spherical corrections, uniform along all axes.Example:Correcting Farsightedness

10.26.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84123
Figure: This chart can detect astigmatism, unevenness in the focus of the eye. Check each of your eyes separat ely by
looking at the center cross (without spectacles if you wear them). If lines along some axes appear darker or clearer than others, you
have an astigmatism.
Contact lenses have advantages over glasses beyond t heir cosmetic aspects. One problem with glasses is that as the eye moves, it is
not at a fixed distance from the spectacle lens. Cont acts rest on and move with the eye, eliminating this p roblem. Because contacts
cover a significant portion of the cornea, they prov ide superior peripheral vision compared with eyeglasse s. Contacts also correct
some corneal astigmatism caused by surface irregula rities. The tear layer between the smooth contact and the cornea fills in the
irregularities. Since the index of refraction of the t ear layer and the cornea are very similar, you now h ave a regular optical surface
in place of an irregular one. If the curvature of a contact lens is not the same as the cornea (as may be n ecessary with some
individuals to obtain a comfortable fit), the tear la yer between the contact and cornea acts as a lens. If the tear layer is thinner in the
center than at the edges, it has a negative power, for example. Skilled optometrists will adjust the power of the contact to
compensate.
Laser vision correction has progressed rapidly in the last few years. It is th e latest and by far the most successful in a series of
procedures that correct vision by reshaping the cor nea. As noted at the beginning of this section, the co rnea accounts for about twothirds of the power of the eye. Thus, small adjustments of its curvature have the same effect as putting a l ens in front of the eye. To
a reasonable approximation, the power of multiple le nses placed close together equals the sum of their p owers. For example, a
concave spectacle lens (for nearsightedness) having has the same effect on vision as reducing the power of the eye
itself by 3.00 D. So to correct the eye for nearsighted ness, the cornea is flattened to reduce its power. Simi larly, to correct for
farsightedness, the curvature of the cornea is enha nced to increase the power of the eye -- the same ef fect as the positive power
spectacle lens used for farsightedness. Laser visio n correction uses high intensity electromagnetic radia tion to ablate (to remove
material from the surface) and reshape the corneal surf aces.
Today, the most commonly used laser vision correction procedure is Laser in situ Keratomileusis (LASIK). The top layer of the
cornea is surgically peeled back and the underlying t issue ablated by multiple bursts of finely controll ed ultraviolet radiation
produced by an excimer laser. Lasers are used because they not only produce well-focused intense light, but they also emit very
pure wavelength electromagnetic radiation that can b e controlled more accurately than mixed wavelength l ight. The 193 nm
wavelength UV commonly used is extremely and strongly absorbed by corneal tissue, allowing precise evaporatio n of very thin
layers. A computer controlled program applies more bursts, usually at a rate of 10 per second, to the ar eas that require deeper
removal. Typically a spot less than 1 mm in diameter and about in thickness is removed by each burst. Near sightedness,
farsightedness, and astigmatism can be corrected with an accuracy that produces normal distant vision in more than 90% of the
patients, in many cases right away. The corneal flap is replaced; healing takes place rapidly and is nearl y painless. More than 1
million Americans per year undergo LASIK (Figure).

10.26.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84123
Figure: Laser vision correction is being performed usin g the LASIK procedure. Reshaping of the cornea by lase r ablation is
based on a careful assessment of the patient’s vision and is computer controlled. The upper corneal layer is te mporarily peeled back
and minimally disturbed in LASIK, providing for more rapid and less painful healing of the less sensitive tissue s below. (credit:
U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist 1st Cla ss Brien Aho)
Summary
Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the inability to see distan t objects and is corrected with a diverging lens to reduce power.
Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the inability to see close objects and is corrected with a converging lens to increase power.
In myopia and hyperopia, the corrective lenses produce i mages at a distance that the person can see clearly—the fa r point and
near point, respectively.
Glossary
nearsightedness
another term for myopia, a visual defect in which distant o bjects appear blurred because their images are focuse d in front of the
retina rather than being focused on the retina
myopia
a visual defect in which distant objects appear blurred bec ause their images are focused in front of the retina rath er than being
focused on the retina
far point
the object point imaged by the eye onto the retina in a n unaccommodated eye
farsightedness
another term for hyperopia, the condition of an eye where incoming rays of light reach the retina before they co nverge into a
focused image
hyperopia
the condition of an eye where incoming rays of light reach the retina before they converge into a focused image
near point
the point nearest the eye at which an object is accurate ly focused on the retina at full accommodation
astigmatism
the result of an inability of the cornea to properly focu s an image onto the retina
laser vision correction

10.26.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84123a medical procedure used to correct astigmatism and eyesi ght deficiencies such as myopia and hyperopia
This page titled 10.26: Vision_Correction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
26.2: Vision Correction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

10.27.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412410.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the simple theory of color vision.
Outline the coloring properties of light sources.
Describe the retinex theory of color vision.
The gift of vision is made richer by the existence of color. Objects and lights abound with thousands of hues that stimulate our
eyes, brains, and emotions. Two basic questions are addr essed in this brief treatment -- what does color mea n in scientific terms,
and how do we, as humans, perceive it?
Simple Theory of Color Vision
We have already noted that color is associated with th e wavelength of visible electromagnetic radiation. Wh en our eyes receive
pure-wavelength light, we tend to see only a few colors. Six of these (most often listed) are red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and
violet. These are the rainbow of colors produced when white light is dispersed according to different wavelen gths. There are
thousands of other hues that we can perceive. These include brown, teal, gold, pin k, and white. One simple theory of color vision
implies that all these hues are our eye’s response to different combinations of wavelengths. This is true to an extent, but we find
that color perception is even subtler than our eye’s response for various wavelengths of light.
The two major types of light-sensing cells (photorec eptors) in the retina are rods and cones Rods are more sensitive than cones by
a factor of about 1000 and are solely responsible f or peripheral vision as well as vision in very dark e nvironments. They are also
important for motion detection. There are about 120 million rods in the human retina. Rods do not yield color information. You
may notice that you lose color vision when it is very da rk, but you retain the ability to discern grey scales.
1. Go into a darkened room from a brightly lit room, or f rom outside in the Sun. How long did it take to start seeing sha pes
more clearly? What about color? Return to the bright room. Did it take a few minutes before you could see things c learly?
2. Demonstrate the sensitivity of foveal vision. Look at the letter G in the word ROGERS. What about the clarit y of the letters
on either side of G?
Cones are most concentrated in the fovea, the centr al region of the retina. There are no rods here. The fovea is at the center of the
macula, a 5 mm diameter region responsible for our central vision. The cones work best in bright light an d are responsible for high
resolution vision. There are about 6 million cones in the human retina. There are three types of cones, a nd each type is sensitive to
different ranges of wavelengths, as illustrated in Figure. A simplified theory of color vision is that there are three primary
colors corresponding to the three types of cones. The thous ands of other hues that we can distinguish among are created by various
combinations of stimulations of the three types of c ones. Color television uses a three-color system in whic h the screen is covered
with equal numbers of red, green, and blue phosphor dots. The broad range of hues a viewer sees is produced b y various
combinations of these three colors. For example, you will perceive yellow when red and green are illuminat ed with the correct ratio
of intensities. White may be sensed when all three are illuminated. Then, it would seem that all hues can be p roduced by adding
three primary colors in various proportions. But there is an indication that color vision is more sophistic ated. There is no unique set
of three primary colors. Another set that works is yel low, green, and blue. A further indication of the nee d for a more complex
theory of color vision is that various different co mbinations can produce the same hue. Yellow can be sen sed with yellow light, or
with a combination of red and green, and also with white light from which violet has been removed. The three-p rimary-colors
aspect of color vision is well established; more sophisti cated theories expand on it rather than deny it.Learning Objectives
TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: RODS AND CONES

10.27.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84124
Figure: The image shows the relative sensitivity of the three types of cones, which are named according to w avelengths of
greatest sensitivity. Rods are about 1000 times more sensi tive, and their curve peaks at about 500 nm. Evidenc e for the three types
of cones comes from direct measurements in animal and h uman eyes and testing of color blind people.
Consider why various objects display color -- that i s, why are feathers blue and red in a crimson rosella? The true color of an object
is defined by its absorptive or reflective characte ristics. Figure shows white light falling on three differ ent objects, one pure
blue, one pure red, and one black, as well as pure red light falling on a white object. Other hues are crea ted by more complex
absorption characteristics. Pink, for example on a ga lah cockatoo, can be due to weak absorption of all co lors except red. An object
can appear a different color under non-white illumin ation. For example, a pure blue object illuminated with pure red light will
appear black, because it absorbs all the red light falling o n it. But, the true color of the object is blue, which is independent of
illumination.
Figure: Absorption characteristics determine the true color of an object. Here, three objects are illumina ted by white light,
and one by pure red light. White is the equal mixtur e of all visible wavelengths; black is the absence of l ight.
Similarly, light sources have colors that are defined by the wavelengths they produce. A helium-neon laser emits pure red light. In
fact, the phrase “pure red light” is defined by havi ng a sharp constrained spectrum, a characteristic of laser light. The Sun produces
a broad yellowish spectrum, fluorescent lights emit blu ish-white light, and incandescent lights emit reddish-wh ite hues as seen in
Figure 3. As you would expect, you sense these colors when viewing the light source directly or when illuminating a white object
with them. All of this fits neatly into the simplified th eory that a combination of wavelengths produces various hues.
This activity is best done with plastic sheets of diffe rent colors as they allow more light to pass through t o our eyes. However,
thin sheets of paper and fabric can also be used. Over lay different colors of the material and hold them up to a white light.
Using the theory described above, explain the colors you o bserve. You could also try mixing different crayon colo rs.TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: EXPLORING COLOR ADDITION

10.27.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84124
Figure: Emission spectra for various light sources are sho wn. Curve A is average sunlight at Earth’s surface, cur ve B is light
from a fluorescent lamp, and curve C is the output of an in candescent light. The spike for a helium-neon laser (curve D) is due to its
pure wavelength emission. The spikes in the fluorescent output are due to atomic spectra -- a topic that wil l be explored later.
Color Constancy and a Modified Theory of Color Vision
The eye-brain color-sensing system can, by comparing various objects in its view, perceive the true color of an object under
varying lighting conditions -- an ability that is c alled color constancy. We can sense that a white tablecloth, for example, is white
whether it is illuminated by sunlight, fluorescent li ght, or candlelight. The wavelengths entering the eye are quite different in each
case, as the graphs in Figure 3 imply, but our color vision can detect the true color by comparing the ta blecloth with its
surroundings.
Theories that take color constancy into account are based on a large body of anatomical evidence as well as perceptual studies.
There are nerve connections among the light recepto rs on the retina, and there are far fewer nerve conn ections to the brain than
there are rods and cones. This means that there is si gnal processing in the eye before information is se nt to the brain. For example,
the eye makes comparisons between adjacent light rece ptors and is very sensitive to edges as seen in Figure 4. Rather than
responding simply to the light entering the eye, whic h is uniform in the various rectangles in this figur e, the eye responds to the
edges and senses false darkness variations.
Figure: The importance of edges is shown. Although the grey strips are uniformly shaded, as indicated by the graph
immediately below them, they do not appear uniform at all. Instead, they are perceived darker on the da rk side and lighter on the
light side of the edge, as shown in the bottom graph. This is due to nerve impulse processing in the eye.
One theory that takes various factors into account wa s advanced by Edwin Land (1909 – 1991), the creative founder of the Polaroid
Corporation. Land proposed, based partly on his many el egant experiments, that the three types of cones are or ganized into systems
called retinexes. Each retinex forms an image that is compared with th e others, and the eye-brain system thus can compare a

10.27.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84124candle-illuminated white table cloth with its general ly reddish surroundings and determine that it is ac tually white. This retinex
theory of color vision is an example of modified theories of color vision that attempt to account for its subtleties. One striki ng
experiment performed by Land demonstrates that some t ype of image comparison may produce color vision. Two pictures are taken
of a scene on black-and-white film, one using a red f ilter, the other a blue filter. Resulting black-and -white slides are then projected
and superimposed on a screen, producing a black-and -white image, as expected. Then a red filter is place d in front of the slide
taken with a red filter, and the images are again su perimposed on a screen. You would expect an image in va rious shades of pink,
but instead, the image appears to humans in full color with all the hues of the original scene. This implies that color vision can be
induced by comparison of the black-and-white and red images. Color vision is not completely understood or explained, and the
retinex theory is not totally accepted. It is apparent t hat color vision is much subtler than what a first look mig ht imply.
Make a whole rainbow by mixing red, green, and blue li ght. Change the wavelength of a monochromatic beam o r filter white
light. View the light as a solid beam, or see the individual photons.
Color Vision
Single Bulb
RGB BulbsPHET EXPLORATIONS: COLOR VISION

10.27.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84124Summary
The eye has four types of light receptors -- rods and thre e types of color-sensitive cones.
The rods are good for night vision, peripheral vision, an d motion changes, while the cones are responsible for ce ntral vision and
color.
We perceive many hues, from light having mixtures of wave lengths.
A simplified theory of color vision states that there are three primary colors, which correspond to the three typ es of cones, and
that various combinations of the primary colors produce a ll the hues.
The true color of an object is related to its relative a bsorption of various wavelengths of light. The color of a light source is
related to the wavelengths it produces.
Color constancy is the ability of the eye-brain system to d iscern the true color of an object illuminated by variou s light sources.
The retinex theory of color vision explains color const ancy by postulating the existence of three retinexes or i mage systems,
associated with the three types of cones that are compared t o obtain sophisticated information.
Glossary
hues
identity of a color as it relates specifically to the s pectrum
rods and cones
two types of photoreceptors in the human retina; rods are re sponsible for vision at low light levels, while cones are ac tive at
higher light levels
simplified theory of color vision
a theory that states that there are three primary colors, wh ich correspond to the three types of cones
color constancy
a part of the visual perception system that allows people to perceive color in a variety of conditions and to se e some consistency
in the color
retinex
a theory proposed to explain color and brightness perc eption and constancies; is a combination of the words r etina and cortex,
which are the two areas responsible for the processing of visual information
retinex theory of color vision
the ability to perceive color in an ambient-colored env ironment
This page titled 10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
26.3: Color and Color Vision by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

10.28.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412510.28: The_Human_Eye
The eye is an adaptive optical device.
3.4.1 Anatomy
The human eye is made of an almost spherical (24 mm long and 22 mm across) gelatinous substance called t he vitreous humor
with refractive index 1.337, surrounded by a white she ll, the sclera (Figure). At the front, the sclera has an opening with a
transparent lens called the cornea, with for green light an index of refraction of 1.376. Most of the bending of the rays takes place
at the air-cornea interface and this is why it is diff icult to see under water (n = 1.33). After passing the cornea, the rays reach
the aqueous humour (n ≈1.336) with the iris (i.e. pupil). It can expand or contract from a 2 mm (bright sun) to 8 mm (low light)
diameter to adapt to the light intensity. The iris g ives colour to the eye. After the iris, the rays rea ch the flexible crystalline lens
which has the size of a bean (9 mm in diameter, and 4 mm thick in unaccommodated condition). Its index of refraction varies from
1.406 in the centre to 1.386 at the edge.
Figure: Cross section of a human eye (from Wikimedia C ommons by Holly Fischer / CC BY).
3.4.2 Working of the eye
The entire eye can very accurately be treated as two lenses in contact, of which the crystalline lens can change its focal length.
Often the system is approximated by only a single len s. In unaccommodated condition, the first focal dista nce of the lens system is
f = 16 mm as measured from the cornea. The second foc al distance is equal to the length of the eye: f = 24 mm. These focal
distances are different, because the refractive indic es of the surrounding medium (air and vitreous humour) differ. The power of the
intact, unaccommodated eye lens system is, according to (2.5.35), (2.5.39):
In relaxed condition the lens focuses light coming f rom infinity on the retina. When the object is close r, the eye muscles contract
due to which the crystalline lens becomes more conve x and the focal length of the system decreases, as see n on the right of Figure
. At a certain point, the object will be too close to be focused on the retina. This is called the near poin t of the eye. Due to the
loss of elasticity of the muscle, the near point moves from 7 cm for teens to 100 cm for a 60-year-o ld. Figure shows the
optical rays entering the eyes, for two configuratio ns: an object at infinity and an object nearby. The so-called normal near point iswater
o i

10.28.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84125at 25 cm. The far point is the furthest object which is imaged on the retina by the unaccommodated eye. For the normal eye the far
point is at infinity.
Figure: Left: Optical rays showing how an eye accommo dates by changing its focal length. Right: Relaxed an d contracted
muscle at the crystalline lens needed for this accommod ation.(Left: adapted from Wikimedia Commons Erin Sil versmith / BY-NCSA 2.5 Generic. Right: adapted from Sjaastad O.V., San d O. and Hove K. (2010) Physiology of domestic animal s, 2nd edn., Oslo:
Scandinavian Veterinary Press).
3.4.3 Retina
The retina is composed of approximately 125 million photoreceptor cells: the rods and the cones. The rods are highly sensitive
black and white (intensity) sensors, while the cones are colour sensitive for the wavelengths 390 nm - 780 nm. UV light is absorbed
by the lens (people whose lens is removed because of c ataract can "see" UV light). The fovea centralis is the most sensitive centre
of the retina with a high density of cones. The eyes move continuously to focus the image on this area. T he information is
transferred by the optical nerve, placed at the back of t he eye, where it causes a blind spot.
3.4.4 Dioptric Power of a lens
For a combination of two thin lenses, it is not so eas y to derive the resulting focal length from the ind ividual focal length of the
lenses. It is easier to consider the dioptric power. For a single lens the dioptric power is defined by:
with R and R the radii of the thin lens and n the ind ex of refraction of the glass. Because for two lenses i n contact, the focal
length is given by:
the combined power of the two lenses is the sum of the indi vidual powers:
A lens of focal length has a dioptric power. If it is in contact with a negative lens of dioptric power
, the resulting power is, equivalent to a parallel sheet o f glass.
3.4.5 Eyeglasses
The eye can suffer from imperfections as seen in Figure. We discuss the most common imperfections and their solu tions.
a. Myopia or Nearsightedness. A myopic eye has too short focal distances (has too high power) so that distant objects are focused
in front of the retina by the unaccommodated eye. T he far point is thus not at infinity, but closer. This can be corrected by a
negative lens. Suppose the far point is at. If the c oncave lens makes a virtual image of a distant object at distance in front
of the cornea, the unaccommodated eye can see it cle arly. The lens Law (2.5.44), with implies then. Hence
the required power of the lens is:1 2 i

10.28.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84125The lens is best put in the front focal plane of th e unaccomodated eye, i.e. at approximately 16 in f ront of the cornea. (Since the
distance of the retina to the eye lens is roughly and the refractive index of the vitrous humor is, this implies a focal
distance in air of the unaccomodated eye of). The reason is that in this case the magnification of the eye and the
negative lens together are the same as for the unco rrected eye. To see this, draw a ray from the top of t he object through the centre
of the negative lens. This will then be made parallel to the optical axis by the eye lens; the distance of this ray to the optical axis is
the image size on the retina. This ray will end up at the same point of the retina as when the negative le ns is taken out, because it is
not refracted by this lens.
Contact lenses are very close to the eye lens and he nce the total power of the eye with a contact lens is simply the sum of the power
of the eye and the contact lens.
b. Hyperopia or Farsightedness. In this case a distant object is imaged by the un accommodated eye behind the retina, i.e. the back
focal distance of the unaccommodated eye is larger t han the depth of the eye. Close objects can not be i maged on the retina, hence
the near point is relatively far from the cornea. I n order to bend the rays more, a positive lens is plac ed in front of the eye. Suppose
that a hyperopic eye has near point at distance. For an object at to have virtual image at, so that it
can be seen, the focal length must satisfy
hence the power must be Diopter.
Figure: Correction of farsighted (left) and nearsight ed (right) eye (adapted from Wikimedia Commons by Gu menyuk I.S. /
CC BY-SA 4.0).

10.28.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84125c. Presbyopia. This is the lack of accommodation of the eye as is common in people over 40. It results in an increase in the
distance between the near point and the retina. This defect affects all images. Presbyopia is usually corre cted by glasses with
progressive correction, the upper part of glass used for di stance vision and the lower part for near vision.
d. Astigmatism. In this case the focal distances for two direction s perpendicular to the optical axis are different. I t is attributed to a
lack of symmetry of revolution of the cornea. This is co mpensated by using glasses which themselves are astigmati c.
3.4.6 New Correction Technique
In recent years, to correct eye defects such as myop ia and astigmatism, technology has been developed to change the local
curvatures of the surface of the cornea using an ex cimer laser. The laser is computer-controlled and ca uses photo-ablation in parts
of the cornea.
This page titled 10.28: The_Human_Eye is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.
3.5: The Human Eye has no license indicated.

10.29.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412610.29: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light
Vision is such an everyday occurrence that we seldom stop to think and wonder how we are able to see the ob jects that surround us.
Yet the vision process is a fascinating example of h ow light can produce molecular changes. The retina cont ain the molecules that
undergo a chemical change upon absorbing light, but it is the brain that actually makes sense of the vi sual information to create an
image.
Introduction
Light is one of the most important resources for civi lization, it provides energy as it pass along by the s un. Light influence our
everyday live. Living organisms sense light from the environment by photoreceptors. Light, as waves carry en ergy, contains energy
by different wavelength. In vision, light is the stimul us input. Light energy goes into eyes stimulate pho toreceptor in eyes.
However, as an energy wave, energy is passed on through light a t different wavelength.
Light, as waves carry energy, contains energy by different w avelength. From long wavelength to short wavelength, en ergy increase.
400 nm to 700 nm is visible spectrum.
Light energy can convert chemical to other forms. Vitamin A, also known as retinol, anti-dry eye vitamins, is a requ ired nutrition
for human health. The predecessor of vitamin A is pre sent in the variety of plant carotene. Vitamin A is critical for vision because it
is needed by the retina of eye. Retinol can be conv ert to retinal, and retinal is a chemical necessary f or rhodopsin. As light enters
the eye, the 11- cis-retinal is isomerized to the all-"trans" form.

10.29.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84126Mechanism of Vision
The molecule cis-retinal can absorb light at a spec ific wavelength. When visible light hits the cis-ret inal, the cis-retinal undergoes
an isomerization, or change in molecular arrangement, to all-trans-r etinal. The new form of trans-retinal does not fit as we ll into the
protein, and so a series of geometry changes in the p rotein begins. The resulting complex is referred to a bathrhodopsin (there are
other intermediates in this process, but we'll ignore th em for now).
The reaction above shows Lysine side-chain from the o psin react with 11-cis-retinal when stimulated. By rem oving the oxygen
atom form the retinal and two hydrogen atom form the free amino group of the lysine, the linkage show on t he picture above is
formed, and it is called Schiff base.
Signal Transduction Pathway
As the protein changes its geometry, it initiates a ca scade of biochemical reactions that results in changes in charge so that a large
potential difference builds up across the plasma memb rane. This potential difference is passed along to a n adjoining nerve cell as
an electrical impulse. The nerve cell carries this impul se to the brain, where the visual information is interpreted.
The light image is mapped on the surface of the reti na by activating a series of light-sensitive cells k nown as rods and cones or
photoreceptors. The rods and cones convert the light i nto electrical impulses which are transmitted to the br ain via nerve fibers. The
brain then determines, which nerve fibers carried the electrical impulse activate by light at certain ph otoreceptors, and then creates
an image.
The retina is lined with many millions of photorecep tor cells that consist of two types: 7 million cones provide color information
and sharpness of images, and 120 million rods are ex tremely sensitive detectors of white light to provide night vision. The tops of
the rods and cones contain a region filled with memb rane-bound discs, which contain the molecule cis-retina l bound to a protein
called opsin. The resulting complex is called rhodopsin or "visual purple".
Figure 3: A fundus photograph of the back of the retina. The white ar ea is the beginning of the optical nerve (optic disc). The
image in this photo is the right eye of eric anthamatten. (CC- BY-SA-4.0; TheGoose aPrisoner).
In human eyes, rod and cones react to light stimula tion, and a series of chemical reactions happen in c ells. These cells receive light,
and pass on signals to other receiver cells. This chain of process is class signal transduction pathway. Sign al transduction pathway
is a mechanism that describe the ways cells react and response to stimulation.
References
1. Biochemistry, L. Stryer (W.H. Freeman and Co, San Francisco, 19 75).
2. The Cambridge Guide to the Material World, Rodney Cotterill (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1 985)

10.29.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84126Contributors
{{template.ContribOphardt()}}
This page titled 10.29: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax.
Vision and Light is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0.

10.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412810.A: The Nature of Light (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
1.1. 2.1% (to two significant figures)
1.2. 15.1°
1.3. air to water, because the condition that the second medium m ust have a smaller index of refraction is not satisfied
1.4. 9.3 cm
1.5. becomes longer, tilts further away from the surfa ce, and the refracted ray tilts away from the normal.
1.6. also
1.7. There will be only refraction but no reflection.
Conceptual Questions
1. model as a ray when devices are large compared to wav elength, as a wave when devices are comparable or small
compared to wavelength
3. This fact simply proves that the speed of light is great er than that of sound. If one knows the distance to t he location of the
lightning and the speed of sound, one could, in pri nciple, determine the speed of light from the data. I n practice, because the
speed of light is so great, the data would have to be known t o impractically high precision.
5. Powder consists of many small particles with randomly orient ed surfaces. This leads to diffuse reflection, reducing s hine.
7. “toward” when increasing n (air to water, water to glass); “away” when decreasing n (glass to air)
9. A ray from a leg emerges from water after refractio n. The observer in air perceives an apparent location for the source, as
if a ray traveled in a straight line. See the dashed ray bel ow.
The figure is illustration of the formation of the image of a leg unde r water, as seen by a viewer in the air above
the water. A ray is shown leaving the leg and refracting at the water air interface. The refracted ray bends away
from the normal. Extrapolating the refracted ray back into the wate r, the extrapolated ray is above the actual
ray so that the image of the leg is above the actual leg and the leg a ppears shorter.
11. The gemstone becomes invisible when its index of refra ction is the same, or at least similar to, the water sur rounding it.
Because diamond has a particularly high index of re fraction, it can still sparkle as a result of total internal reflection, not
invisible.
13. One can measure the critical angle by looking for the onset of total internal reflection as the angle of incidence is varied.
Equation 1.5 can then be applied to compute the index o f refraction.

10.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412815. In addition to total internal reflection, rays that refract into and out of diamond crystals are subject to dispersion due to
varying values of n across the spectrum, resulting in a spar kling display of colors.
17. yes
19. No. Sound waves are not transverse waves.
21. Energy is absorbed into the filters.
23. Sunsets are viewed with light traveling straight from the Sun toward us. When blue light is scattered out of this path, the
remaining red light dominates the overall appearance of the setting Sun.
25. The axis of polarization for the sunglasses has been rotated.
Problems
27.
29. ice at
31. 1.03 ns
33. 337 m
35. proof
37. proof
39. reflection,; refraction,
41.
43. 1.53
45. a. 2.9 m;
b. 1.4 m
47. a.;
b.
49.
51. a. 1.43, fluorite;
b.
53. a.;
b.
55. for red, for violet
57. a.;
b. 1.3 m
59.
61. for red, for violet
63. 0.500
65. 0.125 or 1/8
67.
69.
71. a. 0.500;

10.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84128b. 0.250;
c. 0.187
73.
75.
Additional Problems
77. 114 radian/s
79. 3.72 mm
81.
83. a. 1.92. The gem is not a diamond (it is zircon).
b.
85. a. 0.898;
b. We cannot have, since this would imply a speed greate r than c.
c. The refracted angle is too big relative to the angle of incidence.
87.
89. a.;
b. yes
Challenge Problems
91. First part:. The remainder depends on the complexity of the solution the reader constructs.
93. proof; 1.33
95. a. 0.750;
b. 0.563;
c. 1.33
This page titled 10.A: The Nature of Light (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.A: The Nature of Light (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

1.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841271.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
Conceptual Questions
1. Virtual image cannot be projected on a screen. You c annot distinguish a real image from a virtual image simply by judging
from the image perceived with your eye.
3. Yes, you can photograph a virtual image. For example, if you photograph your reflection from a plane mirro r, you get a
photograph of a virtual image. The camera focuses the light that enters its lens to form an image; whether the source of the
light is a real object or a reflection from mirror (i.e., a virtual image) does not matter.
5. No, you can see the real image the same way you can se e the virtual image. The retina of your eye effecti vely serves as a
screen.
7. The mirror should be half your size and its top ed ge should be at the level of your eyes. The size does not depend on your
distance from the mirror.
9. when the object is at infinity; see the mirror equatio n
11. Yes, negative magnification simply means that the i mage is upside down; this does not prevent the image fr om being
larger than the object. For instance, for a concave m irror, if distance to the object is larger than one focal distance but smaller
than two focal distances the image will be inverted and magn ified.
13. answers may vary
15. The focal length of the lens is fixed, so the image distan ce changes as a function of object distance.
17. Yes, the focal length will change. The lens maker’s e quation shows that the focal length depends on the in dex of
refraction of the medium surrounding the lens. Beca use the index of refraction of water differs from th at of air, the focal
length of the lens will change when submerged in water.
19. A relaxed, normal-vision eye will focus parallel rays of l ight onto the retina.
21. A person with an internal lens will need glasses to rea d because their muscles cannot distort the lens as t hey do with
biological lenses, so they cannot focus on near objec ts. To correct nearsightedness, the power of the int raocular lens must be
less than that of the removed lens.
23. Microscopes create images of macroscopic size, so geomet ric optics applies.
25. The eyepiece would be moved slightly farther from th e objective so that the image formed by the objecti ve falls just
beyond the focal length of the eyepiece.
Problems
27.

1.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84127
Figure shows cross sections of two mirrors placed at an ang le of 60 degrees to each other. Six small circles label ed object,
and are shown. The object is on the bisector between the mirrors. Line 1 intersects mirror 1 perpendicular ly
connecting the object to on the other side of the m irror. Line 2 intersects the mirror 2 perpendicularly connecting the object to
on the other side of the mirror. Lines parallel to th ese respectively connect to and to. Lines parallel to these respectively
connect to and to.
29. It is in the focal point of the big mirror and at the cente r of curvature of the small mirror.
31.
33.
35. Step 1: Image formation by a mirror is involved.
Step 2: Draw the problem set up when possible.
Step 3: Use thin-lens equations to solve this problem.
Step 4: Find f.
Step 5: Given:.
Step 6: No ray tracing is needed.
Step 7: Using. Then,.
Step 8: The image is virtual because the image dista nce is negative. The focal length is positive, so the mirror is
concave.
37. a. for a convex mirror;
b. (behind the cornea);
c., so that
39.
41.

1.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84127
Figure shows the cross section of a concave mirror. Two r ays originating from a point strike the mirror and ar e reflected. The
distance of the point from the mirror is labeled and.
43.
with
45.
47.
49. proof
51. a.;
b., so that and
or
53. a.;
b., so the maximum height is;
c. This seems quite reasonable, since at 3.00 m it is pos sible to get a full length picture of a person.
55. a.;
b.
57. a. Using,. Then we can determine the magnification,.
b. and;
c. The magnification m increases rapidly as you increase t he object distance toward the focal length.
59.
61.
63. 83 cm to the right of the converging lens,
65.

1.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412767.
69. a.;
b.;
c.
71.
73. Originally, the close vision was 51.0 D. Therefore,
75. originally,; because the power for normal distant vision is 50.0 D, the power should be decreased by 20.0 D
77.
79. a.;
b.
81. We need when, so
83. Let = far point ⇒
85.
87.
89.
91.
93.
95.
97. a.;
b.
99. a. behind the objective lens;
b.;
c.
d.;
e.
101.
103.
105.
107. Answers will vary.
109. 12 cm to the left of the mirror,

1.A.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84127111. 27 cm in front of the mirror,, orientation upright
113. The following figure shows three successive images begi nning with the image in mirror. is the image in
mirror, whose image in mirror is whose image in mirror is the real image.
Figure shows the side view of two concave mirrors, and placed one on top of the other, facing each other. The top,, one
has a small hole in the middle. A penny is placed on t he bottom mirror. An image of the penny labeled is shown below.
Another image of the penny, labeled is shown above t he top mirror. This is labeled real image.
115. 5.4 cm from the axis
117. Let the vertex of the concave mirror be the origin of the coordinate system. Image 1 is at −10/3 cm (−3. 3 cm), image 2 is
at −40/11 cm (−3.6 cm). These serve as objects for s ubsequent images, which are at −310/83 cm (−3.7 cm), −934 0/2501 cm
(−3.7 cm), −140,720/37,681 cm (−3.7 cm). All remaining imag es are at approximately −3.7 cm.
119.
Figure shows two prisms with their bases parallel to each other at an angle of 45 degrees to the horizontal. T o the right of this is a
bi-convex lens. A ray along the optical axis enters th is set up from the left, deviates between the two prism s and travels parallel to
the optical axis, slightly below it. It enters the len s and deviates to pass through its focal point on the ot her side.
121. Figure shows from left to right: an object with base O o n the axis and tip P. A bi-concave lens with focal po int F1 and
F2 on the left and right respectively and a concave mirror with center of curvature C. Two rays originate from P and diverge
through the bi-concave lens. Their back extensions converge between F1 and the lens to form image Q1. Two r ays
originating from the tip of Q1 strike the mirror, are re flected and converge at Q2 between C and the mirror.
123. −5 D
125. 11
Additional Problems
127. a.

1.A.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84127
Figure shows the cross section of a concave mirror with c entre of curvature O and focal point F. Point P lies on the axis between
point F and the mirror. Ray 1 originates from point P, travels along the axis and hits the mirror. The ref lected ray 1 prime travels
back along the axis. Ray 2 originates from P and hits the mirror at point X. The reflected ray is labeled 2 prime. Line OX, labeled
normal at X, bisects the angle formed by PX and ray 2 prime. The back extensions of 1 prime and 2 prime in tersect at point Q.
b.
Figure shows the cross section of a concave mirror with p oints P, O, Q and F lying on the optical axis. Point P is furthest from the
mirror. Ray 1 originates from P, travels along the ax is and hits the mirror. The reflected ray 1 prime tra vels back along the axis. Ray
2 originates from P and hits the mirror at point X. T he reflected ray 2 prime intersects the axis at point Q, which lies between points
P and F. OX, labeled normal at X, bisects the angle PX Q.
c.
Figure shows a convex mirror with point P lying betwee n point F and the mirror on the optical axis. Ray 1 originates from P, travels
along the axis and hits the mirror. The reflected ray 1 prime travels back along the axis. Ray 2 originate s from P and hits the mirror
at point X. The angle formed by reflected ray 2 pri me and PX is bisected by OX, the normal at X. The back extensions of 1 prime
and 2 prime intersect at point Q, just behind the mir ror.
d. similar to the previous picture but with point P outside th e focal length;
e. Repeat (a)–(d) for a point object off the axis. For a point object placed off axis in front of a conca ve mirror
corresponding to parts (a) and (b), the case for convex mirro r left as exercises.

1.A.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84127
Figure a shows the cross section of a concave mirror. Poi nt P lies above the axis, closer to the mirror than fo cal point F. Ray 1
originates from P and hits the mirror. Reflected ray 1 prime travels back along the same line as ray 1 and intersects the optical axis
at point O. Ray 2 originates from point P and hits th e mirror at point X. The reflected ray is labeled 2 prime. The back extensions of
1 prime and 2 prime intersect at point Q behind the mirror. The angle formed by rays 2 and 2 prime is bise cted by OX, the normal
at X. Figure b shows the cross section of a concave mirro r. Point P lies above the axis, further away from the mirror than point F.
Ray 1 originates from P and hits the mirror. Reflecte d ray 1 prime travels back along the same line as ray 1 and intersects the
optical axis at point O. Ray 2 originates from point P and hits the mirror at point X. The reflected ray is labeled 2 prime. Rays 1
prime and 2 prime intersect at point Q in front of t he mirror. The angle formed by rays 2 and 2 prime is bisected by OX, the normal
at X.
129., upright
131. proof
133.

1.A.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84127
Figure shows a bi-convex lens, an object placed at poin t A on the optical axis and an inverted image formed at point on the axis
behind the lens. The top of the object is a distance h from the origin. Three rays originate from the top of the object, strike the lens
and converge on the other side at the top of the inv erted image. It passes the focal point in front of the lens and is parallel to the
optical axis behind the lens.
Triangles BAO and are similar triangles. Thus,. Triangles NOF and are similar
triangles. Thus,. Noting that gives or. Inverting th is
gives. Equating the two expressions for the ratio g ives. Dividing through by
gives or.
135. 70 cm
137. The plane mirror has an infinite focal point, so tha t. The total apparent distance of the man in the m irror will be
his actual distance, plus the apparent image distance, or. If this distance must be less than 20 cm, he sh ould
stand at.
139. Here we want. If near point,. Thus,
. Using gives, so the near point is 25.3 cm.
141. Assuming a lens at 2.00 cm from the boy’s eye, the im age distance must be. For an
infinite-distance object, the required power is. Ther efore, the lens will correct the
nearsightedness.
143.
145. Use,. The image distance for the objective is. Using,
, and gives. We want this image to be at the focal point of the eyepiece so that the eyepiece
forms an image at infinity for comfortable viewing. Thus, the distance d between the lenses should be
147. a. focal length of the corrective lens;
b. −1.25 D
149.
151.
This page titled 1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

10.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413010.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
1.1 The Propagation of Light
1. Under what conditions can light be modeled like a ray? Like a wave?
2. Why is the index of refraction always greater than or equa l to 1?
3. Does the fact that the light flash from lightning re aches you before its sound prove that the speed of lig ht is extremely
large or simply that it is greater than the speed of sound? Discuss how you could use this effect to get an e stimate of the
speed of light.
4. Speculate as to what physical process might be responsible f or light traveling more slowly in a medium than in a vacuu m.
1.2 The Law of Reflection
5. Using the law of reflection, explain how powder takes the shine off of a person’s nose. What is the name of the optical
effect?
1.3 Refraction
6. Diffusion by reflection from a rough surface is des cribed in this chapter. Light can also be diffused by refraction. Describe
how this occurs in a specific situation, such as light interac ting with crushed ice.
7. Will light change direction toward or away from the perpendicular when it goes from air to water? Water t o glass? Glass to
air?
8. Explain why an object in water always appears to be at a depth sh allower than it actually is?
9. Explain why a person’s legs appear very short when wad ing in a pool. Justify your explanation with a ray di agram
showing the path of rays from the feet to the eye of an o bserver who is out of the water.
10. Explain why an oar that is partially submerged in water appears bent.
1.4 Total Internal Reflection
11. A ring with a colorless gemstone is dropped into water. The gemstone becomes invisible when submerged. Can i t be a
diamond? Explain.
12. The most common type of mirage is an illusion that l ight from faraway objects is reflected by a pool of wat er that is not
really there. Mirages are generally observed in deser ts, when there is a hot layer of air near the ground. Given that the
refractive index of air is lower for air at higher temper atures, explain how mirages can be formed.
13. How can you use total internal reflection to estimate the i ndex of refraction of a medium?
1.5 Dispersion
14. Is it possible that total internal reflection plays a role in rainbows? Explain in terms of indices of re fraction and angles,
perhaps referring to that shown below. Some of us have seen the formation of a double rainbow; is it physica lly possible to
observe a triple rainbow? A photograph of a double rainbow.

10.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84130
15. A high-quality diamond may be quite clear and color less, transmitting all visible wavelengths with little ab sorption.
Explain how it can sparkle with flashes of brilliant color when illuminated by white light.
1.6 Huygens’s Principle
16. How do wave effects depend on the size of the object with which the wave interacts? For example, why does sound bend
around the corner of a building while light does not?
17. Does Huygens’s principle apply to all types of waves?
18. If diffraction is observed for some phenomenon, it i s evidence that the phenomenon is a wave. Does the reve rse hold
true? That is, if diffraction is not observed, does that me an the phenomenon is not a wave?
1.7 Polarization
19. Can a sound wave in air be polarized? Explain.
20. No light passes through two perfect polarizing filter s with perpendicular axes. However, if a third polarizin g filter is
placed between the original two, some light can pass. Why is this? Under what circumstances does most of the light pass?
21. Explain what happens to the energy carried by light that it is dimmed by passing it through two crossed polarizing f ilters.
22. When particles scattering light are much smaller tha n its wavelength, the amount of scattering is proport ional to. Does
this mean there is more scattering for small than large? How does this relate to the fact that the sky is blue?
23. Using the information given in the preceding question, expl ain why sunsets are red.
24. When light is reflected at Brewster’s angle from a smo oth surface, it is polarized parallel to the surface. Part of the
light will be refracted into the surface. Describe how you would do an experiment to determine the polariza tion of the
refracted light. What direction would you expect the po larization to have and would you expect it to be?
25. If you lie on a beach looking at the water with your head tipped slightly sideways, your polarized sunglasse s do not work
very well. Why not?
Problems
1.1 The Propagation of Light
26. What is the speed of light in water? In glycerine?
27. What is the speed of light in air? In crown glass?
28. Calculate the index of refraction for a medium in which the speed of light is, and identify the most li kely
substance based on Table 1.1.
29. In what substance in Table 1.1 is the speed of light?
30. There was a major collision of an asteroid with the Moo n in medieval times. It was described by monks at Cante rbury
Cathedral in England as a red glow on and around the Moon. How long after the asteroid hit the Moon, which is
away, would the light first arrive on Earth?

10.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413031. Components of some computers communicate with each o ther through optical fibers having an index of refra ction
. What time in nanoseconds is required for a signal to trave l 0.200 m through such a fiber?
32. Compare the time it takes for light to travel 1000 m o n the surface of Earth and in outer space.
33. How far does light travel underwater during a time interval of?
1.2 The Law of Reflection
34. Suppose a man stands in front of a mirror as shown below. His eyes are 1.65 m above the floor and the top of his head is
0.13 m higher. Find the height above the floor of th e top and bottom of the smallest mirror in which he can see both the top
of his head and his feet. How is this distance related to th e man’s height?
The figure is a drawing of a man standing in front of a mirror and looking at his image. The mirror is about half
as tall as the man, with the top of the mirror above his eyes but belo w the top of his head. The light rays from
his feet reach the bottom of the mirror and reflect to his eye s. The rays from the top of his head reach the top of
the mirror and reflect to his eyes.
35. Show that when light reflects from two mirrors that me et each other at a right angle, the outgoing ray is parallel to the
incoming ray, as illustrated below.
Two mirrors meet each other at a right angle. An incoming ray of light hi ts one mirror at an angle of theta one
to the normal, is reflected at the same angle of theta one on the ot her side of the normal, then hits the other
mirror at an angle of theta two to the normal and reflects at the sa me angle of theta two on the other side of the
normal, such that the outgoing ray is parallel to the incoming ray.

10.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413036. On the Moon’s surface, lunar astronauts placed a corner reflector, off which a laser beam is periodically r eflected. The
distance to the Moon is calculated from the round-tr ip time. What percent correction is needed to accoun t for the delay in
time due to the slowing of light in Earth’s atmospher e? Assume the distance to the Moon is precisely and E arth’s
atmosphere (which varies in density with altitude) is equivalent to a layer 30.0 km thick with a constant index of refraction
37. A flat mirror is neither converging nor diverging. T o prove this, consider two rays originating from the same point and
diverging at an angle (see below). Show that after striking a plane mirror, the angle between their directions remains.
Light rays diverging from a point at an angle theta are incident on a mirror at two different places and their
reflected rays diverge. One ray hits at an angle theta one from the no rmal, and reflects at the same angle theta
one on the other side of the normal. The other ray hits at a larger angle theta two from the normal, and reflects
at the same angle theta two on the other side of the normal. When the r eflected rays are extended backwards
from their points of reflection, they meet at a point behind the mirro r, at the same angle theta with which they
left the source.
1.3 Refraction
Unless otherwise specified, for problems 1 through 10, th e indices of refraction of glass and water should be t aken to be 1.50 and
1.333, respectively.
38. A light beam in air has an angle of incidence of at the surface of a glass plate. What are the angles o f reflection and
refraction?
39. A light beam in air is incident on the surface of a pond, making an angle of 20° with respect to the sur face. What are
the angles of reflection and refraction?
40. When a light ray crosses from water into glass, it eme rges at an angle of with respect to the normal of the interface.
What is its angle of incidence?
41. A pencil flashlight submerged in water sends a light b eam toward the surface at an angle of incidence of. What is the
angle of refraction in air?
42. Light rays from the Sun make a angle to the vertica l when seen from below the surface of a body of water. At what
angle above the horizon is the Sun?
43. The path of a light beam in air goes from an angle of incidence of to an angle of refraction of when it enters a
rectangular block of plastic. What is the index of refra ction of the plastic?
44. A scuba diver training in a pool looks at his instruc tor as shown below. What angle does the ray from the instructor’s face
make with the perpendicular to the water at the point where the ray enters? The angle between the ray in t he water and the
perpendicular to the water is.

10.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84130
A scuba diver and his trainer look at each other. They see each other at the locations given by straight line
extrapolations of the rays reaching their eyes. To the trainer, the scuba diver appears less deep than he actually
is, and to the diver, the trainer appears higher than he actually is. To the tr ainer, the scuba diver's feet appear to
be at a depth of two point zero meters. The incident ray from the trai ner strikes the water surface at a
horizontal distance of two point zero meters from the trainer. The di ver’s head is a vertical distance of d equal
to two point zero meters below the surface of the water.
45. (a) Using information in the preceding problem, find t he height of the instructor’s head above the water, n oting that you
will first have to calculate the angle of incidence.
(b) Find the apparent depth of the diver’s head below water as seen by the instructor.
1.4 Total Internal Reflection
46. Verify that the critical angle for light going from water to air is, as discussed at the end of Example 1.4, regarding
the critical angle for light traveling in a polystyrene (a type of plastic) pipe surrounded by air.
47. (a) At the end of Example 1.4, it was stated that the criti cal angle for light going from diamond to air is. Verif y this.
(b) What is the critical angle for light going from zir con to air?
48. An optical fiber uses flint glass clad with crown glass. What is the critical angle?
49. At what minimum angle will you get total internal reflect ion of light traveling in water and reflected from ice?
50. Suppose you are using total internal reflection to mak e an efficient corner reflector. If there is air outsi de and the incident
angle is, what must be the minimum index of refraction of t he material from which the reflector is made?
51. You can determine the index of refraction of a substance by determining its critical angle.
(a) What is the index of refraction of a substance t hat has a critical angle of when submerged in water? What is
the substance, based on Table 1.1?
(b) What would the critical angle be for this substance in a ir?
52. A ray of light, emitted beneath the surface of an u nknown liquid with air above it, undergoes total inte rnal reflection as
shown below. What is the index of refraction for the liqui d and its likely identification?

10.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84130
A light ray travels from an object placed in a medium n 1 at 15.0 c entimeters below the horizontal interface
with medium n 2. This ray gets totally internally reflected with thet a c as critical angle. The horizontal distance
between the object and the point of incidence is 13.4 centimeters.
53. Light rays fall normally on the vertical surface of th e glass prism (shown below.
(a) What is the largest value for such that the ray is t otally reflected at the slanted face?
(b) Repeat the calculation of part (a) if the prism is imm ersed in water.
A right angle triangular prism has a horizontal base and a vertical s ide. The hypotenuse of the triangle makes
an angle of phi with the horizontal base. A horizontal light rays is inc ident normally on the vertical surface of
the prism.
1.5 Dispersion
54. (a) What is the ratio of the speed of red light to viole t light in diamond, based on Table 1.2?
(b) What is this ratio in polystyrene?
(c) Which is more dispersive?
55. A beam of white light goes from air into water at an i ncident angle of. At what angles are the red (660 nm) and
violet (410 nm) parts of the light refracted?
56. By how much do the critical angles for red (660 nm) and viol et (410 nm) light differ in a diamond surrounded by air?
57. (a) A narrow beam of light containing yellow (580 nm) and green (550 nm) wavelengths goes from polystyrene to air,
striking the surface at a incident angle. What is the a ngle between the colors when they emerge?
(b) How far would they have to travel to be separated by 1.00 mm?

10.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413058. A parallel beam of light containing orange (610 nm) and violet (410 nm) wavelengths goes from fused quar tz to water,
striking the surface between them at a incident angle. What is the angle between the two colors in water?
59. A ray of 610-nm light goes from air into fused quar tz at an incident angle of. At what incident angle m ust 470 nm
light enter flint glass to have the same angle of refra ction?
60. A narrow beam of light containing red (660 nm) and b lue (470 nm) wavelengths travels from air through a 1.00-cm-thick
flat piece of crown glass and back to air again. The beam strikes at a incident angle.
(a) At what angles do the two colors emerge?
(b) By what distance are the red and blue separated when th ey emerge?
61. A narrow beam of white light enters a prism made of cr own glass at a incident angle, as shown below. At what
angles, and, do the red (660 nm) and violet (410 nm) com ponents of the light emerge from the prism?
A blue incident light ray at an angle of incidence equal to 45 degrees to the normal falls on an equilateral
triangular prism whose corners are all at angles equal to 60 degrees. At the first surface, the ray refracts and
splits into red and violet rays. These rays hit the second surface and emerge from the prism. The red light with
660 nanometers bends less than the violet light with 410 nanometers.
1.7 Polarization
62. What angle is needed between the direction of polarized l ight and the axis of a polarizing filter to cut its inten sity in half?
63. The angle between the axes of two polarizing filters is. By how much does the second filter reduce the int ensity of
the light coming through the first?
64. Two polarizing sheets and are placed together with t heir transmission axes oriented at an angle to each other.
What is when only of the maximum transmitted light in tensity passes through them?
65. Suppose that in the preceding problem the light inc ident on is unpolarized. At the determined value of, what fraction
of the incident light passes through the combination?
66. If you have completely polarized light of intensity, what will its intensity be after passing through a p olarizing
filter with its axis at an angle to the light’s polarizat ion direction?
67. What angle would the axis of a polarizing filter nee d to make with the direction of polarized light of i ntensity
to reduce the intensity to?
68. At the end of Example 1.7, it was stated that the inte nsity of polarized light is reduced to of its origi nal value by
passing through a polarizing filter with its axis at an angle of to the direction of polarization. Verify t his statement.
69. Show that if you have three polarizing filters, with the second at an angle of to the first and the thi rd at an angle of
to the first, the intensity of light passed by the f irst will be reduced to of its value. (This is in co ntrast to having
only the first and third, which reduces the intensity to zero, so that placing the second between them inc reases the intensity of
the transmitted light.)
70. Three polarizing sheets are placed together such th at the transmission axis of the second sheet is orient ed at to the
axis of the first, whereas the transmission axis of the third sheet is oriented at (in the same sense) to the axis of the first.
What fraction of the intensity of an incident unpolariz ed beam is transmitted by the combination?

10.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413071. In order to rotate the polarization axis of a beam of linearly polarized light by, a student places shee ts and
with their transmission axes at and, respectively, to th e beam’s axis of polarization.
(a) What fraction of the incident light passes through and
(b) through the combination?
(c) Repeat your calculations for part (b) for transmission -axis angles of and, respectively.
72. It is found that when light traveling in water falls on a plastic block, Brewster’s angle is. What is the refractive
index of the plastic?
73. At what angle will light reflected from diamond be comple tely polarized?
74. What is Brewster’s angle for light traveling in water that is reflected from crown glass?
75. A scuba diver sees light reflected from the water’s surfac e. At what angle will this light be completely polarized?
Additional Problems
76. From his measurements, Roemer estimated that it took 22 min for light to travel a distance equal to the diameter of
Earth’s orbit around the Sun.
(a) Use this estimate along with the known diameter of Earth’s orbit to obtain a rough value of the speed of light.
(b) Light actually takes 16.5 min to travel this distance. Use this time to calculate the speed of light.
77. Cornu performed Fizeau’s measurement of the speed of light using a wheel of diameter 4.00 cm that contai ned 180 teeth.
The distance from the wheel to the mirror was 22.9 km. Assuming he measured the speed of light accurately, wh at was the
angular velocity of the wheel?
78. Suppose you have an unknown clear substance immersed in water, and you wish to identify it by finding its in dex of
refraction. You arrange to have a beam of light ent er it at an angle of, and you observe the angle of refraction to be
. What is the index of refraction of the substance and i ts likely identity?
79. Shown below is a ray of light going from air through crown glass into water, such as going into a fish tank. Calculate the
amount the ray is displaced by the glass, given that the i ncident angle is. and the glass is 1.00 cm thick.
The figure illustrates refraction occurring when light travels fro m medium to through an intermediate
medium. The incident ray makes an angle with a perpendicular drawn at the point of incidence at the
interface between and. The light ray entering bends towards the perpendicul ar line making an angle
with it on the side. The ray arrives at the interface between and at an angle of to a perpendicular
drawn at the point of incidence at this interface, and the transmitted ray be nds away from the perpendicular,
making an angle of theta three to the perpendicular on the side. A straig ht line extrapolation of the original

10.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84130incident ray is shown as a dotted line. This line is parallel to the refra cted ray in the third medium,, and is
shifted a distance delta x from the refracted ray. The extrapolated r ay is at the same angle theta three to the
perpendicular in medium as the refracted ray.
80. Considering the previous problem, show that is the s ame as it would be if the second medium were not present.
81. At what angle is light inside crown glass completely polarize d when reflected from water, as in a fish tank?
82. Light reflected at from a window is completely polar ized. What is the window’s index of refraction and the likely
substance of which it is made?
83. (a) Light reflected at from a gemstone in a ring is comp letely polarized. Can the gem be a diamond?
(b) At what angle would the light be completely polarized if the gem was in water?
84. If is Brewster’s angle for light reflected from the top of an interface between two substances, and is B rewster’s angle
for light reflected from below, prove that.
85. Unreasonable results Suppose light travels from water to another substance, with an angle of incidence of and an
angle of refraction of.
(a) What is the index of refraction of the other substanc e?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
86. Unreasonable results Light traveling from water to a gemstone strikes th e surface at an angle of and has an angle
of refraction of.
(a) What is the speed of light in the gemstone?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
87. If a polarizing filter reduces the intensity of pol arized light to of its original value, by how much a re the electric and
magnetic fields reduced?
88. Suppose you put on two pairs of polarizing sunglasses wi th their axes at an angle of. How much longer will it take
the light to deposit a given amount of energy in yo ur eye compared with a single pair of sunglasses? Assume the lenses are
clear except for their polarizing characteristics.
89. (a) On a day when the intensity of sunlight is, a ci rcular lens 0.200 m in diameter focuses light onto water in
a black beaker. Two polarizing sheets of plastic are p laced in front of the lens with their axes at an ang le of. Assuming
the sunlight is unpolarized and the polarizers are eff icient, what is the initial rate of heating of the wate r in,
assuming it is absorbed? The aluminum beaker has a ma ss of 30.0 grams and contains 250 grams of water.
(b) Do the polarizing filters get hot? Explain.
Challenge Problems
90. Light shows staged with lasers use moving mirrors to s wing beams and create colorful effects. Show that a li ght ray
reflected from a mirror changes direction by when the m irror is rotated by an angle.
91. Consider sunlight entering Earth’s atmosphere at su nrise and sunset—that is, at a. incident angle. Taking the
boundary between nearly empty space and the atmosphe re to be sudden, calculate the angle of refraction for sunlight. This
lengthens the time the Sun appears to be above the h orizon, both at sunrise and sunset. Now construct a probl em in which
you determine the angle of refraction for different models of the atmosphere, such as various layers of varying density. Your
instructor may wish to guide you on the level of com plexity to consider and on how the index of refractio n varies with air
density.

10.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413092. A light ray entering an optical fiber surrounded b y air is first refracted and then reflected as shown b elow. Show that if
the fiber is made from crown glass, any incident ray will be totally internally reflected.
The figure shows light traveling from and incident onto the left face of a rectangular block of material.
The ray is incident at an angle of incidence, measured relative to the no rmal to the surface where the ray
enters. The angle of refraction is, again, relative to the normal to the surface. The refracted ray falls onto the
upper face of the block and gets totally internally reflected with as the angle of incidence.
93. A light ray falls on the left face of a prism (see b elow) at the angle of incidence for which the emergi ng beam has an
angle of refraction at the right face. Show that the index of refraction n of the glass prism is given by
where is the vertex angle of the prism and is the ang le through which the beam has been deviated. If and t he
base angles of the prism are each, what is n?
A light ray falls on the left face of a triangular prism whose upper vert ex has an angle of phi and whose index of
refraction is n. The angle of incidence of the ray relative to the nor mal to the left face is theta. The ray refracts
in the prism. The refracted ray is horizontal, parallel to the base of the prism. The refracted ray reaches the
right face of the prism and refracts as it emerges out of the prism. The emerging ray makes an angle of theta
with the normal to the right face.
94. If the apex angle in the previous problem is and, wh at is the value of?
95. The light incident on polarizing sheet is linearly polarized at an angle of with respect to the trans mission axis of
. Sheet is placed so that its axis is parallel to the polarization axis of the incident light, that is, also at with respect
to.
(a) What fraction of the incident light passes through?
(b) What fraction of the incident light is passed by the combination?
(c) By rotating, a maximum in transmitted intensity is obtained. What is the ratio of this maximum intens ity to the
intensity of transmitted light when is at with respect to?
96. Prove that if I is the intensity of light transmitted by two polari zing filters with axes at an angle and is the inten sity
when the axes are at an angle, then, the original i ntensity. (Hint: Use the trigonometric identities
and.)
This page titled 10.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841301.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

1.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841291.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
2.1 Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
1. What are the differences between real and virtual i mages? How can you tell (by looking) whether an image formed by a
single lens or mirror is real or virtual?
2. Can you see a virtual image? Explain your response.
3. Can you photograph a virtual image?
4. Can you project a virtual image onto a screen?
5. Is it necessary to project a real image onto a screen to s ee it?
6. Devise an arrangement of mirrors allowing you to see the back of your head. What is the minimum number of mirrors
needed for this task?
7. If you wish to see your entire body in a flat mirror (from head to toe), how tall should the mirror be? Do es its size depend
upon your distance away from the mirror? Provide a sketch.
2.2 Spherical Mirrors
8. At what distance is an image always located: at, or?
9. Under what circumstances will an image be located at the foc al point of a spherical lens or mirror?
10. What is meant by a negative magnification? What is mean t by a magnification whose absolute value is less than on e?
11. Can an image be larger than the object even though its magnification is negative? Explain.
2.3 Images Formed by Refraction
12. Derive the formula for the apparent depth of a fish in a f ish tank using Snell’s law.
13. Use a ruler and a protractor to find the image by r efraction in the following cases. Assume an air-glass interface. Use a
refractive index of 1 for air and of 1.5 for glass. (Hint: Us e Snell’s law at the interface.)
(a) A point object located on the axis of a concave in terface located at a point within the focal length from t he vertex.
(b) A point object located on the axis of a concave interface located at a point farther than the focal length from the
vertex.
(c) A point object located on the axis of a convex inte rface located at a point within the focal length from th e vertex.
(d) A point object located on the axis of a convex interface located at a point farther than the focal length from the
vertex.
(e) Repeat (a)–(d) for a point object off the axis.
2.4 Thin Lenses
14. You can argue that a flat piece of glass, such as in a window, is like a lens with an infinite focal leng th. If so, where does
it form an image? That is, how are and related?
15. When you focus a camera, you adjust the distance of the lens from the film. If the camera lens acts like a thin lens, why
can it not be a fixed distance from the film for both near and distant objects?
16. A thin lens has two focal points, one on either side of the lens at equal distances from its center, and sh ould behave the
same for light entering from either side. Look backwa rd and forward through a pair of eyeglasses and comme nt on whether
they are thin lenses.
17. Will the focal length of a lens change when it is submerged in water? Explain.

1.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841292.5 The Eye
18. If the lens of a person’s eye is removed because of cataracts (as has been done since ancient times), wh y would you
expect an eyeglass lens of about 16 D to be prescribed?
19. When laser light is shone into a relaxed normal-visio n eye to repair a tear by spot-welding the retina to the back of the
eye, the rays entering the eye must be parallel. Why?
20. Why is your vision so blurry when you open your eyes while swimming under water? How does a face mask enable c lear
vision?
21. It has become common to replace the cataract-cloud ed lens of the eye with an internal lens. This intraoc ular lens can be
chosen so that the person has perfect distant vision. Will the person be able to read without glasses? If t he person was
nearsighted, is the power of the intraocular lens greater or less than the removed lens?
22. If the cornea is to be reshaped (this can be done surgically or with contact lenses) to correct myopia, sho uld its curvature
be made greater or smaller? Explain.
2.8 Microscopes and Telescopes
23. Geometric optics describes the interaction of light wi th macroscopic objects. Why, then, is it correct to use geometric
optics to analyze a microscope’s image?
24. The image produced by the microscope in Figure 2.38 cannot be projected. Could extra lenses or mirrors project it?
Explain.
25. If you want your microscope or telescope to project a real image onto a screen, how would you change the pl acement of
the eyepiece relative to the objective?
Problems
2.1 Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
26. Consider a pair of flat mirrors that are positioned s o that they form an angle of 120°. An object is place d on the bisector
between the mirrors. Construct a ray diagram as in Figure 2.4 to show how many images are formed.
27. Consider a pair of flat mirrors that are positioned so that they form an angle of 60°. An object is placed on the bisector
between the mirrors. Construct a ray diagram as in Figure 2.4 to show how many images are formed.
28. By using more than one flat mirror, construct a ray dia gram showing how to create an inverted image.
2.2 Spherical Mirrors
29. The following figure shows a light bulb between two sph erical mirrors. One mirror produces a beam of light with parallel
rays; the other keeps light from escaping without be ing put into the beam. Where is the filament of the light in relation to the
focal point or radius of curvature of each mirror?

1.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84129A light bulb is shown in the centre, with a small concave mirror to its left and a bigger one to its right. The light
rays originating from the bulb that hit the smaller mirror are refl ected back to the bulb. Light rays from the
bulb that hit the bigger mirror are reflected. These reflected ray s are parallel and travel towards the left.
30. Why are diverging mirrors often used for rearview mir rors in vehicles? What is the main disadvantage of u sing such a
mirror compared with a flat one?
31. Some telephoto cameras use a mirror rather than a le ns. What radius of curvature mirror is needed to rep lace a 800 mmfocal length telephoto lens?
32. Calculate the focal length of a mirror formed by the shiny back of a spoon that has a 3.00 cm radius of curvatu re.
33. Electric room heaters use a concave mirror to refle ct infrared (IR) radiation from hot coils. Note that I R radiation follows
the same law of reflection as visible light. Given tha t the mirror has a radius of curvature of 50.0 cm a nd produces an image
of the coils 3.00 m away from the mirror, where are the coils?
34. Find the magnification of the heater element in the previous problem. Note that its large magnitude helps spread out the
reflected energy.
35. What is the focal length of a makeup mirror that p roduces a magnification of 1.50 when a person’s face is 12.0 cm away?
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Example 2.2.
36. A shopper standing 3.00 m from a convex security mirror sees his image with a magnification of 0.250.
(a) Where is his image?
(b) What is the focal length of the mirror?
(c) What is its radius of curvature?
37. An object 1.50 cm high is held 3.00 cm from a person’s corne a, and its reflected image is measured to be 0.167 cm high.
(a) What is the magnification?
(b) Where is the image?
(c) Find the radius of curvature of the convex mirror formed by the cornea. (Note that this technique is u sed by
optometrists to measure the curvature of the cornea fo r contact lens fitting. The instrument used is calle d a keratometer,
or curve measurer.)
38. Ray tracing for a flat mirror shows that the image is located a distance behind the mirror equal to the distance of the
object from the mirror. This is stated as, since t his is a negative image distance (it is a virtual i mage). What is the
focal length of a flat mirror?
39. Show that, for a flat mirror,, given that the image is the same distance behind the mirror as the distan ce of the
object from the mirror.
40. Use the law of reflection to prove that the focal le ngth of a mirror is half its radius of curvature. Th at is, prove that
. Note this is true for a spherical mirror only if its diameter is small compared with its radius of curvature.
41. Referring to the electric room heater considered i n problem 5, calculate the intensity of IR radiatio n in projected
by the concave mirror on a person 3.00 m away. Assume that the heating element radiates 1500 W and has an area of,
and that half of the radiated power is reflected and foc used by the mirror.
42. Two mirrors are inclined at an angle of 60° and an o bject is placed at a point that is equidistant from the two mirrors. Use
a protractor to draw rays accurately and locate all images. You may have to draw several figures so that t hat rays for different
images do not clutter your drawing.
43. Two parallel mirrors are facing each other and are separated by a distance of 3 cm. A point object is pla ced between the
mirrors 1 cm from one of the mirrors. Find the coordinates of a ll the images.

1.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841292.3 Images Formed by Refraction
44. An object is located in air 30 cm from the vertex of a concave surface made of glass with a radius of curva ture 10 cm.
Where does the image by refraction form and what is its mag nification? Use and.
45. An object is located in air 30 cm from the vertex of a convex surface made of glass with a radius of curva ture 80 cm.
Where does the image by refraction form and what is its mag nification?
46. An object is located in water 15 cm from the vertex o f a concave surface made of glass with a radius of cu rvature 10 cm.
Where does the image by refraction form and what is its mag nification? Use and.
47. An object is located in water 30 cm from the vertex of a convex surface made of Plexiglas with a radius of c urvature of
80 cm. Where does the image form by refraction and what is its magnification? and.
48. An object is located in air 5 cm from the vertex of a concave surface made of glass with a radius of curv ature 20 cm.
Where does the image form by refraction and what is its ma gnification? Use and.
49. Derive the spherical interface equation for refracti on at a concave surface. (Hint: Follow the derivation in the text for the
convex surface.)
2.4 Thin Lenses
50. How far from the lens must the film in a camera be, i f the lens has a 35.0-mm focal length and is being u sed to
photograph a flower 75.0 cm away? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Figure 2.27.
51. A certain slide projector has a 100 mm-focal length len s.
(a) How far away is the screen if a slide is placed 103 mm fro m the lens and produces a sharp image?
(b) If the slide is 24.0 by 36.0 mm, what are the dimensi ons of the image? Explicitly show how you follow the st eps in
the Figure 2.27.
52. A doctor examines a mole with a 15.0-cm focal length mag nifying glass held 13.5 cm from the mole.
(a) Where is the image?
(b) What is its magnification?
(c) How big is the image of a 5.00 mm diameter mole?
53. A camera with a 50.0-mm focal length lens is being used to photograph a person standing 3.00 m away.
(a) How far from the lens must the film be?
(b) If the film is 36.0 mm high, what fraction of a 1.75-m- tall person will fit on it?
(c) Discuss how reasonable this seems, based on your experience i n taking or posing for photographs.
54. A camera lens used for taking close-up photographs has a focal length of 22.0 mm. The farthest it can be placed from the
film is 33.0 mm.
(a) What is the closest object that can be photographed?
(b) What is the magnification of this closest object?
55. Suppose your 50.0 mm-focal length camera lens is 51.0 mm away from the film in the camera.
(a) How far away is an object that is in focus?
(b) What is the height of the object if its image is 2.00 c m high?
56. What is the focal length of a magnifying glass that p roduces a magnification of 3.00 when held 5.00 cm fro m an object,
such as a rare coin?
57. The magnification of a book held 7.50 cm from a 10.0 cm-fo cal length lens is 4.00.
(a) Find the magnification for the book when it is held 8.50 cm from the magnifier.

1.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84129(b) Repeat for the book held 9.50 cm from the magnifier.
(c) Comment on how magnification changes as the object dist ance increases as in these two calculations.
58. Suppose a 200 mm-focal length telephoto lens is being used to photograph mountains 10.0 km away.
(a) Where is the image?
(b) What is the height of the image of a 1000 m high clif f on one of the mountains?
59. A camera with a 100 mm-focal length lens is used to p hotograph the sun. What is the height of the image of the sun on
the film, given the sun is in diameter and is away?
60. Use the thin-lens equation to show that the magnificati on for a thin lens is determined by its focal length and the object
distance and is given by.
61. An object of height 3.0 cm is placed 5.0 cm in front of a converging lens of focal length 20 cm and obs erved from the
other side. Where and how large is the image?
62. An object of height 3.0 cm is placed at 5.0 cm in fron t of a diverging lens of focal length 20 cm and obs erved from the
other side. Where and how large is the image?
63. An object of height 3.0 cm is placed at 25 cm in fron t of a diverging lens of focal length 20 cm. Behind the diverging
lens, there is a converging lens of focal length 20 cm. The distance between the lenses is 5.0 cm. Find the lo cation and size of
the final image.
64. Two convex lenses of focal lengths 20 cm and 10 cm ar e placed 30 cm apart, with the lens with the longer fo cal length on
the right. An object of height 2.0 cm is placed midway between them and observed through each lens from the left and from
the right. Describe what you will see, such as where the image(s) will appear, whether they will be upright or i nverted and
their magnifications.
2.5 The Eye
Unless otherwise stated, the lens-to-retina distance is 2.00 cm.
65. What is the power of the eye when viewing an object 50.0 c m away?
66. Calculate the power of the eye when viewing an object 3.00 m away.
67. The print in many books averages 3.50 mm in height. Ho w high is the image of the print on the retina when the book is
held 30.0 cm from the eye?
68. Suppose a certain person’s visual acuity is such that he can see objects clearly that form an image high on his
retina. What is the maximum distance at which he can read th e 75.0-cm-high letters on the side of an airplane?
69. People who do very detailed work close up, such as jewe lers, often can see objects clearly at much closer dist ance than
the normal 25 cm.
(a) What is the power of the eyes of a woman who can see an obje ct clearly at a distance of only 8.00 cm?
(b) What is the image size of a 1.00-mm object, such as lett ering inside a ring, held at this distance?
(c) What would the size of the image be if the object were he ld at the normal 25.0 cm distance?
70. What is the far point of a person whose eyes have a rel axed power of 50.5 D?
71. What is the near point of a person whose eyes have an accom modated power of 53.5 D?
72. (a) A laser reshaping the cornea of a myopic patien t reduces the power of his eye by 9.00 D, with a uncert ainty in
the final correction. What is the range of diopters for ey eglass lenses that this person might need after this proce dure?
(b) Was the person nearsighted or farsighted before t he procedure? How do you know?
73. The power for normal close vision is 54.0 D. In a vision-cor rection procedure, the power of a patient’s eye is incr eased by
3.00 D. Assuming that this produces normal close vision, wh at was the patient’s near point before the procedure?

1.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8412974. For normal distant vision, the eye has a power of 50.0 D. What was the previous far point of a patient who ha d laser
vision correction that reduced the power of her eye by 7.00 D, producing normal distant vision?
75. The power for normal distant vision is 50.0 D. A sever ely myopic patient has a far point of 5.00 cm. By how many
diopters should the power of his eye be reduced in laser visi on correction to obtain normal distant vision for him?
76. A student’s eyes, while reading the blackboard, have a power of 51.0 D. How far is the board from his eyes?
77. The power of a physician’s eyes is 53.0 D while examini ng a patient. How far from her eyes is the object that is being
examined?
78. The normal power for distant vision is 50.0 D. A young woman with normal distant vision has a 10.0% ability to
accommodate (that is, increase) the power of her eyes. What is the closest object she can see clearly?
79. The far point of a myopic administrator is 50.0 cm.
(a) What is the relaxed power of his eyes?
(b) If he has the normal 8.00% ability to accommodate, wh at is the closest object he can see clearly?
80. A very myopic man has a far point of 20.0 cm. What power co ntact lens (when on the eye) will correct his distant visio n?
81. Repeat the previous problem for eyeglasses held 1.50 cm f rom the eyes.
82. A myopic person sees that her contact lens prescription is –4.00 D. What is her far point?
83. Repeat the previous problem for glasses that are 1.75 cm fro m the eyes.
84. The contact lens prescription for a mildly farsight ed person is 0.750 D, and the person has a near point of 29.0 cm. What
is the power of the tear layer between the cornea and the le ns if the correction is ideal, taking the tear layer in to account?
2.7 The Simple Magnifier
85. If the image formed on the retina subtends an angle of and the object subtends an angle of, what is th e
magnification of the image?
86. What is the magnification of a magnifying lens with a focal length of 10 cm if it is held 3.0 cm from th e eye and the
object is 12 cm from the eye?
87. How far should you hold a 2.1 cm-focal length magnify ing glass from an object to obtain a magnification o f?
Assume you place your eye 5.0 cm from the magnifying glass.
88. You hold a 5.0 cm-focal length magnifying glass as c lose as possible to your eye. If you have a normal nea r point, what is
the magnification?
89. You view a mountain with a magnifying glass of focal length. What is the magnification?
90. You view an object by holding a 2.5 cm-focal length m agnifying glass 10 cm away from it. How far from your e ye
should you hold the magnifying glass to obtain a magnifica tion of?
91. A magnifying glass forms an image 10 cm on the oppos ite side of the lens from the object, which is 10 cm away. What is
the magnification of this lens for a person with a normal ne ar point if their eye 12 cm from the object?
92. An object viewed with the naked eye subtends a angle. If you view the object through a magnifying glass, wha t
angle is subtended by the image formed on your retina?
93. For a normal, relaxed eye, a magnifying glass produce s an angular magnification of 4.0. What is the larges t magnification
possible with this magnifying glass?
94. What range of magnification is possible with a 7.0 cm-f ocal length converging lens?
95. A magnifying glass produces an angular magnificatio n of 4.5 when used by a young person with a near point of 18 cm.
What is the maximum angular magnification obtained by an older person with a near point of 45 cm?

1.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841292.8 Microscopes and Telescopes
96. A microscope with an overall magnification of 800 has an objective that magnifies by 200.
(a) What is the angular magnification of the eyepiece?
(b) If there are two other objectives that can be use d, having magnifications of 100 and 400, what other to tal
magnifications are possible?
97. (a) What magnification is produced by a 0.150 cm-foca l length microscope objective that is 0.155 cm from the object
being viewed?
(b) What is the overall magnification if an eyepiece (o ne that produces an angular magnification of 8.00) is u sed?
98. Where does an object need to be placed relative to a microscope for its 0.50 cm-focal length objective to produce a
magnification of −400?
99. An amoeba is 0.305 cm away from the 0.300 cm-focal lengt h objective lens of a microscope.
(a) Where is the image formed by the objective lens?
(b) What is this image’s magnification?
(c) An eyepiece with a 2.00-cm focal length is placed 20.0 cm from the objective. Where is the final image?
(d) What angular magnification is produced by the eyep iece?
(e) What is the overall magnification? (See Figure 2.39.)
100. Unreasonable Results Your friends show you an image through a microscope. They tell you that the microscope has an
objective with a 0.500-cm focal length and an eyepiec e with a 5.00-cm focal length. The resulting overall magnification is
250,000. Are these viable values for a microscope?
Unless otherwise stated, the lens-to-retina distance is 2.00 cm.
101. What is the angular magnification of a telescope th at has a 100 cm-focal length objective and a 2.50 cm -focal length
eyepiece?
102. Find the distance between the objective and eyepiece lenses in the telescope in the above problem needed to produce a
final image very far from the observer, where vision i s most relaxed. Note that a telescope is normally used to view very
distant objects.
103. A large reflecting telescope has an objective mirr or with a 10.0-m radius of curvature. What angular mag nification does
it produce when a 3.00 m-focal length eyepiece is used?
104. A small telescope has a concave mirror with a 2.00-m r adius of curvature for its objective. Its eyepiece i s a 4.00 cmfocal length lens.
(a) What is the telescope’s angular magnification?
(b) What angle is subtended by a 25,000 km-diameter sunsp ot?
(c) What is the angle of its telescopic image?
105. A 7.5×7.5× binocular produces an angular magnifica tion of −7.50, acting like a telescope. (Mirrors are us ed to make the
image upright.) If the binoculars have objective lens es with a 75.0-cm focal length, what is the focal lengt h of the eyepiece
lenses?
106. Construct Your Own Problem Consider a telescope of the type used by Galileo, hav ing a convex objective and a
concave eyepiece as illustrated in part (a) of Figure 2.40. Construct a problem in which you calculate the location and size of
the image produced. Among the things to be considere d are the focal lengths of the lenses and their rela tive placements as
well as the size and location of the object. Verify th at the angular magnification is greater than one. T hat is, the angle
subtended at the eye by the image is greater than the ang le subtended by the object.

1.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84129107. Trace rays to find which way the given ray will emerge after refraction through the thin lens in the followi ng figure.
Assume thin-lens approximation. (Hint: Pick a point P on the given ray in each case. Treat t hat point as an object. Now, find
its image Q. Use the rule: All rays on the other side of the lens will either go through Q or appear to be coming from Q.)
Figure a shows a ray not parallel to the optical axis st riking a bi-convex lens. Figure a shows a ray not para llel to the optical axis
striking a bi-concave lens.
108. Copy and draw rays to find the final image in the fol lowing diagram. (Hint: Find the intermediate image thr ough lens
alone. Use the intermediate image as the object for the m irror and work with the mirror alone to find the final imag e.)
Figure shows from left to right: an object with base O on the optical axis and tip P, a bi-convex lens and a concave mirror with
center of curvature C. The focal point of the bi-co nvex on the object side is labeled F subscript 1 and tha t on the mirror side is
labeled F subscript 2.
109. A concave mirror of radius of curvature 10 cm is pl aced 30 cm from a thin convex lens of focal length 1 5 cm. Find the
location and magnification of a small bulb sitting 50 c m from the lens by using the algebraic method.
110. An object of height 3 cm is placed at 25 cm in front of a converging lens of focal length 20 cm. Behind the lens there is
a concave mirror of focal length 20 cm. The distance between the lens and the mirror is 5 cm. Find the loca tion, orientation
and size of the final image.
111. An object of height 3 cm is placed at a distance of 2 5 cm in front of a converging lens of focal length 2 0 cm, to be
referred to as the first lens. Behind the lens there is another converging lens of focal length 20 cm pl aced 10 cm from the first
lens. There is a concave mirror of focal length 15 cm placed 50 cm from the second lens. Find the location, orientation, and
size of the final image.
112. An object of height 2 cm is placed at 50 cm in front of a diverging lens of focal length 40 cm. Behind the lens, there is a
convex mirror of focal length 15 cm placed 30 cm fr om the converging lens. Find the location, orientatio n, and size of the
final image.
113. Two concave mirrors are placed facing each other. One of them has a small hole in the middle. A penny is p laced on the
bottom mirror (see the following figure). When you l ook from the side, a real image of the penny is obse rved above the hole.
Explain how that could happen.

1.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84129
Figure shows the side view of two concave mirrors placed one on top of the other, facing each other. The to p one has a small hole
in the middle. A penny is placed on the bottom mirro r. An image of the penny is shown above the top mirro r, just above the hole.
114. A lamp of height 5 cm is placed 40 cm in front of a converging lens of focal length 20 cm. There is a pl ane mirror 15 cm
behind the lens. Where would you find the image when yo u look in the mirror?
115. Parallel rays from a faraway source strike a converging l ens of focal length 20 cm at an angle of 15 degrees with the
horizontal direction. Find the vertical position of the real image observed on a screen in the focal plane.
116. Parallel rays from a faraway source strike a divergi ng lens of focal length 20 cm at an angle of 10 deg rees with the
horizontal direction. As you look through the lens, wher e in the vertical plane the image would appear?
117. A light bulb is placed 10 cm from a plane mirror, wh ich faces a convex mirror of radius of curvature 8 c m. The plane
mirror is located at a distance of 30 cm from the ve rtex of the convex mirror. Find the location of two im ages in the convex
mirror. Are there other images? If so, where are they loca ted?
118. A point source of light is 50 cm in front of a conv erging lens of focal length 30 cm. A concave mirror with a focal length
of 20 cm is placed 25 cm behind the lens. Where does the fi nal image form, and what are its orientation and magnificat ion?
119. Copy and trace to find how a horizontal ray from S comes out after the lens. Use for the prism material.
Figure shows two prisms with their bases parallel to each other at an angle of 45 degrees to the horizontal. T o the right of this is a
bi-convex lens. A ray along the optical axis enters th is set up from the left.
120. Copy and trace how a horizontal ray from S comes out afte r the lens. Use for the glass.
Figure shows the cross section of a hemisphere to the left and that of a bi-convex lens to the right. A ray al ong the optical axis
enters this setup from the left.
121. Copy and draw rays to figure out the final image.
Figure shows from left to right: an object with base O on the axis and tip P. A bi-concave lens with focal p oint and on the left
and right respectively and a concave mirror with cen tre of curvature C.
122. By ray tracing or by calculation, find the place in side the glass where rays from S converge as a result of refraction
through the lens and the convex air-glass interface. Use a ru ler to estimate the radius of curvature.

1.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84129
Figure shows a bi-convex lens on the left and a glass wit h a convex surface on the right. The lens has focal po ints F on both sides.
The center of curvature of convex glass is C and its ra dius of curvature is R. Point S is between the lens and its focal point on the
left.
123. A diverging lens has a focal length of 20 cm. What is the power of the lens in diopters?
124. Two lenses of focal lengths of and are glued together with transparent material of negligible thic kness. Show that
the total power of the two lenses simply add.
125. What will be the angular magnification of a convex lens wi th the focal length 2.5 cm?
126. What will be the formula for the angular magnificat ion of a convex lens of focal length f if the eye i s very close to the
lens and the near point is located a distance D from the eye?
Additional Problems
127. Use a ruler and a protractor to draw rays to find images in t he following cases.
(a) A point object located on the axis of a concave mi rror located at a point within the focal length from the ve rtex.
(b) A point object located on the axis of a concave mirror located at a point farther than the focal l ength from the
vertex.
(c) A point object located on the axis of a convex mirr or located at a point within the focal length from the ve rtex.
(d) A point object located on the axis of a convex mirror located at a point farther than the focal length from the v ertex.
(e) Repeat (a)–(d) for a point object off the axis.
128. Where should a 3 cm tall object be placed in front of a concave mirror of radius 20 cm so that its image is real and 2 cm
tall?
129. A 3 cm tall object is placed 5 cm in front of a con vex mirror of radius of curvature 20 cm. Where is t he image formed?
How tall is the image? What is the orientation of the imag e?
130. You are looking for a mirror so that you can see a four-fold magnified virtual image of an object when the object is
placed 5 cm from the vertex of the mirror. What kin d of mirror you will need? What should be the radius of curvature of the
mirror?
131. Derive the following equation for a convex mirror:, where VO is the distance to the object O from
vertex V, VI the distance to the image I from V, and VF is the distance to the focal point F from V. (Hint: use two sets of
similar triangles.)
132. (a) Draw rays to form the image of a vertical object on the optical axis and farther than the focal poi nt from a
converging lens.
(b) Use plane geometry in your figure and prove that the m agnification m is given by.
133. Use another ray-tracing diagram for the same situation as given in the previous problem to derive the thi n-lens equation,
134. You photograph a 2.0-m-tall person with a camera tha t has a 5.0 cm-focal length lens. The image on the fil m must be no
more than 2.0 cm high.
(a) What is the closest distance the person can stand t o the lens?
(b) For this distance, what should be the distance from the lens to the film?

1.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84129135. Find the focal length of a thin plano-convex lens. The front surface of this lens is flat, and the rear surface has a radius
of curvature of. Assume that the index of refraction of the lens is 1.5.
136. Find the focal length of a meniscus lens with and. As sume that the index of refraction of the lens
is 1.5.
137. A nearsighted man cannot see objects clearly beyond 20 cm from his eyes. How close must he stand to a mirro r in order
to see what he is doing when he shaves?
138. A mother sees that her child’s contact lens prescription is 0.750 D. What is the child’s near point?
139. Repeat the previous problem for glasses that are 2.20 c m from the eyes.
140. The contact-lens prescription for a nearsighted per son is −4.00 D and the person has a far point of 22.5 cm. What is the
power of the tear layer between the cornea and the lens if t he correction is ideal, taking the tear layer into accoun t?
141. Unreasonable Results A boy has a near point of 50 cm and a far point of 500 cm. Will a −4.00 D lens correct his far
point to infinity?
142. Find the angular magnification of an image by a magn ifying glass of if the object is placed from
the lens and the lens is close to the eye.
143. Let objective and eyepiece of a compound microscope have focal lengths of 2.5 cm and 10 cm, respectivel y and be
separated by 12 cm. A object is placed 6.0 cm from the objective. How large is the virtual image formed b y the
objective-eyepiece system?
144. Draw rays to scale to locate the image at the retina if the eye lens has a focal length 2.5 cm and the nea r point is 24 cm.
(Hint: Place an object at the near point.)
145. The objective and the eyepiece of a microscope have the focal lengths 3 cm and 10 cm respectively. Decide about the
distance between the objective and the eyepiece if we need a magnification from the objective/eyepiece compound
system.
146. A far-sighted person has a near point of 100 cm. How f ar in front or behind the retina does the image of an object placed
25 cm from the eye form? Use the cornea to retina distance o f 2.5 cm.
147. A near-sighted person has afar point of 80 cm.
(a) What kind of corrective lens the person will need i f the lens is to be placed 1.5 cm from the eye?
(b) What would be the power of the contact lens needed? Ass ume distance to contact lens from the eye to be zero.
148. In a reflecting telescope the objective is a concav e mirror of radius of curvature 2 m and an eyepiece is a convex lens of
focal length 5 cm. Find the apparent size of a 25-m t ree at a distance of 10 km that you would perceive wh en looking through
the telescope.
149. Two stars that are apart are viewed by a telescope a nd found to be separated by an angle of radians. If the
eyepiece of the telescope has a focal length of 1.5 c m and the objective has a focal length of 3 meters, ho w far away are the
stars from the observer?
150. What is the angular size of the Moon if viewed from a binocular that has a focal length of 1.2 cm for the eyepiece and a
focal length of 8 cm for the objective? Use the radi us of the moon and the distance of the moon from the
observer to be.
151. An unknown planet at a distance of from Earth is obse rved by a telescope that has a focal length of the ey epiece
of 1 cm and a focal length of the objective of 1 m. If the far away planet is seen to subtend an angle o f radian at the
eyepiece, what is the size of the planet?
This page titled 1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

1.E.12 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84129

10.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413210.S: The Nature of Light (Summary)

10.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84132Key Terms
birefringentrefers to crystals that split an unpolarized beam of li ght into two
beams
Brewster’s angleangle of incidence at which the reflected light is co mpletely
polarized
Brewster’s law, where is the medium in which the incident and
reflected light travel and is the index of refracti on of the
medium that forms the interface that reflects the lig ht
corner reflectorobject consisting of two (or three) mutually perpendi cular
reflecting surfaces, so that the light that enters is re flected back
exactly parallel to the direction from which it came
critical angle incident angle that produces an angle of refraction of 90°
direction of polarization direction parallel to the electric field for EM wav es
dispersion spreading of light into its spectrum of wavelengths
geometric optics part of optics dealing with the ray aspect of light
horizontally polarized oscillations are in a horizontal plane
Huygens’s principleevery point on a wave front is a source of wavelets th at spread out
in the forward direction at the same speed as the wave itself; the
new wave front is a plane tangent to all of the wavel ets
index of refractionfor a material, the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to that in
a material
law of reflection angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence
law of refractionwhen a light ray crosses from one medium to another, i t changes
direction by an amount that depends on the index of refraction of
each medium and the sines of the angle of incidence a nd angle of
refraction
Malus’s lawwhere is the intensity of the polarized wave before p assing
through the filter
optically activesubstances that rotate the plane of polarization of li ght passing
through them
polarizationattribute that wave oscillations have a definite dire ction relative to
the direction of propagation of the wave
polarizedrefers to waves having the electric and magnetic fiel d oscillations
in a definite direction
ray straight line that originates at some point
refractionchanging of a light ray’s direction when it passes thro ugh
variations in matter
total internal reflectionphenomenon at the boundary between two media such th at all the
light is reflected and no refraction occurs
unpolarized refers to waves that are randomly polarized
vertically polarized oscillations are in a vertical plane

10.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84132wave optics part of optics dealing with the wave aspect of light
Key Equations
Speed of light
Index of refraction
Law of reflection
Law of refraction (Snell’s law)
Critical angle for
Malus’s law
Brewster’s law
Summary
1.1: The Propagation of Light
The speed of light in a vacuum is.
The index of refraction of a material is, where v is the s peed of light in a material and c is the speed of light in a
vacuum.
The ray model of light describes the path of light as stra ight lines. The part of optics dealing with the ray aspe ct of light is called
geometric optics.
Light can travel in three ways from a source to another lo cation: (1) directly from the source through empty space; (2) through
various media; and (3) after being reflected from a mirro r.
1.2: The Law of Reflection
When a light ray strikes a smooth surface, the angle o f reflection equals the angle of incidence.
A mirror has a smooth surface and reflects light at specific angles.
Light is diffused when it reflects from a rough surface.
1.3: Refraction
The change of a light ray’s direction when it passes thr ough variations in matter is called refraction.
The law of refraction, also called Snell’s law, relates th e indices of refraction for two media at an interface to the change in
angle of a light ray passing through that interface.
1.4: Total Internal Reflection
The incident angle that produces an angle of refractio n of 90° is called the critical angle.
Total internal reflection is a phenomenon that occurs at the boundary between two media, such that if the incide nt angle in the
first medium is greater than the critical angle, then all the light is reflected back into that medium.
Fiber optics involves the transmission of light down fiber s of plastic or glass, applying the principle of total in ternal reflection.
Cladding prevents light from being transmitted between f ibers in a bundle.
Diamonds sparkle due to total internal reflection coupled wi th a large index of refraction.
1.5: Dispersion
The spreading of white light into its full spectrum of wavel engths is called dispersion.
Rainbows are produced by a combination of refraction and r eflection, and involve the dispersion of sunlight into a continuous
distribution of colors.
Dispersion produces beautiful rainbows but also causes pro blems in certain optical systems.

10.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841321.6: Huygens’s Principle
According to Huygens’s principle, every point on a wave fro nt is a source of wavelets that spread out in the forward dir ection at
the same speed as the wave itself. The new wave front is tange nt to all of the wavelets.
A mirror reflects an incoming wave at an angle equal to the incident angle, verifying the law of reflection.
The law of refraction can be explained by applying Huygen s’s principle to a wave front passing from one medium to a nother.
The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle is called diffraction.
1.7: Polarization
Polarization is the attribute that wave oscillations hav e a definite direction relative to the direction of propag ation of the wave.
The direction of polarization is defined to be the direct ion parallel to the electric field of the EM wave.
Unpolarized light is composed of many rays having random pol arization directions.
Unpolarized light can be polarized by passing it through a po larizing filter or other polarizing material. The proces s of
polarizing light decreases its intensity by a factor o f 2.
The intensity, I, of polarized light after passing through a polarizin g filter is, where is the incident intensity and
is the angle between the direction of polarization and the axis of the filter.
Polarization is also produced by reflection.
Brewster’s law states that reflected light is completely pol arized at the angle of reflection, known as Brewster’s ang le.
Polarization can also be produced by scattering.
Several types of optically active substances rotate the direc tion of polarization of light passing through them.
This page titled 10.S: The Nature of Light (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.S: The Nature of Light (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

1.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841311.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary)

1.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84131Key Terms
aberrationdistortion in an image caused by departures from the sm all-angle
approximation
accommodationuse of the ciliary muscles to adjust the shape of the ey e lens for
focusing on near or far objects
angular magnificationratio of the angle subtended by an object observed wit h a
magnifier to that observed by the naked eye
apparent depthdepth at which an object is perceived to be located with respect to
an interface between two media
Cassegrain designarrangement of an objective and eyepiece such that t he lightgathering concave mirror has a hole in the middle, a nd light then is
incident on an eyepiece lens
charge-coupled device (CCD)semiconductor chip that converts a light image into t iny pixels that
can be converted into electronic signals of color and intensity
comasimilar to spherical aberration, but arises when the in coming rays
are not parallel to the optical axis
compound microscopemicroscope constructed from two convex lenses, the first serving
as the eyepiece and the second serving as the objective lens
concave mirrorspherical mirror with its reflecting surface on the in ner side of the
sphere; the mirror forms a “cave”
converging (or convex) lenslens in which light rays that enter it parallel conver ge into a single
point on the opposite side
convex mirrorspherical mirror with its reflecting surface on the ou ter side of the
sphere
curved mirrormirror formed by a curved surface, such as spherical, e lliptical, or
parabolic
diverging (or concave) lens lens that causes light rays to bend away from its optical axis
eyepiecelens or combination of lenses in an optical instrument nearest to
the eye of the observer
far point furthest point an eye can see in focus
farsightedness (or hyperopia)visual defect in which near objects appear blurred bec ause their
images are focused behind the retina rather than on t he retina; a
farsighted person can see far objects clearly but near objects
appear blurred
first focus or object focusobject located at this point will result in an image c reated at
infinity on the opposite side of a spherical interface between two
media
focal lengthdistance along the optical axis from the focal point to the optical
element that focuses the light rays
focal planeplane that contains the focal point and is perpendicu lar to the
optical axis
focal point for a converging lens or mirror, the point at which c onverging light
rays cross; for a diverging lens or mirror, the point f rom which

1.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84131diverging light rays appear to originate
image distancedistance of the image from the central axis of the op tical element
that produces the image
linear magnification ratio of image height to object height
magnification ratio of image size to object size
near point closest point an eye can see in focus
nearsightedness (or myopia)visual defect in which far objects appear blurred beca use their
images are focused in front of the retina rather than on the retina; a
nearsighted person can see near objects clearly but far objects
appear blurred
net magnification(MnetMnet) of the compound microscope is the product of the
linear magnification of the objective and the angul ar magnification
of the eyepiece
Newtonian designarrangement of an objective and eyepiece such that t he focused
light from the concave mirror was reflected to one si de of the tube
into an eyepiece
object distancedistance of the object from the central axis of the o ptical element
that produces its image
objective lens nearest to the object being examined.
optical axisaxis about which the mirror is rotationally symmetric; you can
rotate the mirror about this axis without changing an ything
optical power(P) inverse of the focal length of a lens, with the foc al length
expressed in meters. The optical power P of a lens is ex pressed in
units of diopters D; that is,
plane mirror plane (flat) reflecting surface
ray tracingtechnique that uses geometric constructions to find and
characterize the image formed by an optical system
real imageimage that can be projected onto a screen because the rays
physically go through the image
second focus or image focusfor a converging interface, the point where a bundl e of parallel
rays refracting at a spherical interface; for a diver ging interface,
the point at which the backward continuation of the refracted rays
will converge between two media will focus
simple magnifier (or magnifying glass)converging lens that produces a virtual image of an o bject that is
within the focal length of the lens
small-angle approximationapproximation that is valid when the size of a spheric al mirror is
significantly smaller than the mirror’s radius; in this
approximation, spherical aberration is negligible and the mirror
has a well-defined focal point
spherical aberrationdistortion in the image formed by a spherical mirror when rays are
not all focused at the same point
thin-lens approximationassumption that the lens is very thin compared to the f irst image
distance

1.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84131vertex point where the mirror’s surface intersects with the opt ical axis
virtual imageimage that cannot be projected on a screen because th e rays do not
physically go through the image, they only appear to originate
from the image
Key Equations
Image distance in a plane mirror
Focal length for a spherical mirror
Mirror equation
Magnification of a spherical mirror
Sign convention for mirrors
Focal length +for concave mirror
−for conve x mirror
Object distance +for real object
−for virtual object
Image distance +for real image
−for virtual image
Magnification +for upright image
−for inverted image
Apparent depth equation
Spherical interface equation
The thin-lens equation
The lens maker’s equation
The magnification m of an object
Optical power
Optical power of thin, closely spaced lenses
Angular magnification M of a simple magnifier
Angular magnification of an object a distance L from the eye for a
convex lens of focal length f held a distance ℓ from the eye
Range of angular magnification for a given lens for a person with
a near point of 25 cm
Net magnification of compound microscope
Summary
2.1 Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
A plane mirror always forms a virtual image (behind the mirror).

1.S.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84131The image and object are the same distance from a fla t mirror, the image size is the same as the object size, and the image is
upright.
2.2 Spherical Mirrors
Spherical mirrors may be concave (converging) or convex (d iverging).
The focal length of a spherical mirror is one-half of its radius of curvature:.
The mirror equation and ray tracing allow you to give a c omplete description of an image formed by a spherical mi rror.
Spherical aberration occurs for spherical mirrors but n ot parabolic mirrors; comatic aberration occurs for bo th types of mirrors.
2.3 Images Formed by Refraction
This section explains how a single refracting interface forms images.
When an object is observed through a plane interface between two media, then it appears at an apparent distance that
differs from the actual distance.
An image is formed by the refraction of light at a spheri cal interface between two media of indices of refraction and
Image distance depends on the radius of curvature of the interface, location of the object, and the indices of r efraction of
the media.
2.4 Thin Lenses
Two types of lenses are possible: converging and diverging. A lens that causes light rays to bend toward (away from) its op tical
axis is a converging (diverging) lens.
For a converging lens, the focal point is where the conve rging light rays cross; for a diverging lens, the focal po int is the point
from which the diverging light rays appear to originate.
The distance from the center of a thin lens to its focal point is called the focal length f.
Ray tracing is a geometric technique to determine the pat hs taken by light rays through thin lenses.
A real image can be projected onto a screen.
A virtual image cannot be projected onto a screen.
A converging lens forms either real or virtual images, d epending on the object location; a diverging lens form s only virtual
images.
2.5 The Eye
Image formation by the eye is adequately described by the thin-lens equation.
The eye produces a real image on the retina by adjusti ng its focal length in a process called accommodation.
Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the inability to see far o bjects and is corrected with a diverging lens to reduce th e optical power
of the eye.
Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the inability to see near objects and is corrected with a converging lens to increa se the optical
power of the eye.
In myopia and hyperopia, the corrective lenses produce i mages at distances that fall between the person’s near an d far points so
that images can be seen clearly.
2.6 The Camera
Cameras use combinations of lenses to create an image for rec ording.
Digital photography is based on charge-coupled devices (CCDs) that break an image into tiny “pixels” that can be c onverted
into electronic signals.
2.7 The Simple Magnifier
A simple magnifier is a converging lens and produces a magn ified virtual image of an object located within the focal l ength of
the lens.
Angular magnification accounts for magnification of an im age created by a magnifier. It is equal to the ratio of th e angle
subtended by the image to that subtended by the object wh en the object is observed by the unaided eye.
Angular magnification is greater for magnifying lenses with sm aller focal lengths.

1.S.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84131Simple magnifiers can produce as great as tenfold (10×) magnification.
2.8 Microscopes and Telescopes
Many optical devices contain more than a single lens or mir ror. These are analyzed by considering each element sequ entially.
The image formed by the first is the object for the secon d, and so on. The same ray-tracing and thin-lens technique s developed
in the previous sections apply to each lens element.
The overall magnification of a multiple-element syste m is the product of the linear magnifications of its indiv idual elements
times the angular magnification of the eyepiece. For a two -element system with an objective and an eyepiece, this is
(2.41)
where is the linear magnification of the objective an d is the angular magnification of the eyepiece.
The microscope is a multiple-element system that conta ins more than a single lens or mirror. It allows us to see detail that we
could not to see with the unaided eye. Both the eyepiece an d objective contribute to the magnification. The magn ification of a
compound microscope with the image at infinity is
. (2.42)
In this equation, 16 cm is the standardized distance b etween the image-side focal point of the objective l ens and the
object-side focal point of the eyepiece, 25 cm is t he normal near point distance, and are the focal d istances for
the objective lens and the eyepiece, respectively.
Simple telescopes can be made with two lenses. They are used for viewing objects at large distances.
The angular magnification M for a telescope is given by
, (2.43)
where and are the focal lengths of the objective lens an d the eyepiece, respectively.
This page titled 1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: Physical Optics
The most certain indication of a wave is interferenc e. This wave characteristic is most prominent when the wave interacts with an
object that is not large compared with the wavelength. Interference is observed for water waves, sound waves, l ight waves, and, in
fact, all types of waves.
11.1: Introduction to Interference
11.2: Wave Interference
11.3: The Wave Aspect of Light- Interference
11.4: Polarization
11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference
11.6: Mathematics of Interference
11.7: Single-Slit Diffraction
11.8: Double-Slit Diffraction
11.9: Multiple-Slit Interference
11.10: Diffraction Gratings
11.11: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction
11.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution
11.13: Interference in Thin Films
11.14: Thin Film Interference
11.15: X-Ray Diffraction
11.16: Holography
11.17: The Michelson Interferometer
11.18: Interference (Answers)
11.18.A: Diffraction (Answers)
11.E: Interference (Exercises)
1.E: Diffraction (Exercises)
11.S: Interference (Summary)
1.S: Diffraction (Summary)
This page titled 11: Physical Optics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8414611.1: Introduction to Interference
The most certain indication of a wave is interferenc e. This wave characteristic is most prominent when the wave interacts with an
object that is not large compared with the wavelength. Interference is observed for water waves, sound waves, l ight waves, and, in
fact, all types of waves.
Figure: Soap bubbles are blown from clear fluid into very thin films. The colors we see are not due to any pigmentation but
are the result of light interference, which enhances specific wavelengths for a given thickness of the film.
If you have ever looked at the reds, blues, and gre ens in a sunlit soap bubble and wondered how straw-colored soapy water could
produce them, you have hit upon one of the many phe nomena that can only be explained by the wave charac ter of light (Figure
). The same is true for the colors seen in an oil sli ck or in the light reflected from a DVD disc. In these cases, light interacts
with objects and exhibits wave characteristics.
Figure: A steel ball bearing illuminated by a laser d oes not cast a sharp, circular shadow. Instead, a series o f diffraction
fringes and a central bright spot are observed. Known as Poisson’s spot, the effect was first predicted by August in-Jean Fresnel
(1788–1827) as a consequence of diffraction of light waves. Based on principles of ray optics, Siméon-Denis Po isson (1781–1840)
argued against Fresnel’s prediction. (credit: modificat ion of work by Harvard Natural Science Lecture Demon strations)
We will learn in this chapter that a wave can behave not as one wave but as an infinite number of point s ources of waves. These
waves can interfere with each other, resulting in inte rference patterns. Thus, a monochromatic light beam through a narrow opening
—a slit just a little wider than the wavelength of the light would not cast a simple shadow of the slit on t he screen, an interference
pattern appears in what we will refer to as diffractio n. An example of diffraction is what is depicted in Fig ure. Diffraction
plays a major role in the way we interpret the output of optical instruments and on the was we design instr uments that are based on
the use of light.
This page titled 11.1: Introduction to Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.1: Prelude to Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

11.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841464.1: Prelude to Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

11.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8651211.2: Wave Interference
Explain how mechanical waves are reflected and transmitted at the boundaries of a medium
Define the terms interference and superposition
Find the resultant wave of two identical sinusoidal waves that di ffer only by a phase shift
Up to now, we have been studying mechanical waves that pr opagate continuously through a medium, but we have no t discussed
what happens when waves encounter the boundary of the me dium or what happens when a wave encounters another wav e
propagating through the same medium. Waves do intera ct with boundaries of the medium, and all or part of the wave can be
reflected. For example, when you stand some distance f rom a rigid cliff face and yell, you can hear the sou nd waves reflect off the
rigid surface as an echo. Waves can also interact with other waves propagating in the same medium. If you throw two rocks into a
pond some distance from one another, the circular r ipples that result from the two stones seem to pass t hrough one another as they
propagate out from where the stones entered the water. This phenomenon is known as interference. In this sec tion, we examine
what happens to waves encountering a boundary of a med ium or another wave propagating in the same medium. W e will see that
their behavior is quite different from the behavior of particles and rigid bodies. Later, when we study mod ern physics, we will see
that only at the scale of atoms do we see similarities in t he properties of waves and particles.
Reflection and Transmission
When a wave propagates through a medium, it reflects when it encounters the boundary of the medium. The wav e before hitting
the boundary is known as the incident wave. The wave aft er encountering the boundary is known as the reflecte d wave. How the
wave is reflected at the boundary of the medium depen ds on the boundary conditions; waves will react differ ently if the boundary
of the medium is fixed in place or free to move (Fig ure). A fixed boundary condition exists when the medium at a boundary
is fixed in place so it cannot move. A free boundary condition exists when the medium at the boundary is free to move.
Figure: (a) One end of a string is fixed so that it ca nnot move. A wave propagating on the string, encount ering this fixed
boundary condition, is reflected 180°(rad) out of p hase with respect to the incident wave. (b) One end o f a string is tied to a solid
ring of negligible mass on a frictionless lab pole, whe re the ring is free to move. A wave propagating on t he string, encountering
this free boundary condition, is reflected in phase 0° (0 rad) with respect to the wave.
Figure shows a fixed boundary condition. Here, one end o f the string is fixed to a wall so the end of the st ring is fixed in
place and the medium (the string) at the boundary c annot move. When the wave is reflected, the amplitude of the reflected way is
exactly the same as the amplitude of the incident wa ve, but the reflected wave is reflected rad) out of p hase with respect to
the incident wave. The phase change can be explained using Newton’s third law: Recall that Newton’s third la w states that when
object A exerts a force on object B, then object B e xerts an equal and opposite force on object A. As the in cident wave encounters
the wall, the string exerts an upward force on the wall and the wall reacts by exerting an equal and opposit e force on the string. The
reflection at a fixed boundary is inverted. Note tha t the figure shows a crest of the incident wave reflec ted as a trough. If the
incident wave were a trough, the reflected wave would be a crest.Learning Objectives

11.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/86512Figure shows a free boundary condition. Here, one end o f the string is tied to a solid ring of negligible m ass on a frictionless
pole, so the end of the string is free to move up a nd down. As the incident wave encounters the boundary o f the medium, it is also
reflected. In the case of a free boundary condition, the reflected wave is in phase with respect to the in cident wave. In this case, the
wave encounters the free boundary applying an upward f orce on the ring, accelerating the ring up. The ring travels up to the
maximum height equal to the amplitude of the wave an d then accelerates down towards the equilibrium posit ion due to the tension
in the string. The figure shows the crest of an incid ent wave being reflected in phase with respect to the incident wave as a crest. If
the incident wave were a trough, the reflected wave wou ld also be a trough. The amplitude of the reflected wave would be equal to
the amplitude of the incident wave.
In some situations, the boundary of the medium is neith er fixed nor free. Consider Figure, where a low-linear mass density
string is attached to a string of a higher linear ma ss density. In this case, the reflected wave is out of phase with respect to the
incident wave. There is also a transmitted wave that is in phase with respect to the incident wave. Both th e transmitted and reflected
waves have amplitudes less than the amplitude of the incident wave. If the tension is the same in both str ings, the wave speed is
higher in the string with the lower linear mass density.
Figure: Waves traveling along two types of strings: a t hick string with a high linear density and a thin stri ng with a low linear
density. Both strings are under the same tension, so a wa ve moves faster on the low-density string than on the h igh-density string.
(a) A wave moving from a low-speed to a high-speed me dium results in a reflected wave that is 180°(rad) ou t of phase with
respect to the incident pulse (or wave) and a transmit ted wave that is in phase with the incident wave. (b) When a wave moves from
a low-speed medium to a high-speed medium, both the r eflected and transmitted wave are in phase with respec t to the incident
wave.
shows a high-linear mass density string is attached to a string of a lower linear density. In this case, the reflected wave is in
phase with respect to the incident wave. There is als o a transmitted wave that is in phase with respect to the incident wave. Both the
incident and the reflected waves have amplitudes less than the amplitude of the incident wave. Here you ma y notice that if the
tension is the same in both strings, the wave speed is high er in the string with the lower linear mass density.
Superposition and Interference
Most waves do not look very simple. Complex waves are mo re interesting, even beautiful, but they look formid able. Most
interesting mechanical waves consist of a combination of two or more traveling waves propagating in the sa me medium. The
principle of superposition can be used to analyze the comb ination of waves.
Consider two simple pulses of the same amplitude movi ng toward one another in the same medium, as shown in Figure.
Eventually, the waves overlap, producing a wave that h as twice the amplitude, and then continue on unaffect ed by the encounter.
The pulses are said to interfere, and this phenomenon is kn own as interference.

11.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/86512
Figure: Two pulses moving toward one another experien ce interference. The term interference refers to wha t happens when
two waves overlap.
To analyze the interference of two or more waves, we use the principle of superposition. For mechanical waves, the principle of
superposition states that if two or more traveling waves combine at the same point, the resulting position of the mass ele ment of
the medium, at that point, is the algebraic sum of t he position due to the individual waves. This property is exhibited by many
waves observed, such as waves on a string, sound waves, an d surface water waves. Electromagnetic waves also obey t he
superposition principle, but the electric and magne tic fields of the combined wave are added instead of the displacement of the
medium. Waves that obey the superposition principle are linear waves; waves that do not obey the superpos ition principle are said
to be nonlinear waves. In this chapter, we deal with linear wa ves, in particular, sinusoidal waves.
The superposition principle can be understood by cons idering the linear wave equation. In Mathematics of a Wave, we defined a
linear wave as a wave whose mathematical representatio n obeys the linear wave equation. For a transverse wave on a string with an
elastic restoring force, the linear wave equation is
Any wave function y(x, t) = y(x ∓ vt), where the argument of the function is linear (x ∓ vt) is a solution to the linear wave
equation and is a linear wave function. If wave functio ns y (x, t) and y (x, t) are solutions to the linear wav e equation, the sum of
the two functions y (x, t) + y (x, t) is also a soluti on to the linear wave equation. Mechanical waves that obey superposition are
normally restricted to waves with amplitudes that are small with respect to their wavelengths. If the amplit ude is too large, the
medium is distorted past the region where the restoring fo rce of the medium is linear.
Waves can interfere constructively or destructively. Figure shows two identical sinusoidal waves that arriv e at the same point
exactly in phase. Figure and show the two individual waves, Figure shows the resultant wave that results
from the algebraic sum of the two linear waves. The c rests of the two waves are precisely aligned, as are the troughs. This
superposition produces constructive interference. Because the disturbances add, constructive interfer ence produces a wave that
has twice the amplitude of the individual waves, but has th e same wavelength.1 2
1 2

11.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/86512
Figure: Constructive interference of two identical w aves produces a wave with twice the amplitude, but th e same
wavelength.
Figure shows two identical waves that arrive exactly 1 80° out of phase, producing destructive interference. Figure
and show the individual waves, and Figure shows the su perposition of the two waves. Because the troughs of one
wave add the crest of the other wave, the resulting amplitude is zero for destructive interference—the waves complet ely cancel.
Figure: Destructive interference of two identical wa ves, one with a phase shift of 180°(rad), produces zer o amplitude, or
complete cancellation.
When linear waves interfere, the resultant wave is ju st the algebraic sum of the individual waves as stated in the principle of
superposition. Figure shows two waves (red and blue) a nd the resultant wave (black). The resultant wave is th e algebraic sum
of the two individual waves.

11.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/86512
Figure: When two linear waves in the same medium inte rfere, the height of resulting wave is the sum of the heights of the
individual waves, taken point by point. This plot show s two waves (red and blue) added together, along with the resulting wave
(black). These graphs represent the height of the wave at each point. The waves may be any linear wave, in cluding ripples on a
pond, disturbances on a string, sound, or electromagnet ic waves.
The superposition of most waves produces a combinati on of constructive and destructive interference, and can vary from place to
place and time to time. Sound from a stereo, for examp le, can be loud in one spot and quiet in another. Var ying loudness means the
sound waves add partially constructively and partiall y destructively at different locations. A stereo has at least two speakers
creating sound waves, and waves can reflect from walls. Al l these waves interfere, and the resulting wave is th e superposition of
the waves.
We have shown several examples of the superposition o f waves that are similar. Figure illustrates an examp le of the
superposition of two dissimilar waves. Here again, the distu rbances add, producing a resultant wave.
Figure: Superposition of nonidentical waves exhibits bo th constructive and destructive interference.
At times, when two or more mechanical waves interfere, t he pattern produced by the resulting wave can be rich in complexity,
some without any readily discernable patterns. For ex ample, plotting the sound wave of your favorite music can look quite complex
and is the superposition of the individual sound waves from many instruments; it is the complexity that ma kes the music interesting
and worth listening to. At other times, waves can interf ere and produce interesting phenomena, which are comp lex in their
appearance and yet beautiful in simplicity of the ph ysical principle of superposition, which formed the r esulting wave. One
example is the phenomenon known as standing waves, pro duced by two identical waves moving in different dire ctions. We will
look more closely at this phenomenon in the next section.
Try this simulation to make waves with a dripping faucet, audio speaker, o r laser! Add a second source or a pair of slits to
create an interference pattern. You can observe one source or two sources. Using two sources, you can obser ve the interference
patterns that result from varying the frequencies and the amplitudes of the sources.Simulation

11.2.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/86512Superposition of Sinusoidal Waves that Differ by a Phase Shift
Many examples in physics consist of two sinusoidal waves that are identical in amplitude, wave number, and ang ular frequency,
but differ by a phase shift:
When these two waves exist in the same medium, the res ultant wave resulting from the superposition of the two individual waves
is the sum of the two individual waves:
The resultant wave can be better understood by using the trigonometric identity:
where u = kx - t + and v = kx - t. The resulting wave becom es
This equation is usually written as
The resultant wave has the same wave number and angul ar frequency, an amplitude of A = [2A cos], and a pha se shift equal
to half the original phase shift. Examples of waves tha t differ only in a phase shift are shown in Figure.
Figure: Superposition of two waves with identical ampl itudes, wavelengths, and frequency, but that differ i n a phase shift.
The red wave is defined by the wave function y (x, t) = A sin(kx − t) and the blue wave is defined by the wave function y (x, t) =
A sin(kx − t +). The black line shows the result of ad ding the two waves. The phase difference between the two waves are (a)
0.00 rad, (b) rad, (c) rad, and (d) rad.
The red and blue waves each have the same amplitude, wave number, and angular frequency, and differ only i n a phase shift. They
therefore have the same period, wavelength, and frequ ency. The green wave is the result of the superpositi on of the two waves.R
1 2

11.2.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/86512When the two waves have a phase difference of zero, the waves are in phase, and the resultant wave has the sam e wave number and
angular frequency, and an amplitude equal to twice t he individual amplitudes (part (a)). This is construc tive interference. If the
phase difference is 180°, the waves interfere in dest ructive interference (part (c)). The resultant wave h as an amplitude of zero. Any
other phase difference results in a wave with the sam e wave number and angular frequency as the two incide nt waves but with a
phase shift of and an amplitude equal to 2A cos. Examp les are shown in parts (b) and (d).
This page titled 11.2: Wave Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.6: Interference of Waves by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-1.

11.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413511.3: The Wave Aspect of Light- Interference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Discuss the wave character of light.
Identify the changes when light enters a medium.
We know that visible light is the type of electromagn etic wave to which our eyes respond. Like all other ele ctromagnetic waves, it
obeys the equation
where is the speed of light in vacuum, is the freq uency of the electromagnetic waves, and is its wavel ength. The
range of visible wavelengths is approximately 380 to 760 nm. As is true for all waves, light travels in str aight lines and acts like a
ray when it interacts with objects several times as larg e as its wavelength. However, when it interacts with small er objects, it
displays its wave characteristics prominently. Interfe rence is the hallmark of a wave, and in Figure 1 both the ray and wave
characteristics of light can be seen. The laser beam emitted by the observatory epitomizes a ray, traveli ng in a straight line.
However, passing a pure-wavelength beam through vertical slits with a size close to the wavelength of the beam reveals the wave
character of light, as the beam spreads out horizonta lly into a pattern of bright and dark regions caused by systematic constructive
and destructive interference. Rather than spreading ou t, a ray would continue traveling straight ahead after p assing through slits.
The most certain indication of a wave is interference. This wave characteristic is most prominent when the wave interacts with
an object that is not large compared with the waveleng th. Interference is observed for water waves, sound wave s, light waves,
and (as we will see in "Special Relativity") for matter wave s, such as electrons scattered from a crystal.
Figure: (a) The laser beam emitted by an observatory acts like a ray, traveling in a straight line. This la ser beam is from the
Paranal Observatory of the European Southern Observato ry. (credit: Yuri Beletsky, European Southern Observat ory) (b) A laser
beam passing through a grid of vertical slits produces a n interference pattern -- characteristic of a wave. (credit: Shim'on and Slava
Rybka, Wikimedia Commons)Learning Objectives
MAKING CONNECTIONS: WAVES

11.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84135Light has wave characteristics in various media as we ll as in a vacuum. When light goes from a vacuum to so me medium, like
water, its speed and wavelength change, but its frequenc y remains the same. (We can think of light as a forc ed oscillation that
must have the frequency of the original source.) The speed of light in a medium is, where is its index of refraction. If we
divide both sides of equation by, we get. This imp lies that, where is the wavelength in a
medium and that
where is the wavelength in vacuum and is the medium’ s index of refraction. Therefore, the wavelength of li ght is smaller in any
medium than it is in vacuum. In water, for example, whi ch has, the range of visible wavelenghts is to
, or. Although wavelengths change while traveling from one medium to another, colors do not,
since colors are associated with frequency.
Summary
Wave optics is the branch of optics that must be used when lig ht interacts with small objects or whenever the wave
characteristics of light are considered.
Wave characteristics are those associated with interferenc e and diffraction.
Visible light is the type of electromagnetic wave to whic h our eyes respond and has a wavelength in the range of 380 to 760 nm.
Like all EM waves, the following relationship is valid in va cuum:, where is the speed of light, is the
frequency of the electromagnetic wave, and is its wavelen gth in vacuum.
The wavelength of light in a medium with index of refra ction is. Its frequency is the same as in vacuum.
Glossary
wavelength in a medium
, where is the wavelength in vacuum, and is the index of refraction of the medium
This page titled 11.3: The Wave Aspect of Light- Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
27.1: The Wave Aspect of Light- Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

11.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8414211.4: Polarization
By the end of this section, you will be able
Discuss the meaning of polarization.
Discuss the property of optical activity of certain mate rials.
Polaroid sunglasses are familiar to most of us. They have a special ability to cut the glare of light r eflected from water or glass
(Figure). Polaroids have this ability because of a wave characteristic of light called polarization. What i s polarization? How
is it produced? What are some of its uses? The answers t o these questions are related to the wave character of ligh t.
Figure: These two photographs of a river show the effe ct of a polarizing filter in reducing glare in ligh t reflected from the
surface of water. Part (b) of this figure was taken wi th a polarizing filter and part (a) was not. As a resu lt, the reflection of clouds
and sky observed in part (a) is not observed in part (b). Polarizing sunglasses are particularly useful on snow a nd water. (credit:
Amithshs, Wikimedia Commons)
Light is one type of electromagnetic (EM) wave. As note d earlier, EM waves are transverse waves consisting of varying electric
and magnetic fields that oscillate perpendicular to the direction of propagation (Figure). There are sp ecific directions for the
oscillations of the electric and magnetic fields. Polarization is the attribute that a wave’s oscillations have a d efinite direction
relative to the direction of propagation of the wave. (This is not the same type of polarization as tha t discussed for the separation of
charges.) Waves having such a direction are said to be polarized. For an EM wave, we define the direction of polarization to be
the direction parallel to the electric field. Thus we can think of the electric field arrows as showing the direction of polarization, as
in Figure.
Figure: An EM wave, such as light, is a transverse wave. The electric and magnetic fields are perpendicular to the direction
of propagation.
To examine this further, consider the transverse waves in the ropes shown in Figure. The oscillations in on e rope are in a
vertical plane and are said to be vertically polarized. Those in the other rope are in a horizontal plane a nd are horizontally
polarized. If a vertical slit is placed on the first rope, th e waves pass through. However, a vertical slit blocks the horizontally
polarized waves. For EM waves, the direction of the electri c field is analogous to the disturbances on the ropes.Learning Objectives

11.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142
Figure: The transverse oscillations in one rope are in a vertical plane, and those in the other rope are in a horizontal plane.
The first is said to be vertically polarized, and the other is said to be horizontally polarized. Vertical slits pass vertically polarized
waves and block horizontally polarized waves.
The Sun and many other light sources produce waves tha t are randomly polarized (Figure). Such light is said to be
unpolarized because it is composed of many waves with all possible dire ctions of polarization.
Figure: The slender arrow represents a ray of unpolari zed light. The bold arrows represent the direction of polarization of the
individual waves composing the ray. Since the light is unpolarized, the arrows point in all directions.
Polaroid materials, invented by the founder of Polaro id Corporation, Edwin Land, act as a polarizing slit f or light, allowing only
polarization in one direction to pass through. Polariz ing filters are composed of long molecules aligned in one direction. Thinking
of the molecules as many slits, analogous to those f or the oscillating ropes, we can understand why only l ight with a specific
polarization can get through. The axis of a polariz ing filter is the direction along which the filter pa sses the electric field of an EM
wave (Figure).
Figure: A polarizing filter has a polarization axis t hat acts as a slit passing through electric fields parall el to its direction. The
direction of polarization of an EM wave is defined t o be the direction of its electric field.
Figure shows the effect of two polarizing filters on o riginally unpolarized light. The first filter polarizes the light along its
axis. When the axes of the first and second filters ar e aligned (parallel), then all of the polarized lig ht passed by the first filter is
also passed by the second. If the second polarizing fi lter is rotated, only the component of the light pa rallel to the second filter’s
axis is passed. When the axes are perpendicular, no light is pa ssed by the second.
Only the component of the EM wave parallel to the axi s of a filter is passed. Let us call the angle between the direction of
polarization and the axis of a filter. If the elec tric field has an amplitude, then the transmitted pa rt of the wave has an amplitude

11.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142 (Figure). Since the intensity of a wave is proportio nal to its amplitude squared, the intensity of the transmitted wave
is related to the incident wave by
where is the intensity of the polarized wave before pass ing through the filter. Equation is known as Malus’s law.
Figure: The effect of rotating two polarizing filte rs, where the first polarizes the light. (a) All of th e polarized light is passed
by the second polarizing filter, because its axis is par allel to the first. (b) As the second is rotated, only part of the light is passed.
(c) When the second is perpendicular to the first, no light is passed. (d) In this photograph, a polarizing f ilter is placed above two
others. Its axis is perpendicular to the filter on the right (dark area) and parallel to the filter on the left (lighter area). (credit: P.P.
Urone)
Figure: A polarizing filter transmits only the compon ent of the wave parallel to its axis,, reducing the intensity of any
light not polarized parallel to its axis.
What angle is needed between the direction of polarized l ight and the axis of a polarizing filter to reduce its in tensity by?
Strategy:
When the intensity is reduced by, it is or 0.100 times its original value. That is,. Using this
information, the equation can be used to solve for the nee ded angle.
Solution
Solving the equation for and substituting with the rela tionship between and gives
Solving for yieldsExample: Calculating Intensity Reduction by a Polarizing Filter

11.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142Discussion:
A fairly large angle between the direction of polari zation and the filter axis is needed to reduce the intensity to of its
original value. This seems reasonable based on experim enting with polarizing films. It is interesting that, at an angle of, the
intensity is reduced to of its original value (as you will show in this section’s Problems & Exercises). Note that is
from reducing the intensity to zero, and that at a n angle of the intensity is reduced to of its orig inal value (as
you will also show in Problems & Exercises), giving eviden ce of symmetry.
Polarization by Reflection
By now you can probably guess that Polaroid sunglasse s cut the glare in reflected light because that lig ht is polarized. You can
check this for yourself by holding Polaroid sunglasses i n front of you and rotating them while looking at lig ht reflected from water
or glass. As you rotate the sunglasses, you will noti ce the light gets bright and dim, but not completel y black. This implies the
reflected light is partially polarized and cannot be com pletely blocked by a polarizing filter.
Figure 8 illustrates what happens when unpolarized ligh t is reflected from a surface. Vertically polarized light is preferentially
refracted at the surface, so that the reflected light is left more horizontally polari zed. The reasons for this phenomenon are beyond
the scope of this text, but a convenient mnemonic fo r remembering this is to imagine the polarization dir ection to be like an arrow.
Vertical polarization would be like an arrow perpendi cular to the surface and would be more likely to stic k and not be reflected.
Horizontal polarization is like an arrow bouncing on its side and would be more likely to be reflected. Sung lasses with vertical axes
would then block more reflected light than unpolarized li ght from other sources.
Figure: Polarization by reflection. Unpolarized ligh t has equal amounts of vertical and horizontal polari zation. After
interaction with a surface, the vertical components a re preferentially absorbed or refracted, leaving the reflected light more
horizontally polarized. This is akin to arrows striking on their sides bouncing off, whereas arrows striking on their tips go into the
surface.
Since the part of the light that is not reflected is refracted, the amount of polarization depends on th e indices of refraction of the
media involved. It can be shown that reflected light is completely polarized at a angle of reflection, given by
where is the medium in which the incident and reflect ed light travel and is the index of refraction of t he medium that forms
the interface that reflects the light. This equation is known as Brewster's law, and is known as Brewster's angle, named after
the 19th-century Scottish physicist who discovered them.
Polarizing filters have a polarization axis that acts as a slit. This slit passes electromagnetic waves (often visibl e light) that have
an electric field parallel to the axis. This is accomplished with long molecules aligned perpendicular to the axis as shown in
Figure 9.THINGS GREAT AND SMALL: ATOMIC EXPLANATION OF POLARIZING FILTERS:

11.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142
Figure: Long molecules are aligned perpendicular to the axis of a polarizing filter. The component of th e electric field in
an EM wave perpendicular to these molecules passes throu gh the filter, while the component parallel to the molecules is
absorbed.
Figure 10 illustrates how the component of the electric field parallel to the long molecules is absorbed. An electromagnetic
wave is composed of oscillating electric and magneti c fields. The electric field is strong compared with the magnetic field and
is more effective in exerting force on charges in t he molecules. The most affected charged particles ar e the electrons in the
molecules, since electron masses are small. If the ele ctron is forced to oscillate, it can absorb energy from the EM wave. This
reduces the fields in the wave and, hence, reduces it s intensity. In long molecules, electrons can more e asily oscillate parallel to
the molecule than in the perpendicular direction. Th e electrons are bound to the molecule and are more restricted in their
movement perpendicular to the molecule. Thus, the el ectrons can absorb EM waves that have a component of t heir electric
field parallel to the molecule. The electrons are mu ch less responsive to electric fields perpendicular to the molecule and will
allow those fields to pass. Thus the axis of the polariz ing filter is perpendicular to the length of the molecule.
Figure: Artist’s conception of an electron in a long molecule oscillating parallel to the molecule. The o scillation of the
electron absorbs energy and reduces the intensity of th e component of the EM wave that is parallel to the m olecule.
a. At what angle will light traveling in air be completely pol arized horizontally when reflected from water?
b. From glass?
Strategy:
All we need to solve these problems are the indices o f refraction. Air has, water has, and crown glass has
. The equation can be directly applied to find in each case.
Solution (a):Example: Calculating Polarization by Reflection

11.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142Putting the known quantities into the equation
gives
Solving for the angle yields
Solution (b):
Similarly, for crown glass and air,
Thus,
Discussion:
Light reflected at these angles could be completely blocked by a good polarizing filter held with its axis vertical. Brewster’s
angle for water and air are similar to those for gla ss and air, so that sunglasses are equally effective for light reflected from
either water or glass under similar circumstances. Li ght not reflected is refracted into these media. So at an incident angle equal
to Brewster’s angle, the refracted light will be slight ly polarized vertically. It will not be completely p olarized vertically,
because only a small fraction of the incident light is reflected, and so a significant amount of horizon tally polarized light is
refracted.
Polarization by Scattering
If you hold your Polaroid sunglasses in front of you an d rotate them while looking at blue sky, you will see the sky get bright and
dim. This is a clear indication that light scattere d by air is partially polarized. Figure helps illustr ate how this happens. Since
light is a transverse EM wave, it vibrates the electro ns of air molecules perpendicular to the direction i t is traveling. The electrons
then radiate like small antennae. Since they are osci llating perpendicular to the direction of the light ray, they produce EM radiation
that is polarized perpendicular to the direction of the ray. When viewing the light along a line perpen dicular to the original ray, as in
Figure 11, there can be no polarization in the scatter ed light parallel to the original ray, because that wo uld require the original ray
to be a longitudinal wave. Along other directions, a c omponent of the other polarization can be projected along the line of sight,
and the scattered light will only be partially polar ized. Furthermore, multiple scattering can bring lig ht to your eyes from other
directions and can contain different polarizations.Label '27.9.4' multiply defined

11.4.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142
Figure: Polarization by scattering. Unpolarized light scattering from air molecules shakes their electrons pe rpendicular to
the direction of the original ray. The scattered lig ht therefore has a polarization perpendicular to the original direction and none
parallel to the original direction.
Photographs of the sky can be darkened by polarizing filters, a trick used by many photographers to make clouds brighter by
contrast. Scattering from other particles, such as smo ke or dust, can also polarize light. Detecting polari zation in scattered EM
waves can be a useful analytical tool in determining the s cattering source.
There is a range of optical effects used in sunglass es. Besides being Polaroid, other sunglasses have color ed pigments embedded in
them, while others use non-reflective or even reflecti ve coatings. A recent development is photochromic len ses, which darken in the
sunlight and become clear indoors. Photochromic lens es are embedded with organic microcrystalline molecule s that change their
properties when exposed to UV in sunlight, but become clear i n artificial lighting with no UV.
Find Polaroid sunglasses and rotate one while holding the other still and look at different surfaces and o bjects. Explain your
observations. What is the difference in angle from wh en you see a maximum intensity to when you see a mini mum intensity?
Find a reflective glass surface and do the same. At what angle does the glass need to be oriented to give minimum glare?
Liquid Crystals and Other Polarization Effects in Materials
While you are undoubtedly aware of liquid crystal di splays (LCDs) found in watches, calculators, computer sc reens, cellphones,
flat screen televisions, and other myriad places, you m ay not be aware that they are based on polarization. Liquid crystals are so
named because their molecules can be aligned even tho ugh they are in a liquid. Liquid crystals have the pr operty that they can
rotate the polarization of light passing through the m by. Furthermore, this property can be turned off b y the application of a
voltage, as illustrated in Figure. It is possible to m anipulate this characteristic quickly and in small we ll-defined regions to
create the contrast patterns we see in so many LCD device s.
In flat screen LCD televisions, there is a large ligh t at the back of the TV. The light travels to the fr ont screen through millions of
tiny units called pixels (picture elements). One of t hese is shown in Figure and. Each unit has three cel ls, with red,
blue, or green filters, each controlled independently. When the voltage across a liquid crystal is switched off, the liquid crystal
passes the light through the particular filter. One can vary the picture contrast by varying the streng th of the voltage applied to the
liquid crystal.TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT: POLARIZATION

11.4.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142
Figure: (a) Polarized light is rotated by a liquid crystal and then passed by a polarizing filter that ha s its axis
perpendicular to the original polarization directio n. (b) When a voltage is applied to the liquid crysta l, the polarized light is not
rotated and is blocked by the filter, making the reg ion dark in comparison with its surroundings. (c) LCDs c an be made color
specific, small, and fast enough to use in laptop compu ters and TVs. (credit: Jon Sullivan)
Many crystals and solutions rotate the plane of pola rization of light passing through them. Such substance s are said to be optically
active. Examples include sugar water, insulin, and collagen (Figure). In addition to depending on the type of sub stance, the
amount and direction of rotation depends on a number of factors. Among these is the concentration of the s ubstance, the distance
the light travels through it, and the wavelength of light. Optical activity is due to the asymmetric shape of molecules in the
substance, such as being helical. Measurements of the r otation of polarized light passing through substances can thus be used to
measure concentrations, a standard technique for suga rs. It can also give information on the shapes of mole cules, such as proteins,
and factors that affect their shapes, such as temperatur e and pH.
Figure: Optical activity is the ability of some substan ces to rotate the plane of polarization of light passi ng through them.
The rotation is detected with a polarizing filter or analyzer.

11.4.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142Glass and plastic become optically active when stressed; the greater the stress, the greater the effect. Optic al stress analysis on
complicated shapes can be performed by making plastic models of them and observing them through crossed f ilters, as seen in
Figure 14. It is apparent that the effect depends on wav elength as well as stress. The wavelength dependence is s ometimes also
used for artistic purposes.
Figure: Optical stress analysis of a plastic lens placed b etween crossed polarizers. (credit: Infopro, Wikimedia Commons)
Another interesting phenomenon associated with polariz ed light is the ability of some crystals to split an unpolarized beam of light
into two. Such crystals are said to be berefringent (see Figure 15). Each of the separated rays has a spec ific polarization. One
behaves normally and is called the ordinary ray, whe reas the other does not obey Snell’s law and is called the extraordinary ray.
Birefringent crystals can be used to produce polarize d beams from unpolarized light. Some birefringent ma terials preferentially
absorb one of the polarizations. These materials are c alled dichroic and can produce polarization by this preferential absorption.
This is fundamentally how polarizing filters and othe r polarizers work. The interested reader is invited to further pursue the
numerous properties of materials related to polarization.
Figure: Birefringent materials, such as the common min eral calcite, split unpolarized beams of light into t wo. The ordinary
ray behaves as expected, but the extraordinary ray do es not obey Snell’s law.
Summary
Polarization is the attribute that wave oscillations hav e a definite direction relative to the direction of propag ation of the wave.
EM waves are transverse waves that may be polarized.
The direction of polarization is defined to be the direct ion parallel to the electric field of the EM wave.
Unpolarized light is composed of many rays having random pol arization directions.
Light can be polarized by passing it through a polarizing f ilter or other polarizing material.The intensity of pol arized light
after passing through a polarizing filter is, where is t he original intensity and is the angle between the dire ction
of polarization and the axis of the filter.
Polarization is also produced by reflection.
Brewster’s law states that reflected light will be completel y polarized at the angle of reflection, known as Brewster’s angle,
given by a statement known as Brewster’s law:, where is the medium in which the incident and reflected light
travel and is the index of refraction of the medium tha t forms the interface that reflects the light.
Polarization can also be produced by scattering.
There are a number of types of optically active substances that rotate the direction of polarization of light pa ssing through them.

11.4.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84142Glossary
axis of a polarizing filter
the direction along which the filter passes the electric fie ld of an EM wave
birefringent
crystals that split an unpolarized beam of light into two beams
Brewster’s angle
, where is the index of refraction of the medium from whic h the light is reflected and is the index of
refraction of the medium in which the reflected light trave ls
Brewster’s law
, where is the medium in which the incident and reflecte d light travel and is the index of refraction of the
medium that forms the interface that reflects the light
direction of polarization
the direction parallel to the electric field for EM wave s
horizontally polarized
the oscillations are in a horizontal plane
optically active
substances that rotate the plane of polarization of light passing through them
polarization
the attribute that wave oscillations have a definite dire ction relative to the direction of propagation of the wave
polarized
waves having the electric and magnetic field oscillations in a definite direction
reflected light that is completely polarized
light reflected at the angle of reflection, known as Brewst er’s angle
unpolarized
waves that are randomly polarized
vertically polarized
the oscillations are in a vertical plane
This page titled 11.4: Polarization is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
27.8: Polarization by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

11.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8414711.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the phenomenon of interference
Define constructive and destructive interference for a dou ble slit
The Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) thought that light was a wave, but Isaac Ne wton did not. Newton thought
that there were other explanations for color, and fo r the interference and diffraction effects that were observable at the time. Owing
to Newton’s tremendous reputation, his view generally prevailed; the fact that Huygens’s principle worked wa s not considered
direct evidence proving that light is a wave. The acc eptance of the wave character of light came many yea rs later in 1801, when the
English physicist and physician Thomas Young (1773–1829) demonstrated optical interference with his now-classic double-slit
experiment.
If there were not one but two sources of waves, the wave s could be made to interfere, as in the case of waves on water (Figure
). If light is an electromagnetic wave, it must theref ore exhibit interference effects under appropriate circumstances. In
Young’s experiment, sunlight was passed through a pinho le on a board. The emerging beam fell on two pinholes on a second board.
The light emanating from the two pinholes then fell o n a screen where a pattern of bright and dark spots was observed. This
pattern, called fringes, can only be explained through interference, a wave phenomenon.
Figure: Photograph of an interference pattern produ ced by circular water waves in a ripple tank. Two th in plungers are
vibrated up and down in phase at the surface of the w ater. Circular water waves are produced by and emana te from each plunger.
We can analyze double-slit interference with the help of Figure, which depicts an apparatus analogous to Young’s. Light from
a monochromatic source falls on a slit. The light e manating from is incident on two other slits and t hat are equidistant
from. A pattern of interference fringes on the screen is then produced by the light emanati ng from and. All slits are
assumed to be so narrow that they can be considered secondary point sources for Huygens’ wavelets (The Nature of Light). Slits
and are a distance d apart (), and the distance between the screen and the slits i s D(≈1m), which is much greater than d.Learning Objectives

11.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84147
Figure: The double-slit interference experiment using monochromatic light and narrow slits. Fringes produced by interfering
Huygens wavelets from slits and are observed on the scr een.
Since is assumed to be a point source of monochromat ic light, the secondary Huygens wavelets leaving and always
maintain a constant phase difference (zero in this c ase because and are equidistant from) and have th e same frequency. The
sources and are then said to be coherent. By cohere nt waves, we mean the waves are in phase or have a defin ite phase
relationship. The term incoherent means the waves have random phase relationships, which would be the case if and were
illuminated by two independent light sources, rather than a single source. Two independent light sources (which may be two
separate areas within the same lamp or the Sun) would g enerally not emit their light in unison, that is, not coherently. Also, because
and are the same distance from, the amplitudes of th e two Huygens wavelets are equal.
Young used sunlight, where each wavelength forms its own pattern, making the effect more difficult to see. In t he following
discussion, we illustrate the double-slit experiment wi th monochromatic light (single λ) to clarify the ef fect. Figure shows the
pure constructive and destructive interference of two wa ves having the same wavelength and amplitude.
Figure: The amplitudes of waves add. (a) Pure construc tive interference is obtained when identical waves ar e in phase. (b)
Pure destructive interference occurs when identical wa ves are exactly out of phase, or shifted by half a wav elength.
When light passes through narrow slits, the slits act a s sources of coherent waves and light spreads out as se micircular waves, as
shown in Figure. Pure constructive interference occurs where the waves are crest to crest or trough t o trough. Pure
destructive interference occurs where they are crest to trough. The light must fall on a screen and be scattered into our eyes fo r us
to see the pattern. An analogous pattern for water wave s is shown in Figure. Note that regions of constructive and destructive
interference move out from the slits at well-defined a ngles to the original beam. These angles depend on wa velength and the
distance between the slits, as we shall see below.

11.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84147
Figure: Double slits produce two coherent sources of wa ves that interfere. (a) Light spreads out (diffracts) f rom each slit,
because the slits are narrow. These waves overlap and in terfere constructively (bright lines) and destructivel y (dark regions). We
can only see this if the light falls onto a screen and is scattered into our eyes. (b) When light that has passe d through double slits
falls on a screen, we see a pattern such as this.
To understand the double-slit interference pattern, consider how two waves travel from the slits to the sc reen (Figure). Each
slit is a different distance from a given point on the screen. Thus, different numbers of wavelengths fi t into each path. Waves start
out from the slits in phase (crest to crest), but they may end up out of phase (crest to trough) at the scr een if the paths differ in
length by half a wavelength, interfering destructivel y. If the paths differ by a whole wavelength, then th e waves arrive in phase
(crest to crest) at the screen, interfering constructiv ely. More generally, if the path length difference b etween the two waves is
any half-integral number of wavelengths [(1 / 2)λ, (3 / 2)λ, (5 / 2)λ, etc.], then destructive interferenc e occurs. Similarly, if the path
length difference is any integral number of waveleng ths (λ, 2λ, 3λ, etc.), then constructive interference occurs. These conditions
can be expressed as equations:
for
for

11.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84147
Figure: Waves follow different paths from the slits to a common point P on a screen. Destructive interferenc e occurs where
one path is a half wavelength longer than the other— the waves start in phase but arrive out of phase. Constr uctive interference
occurs where one path is a whole wavelength longer th an the other—the waves start out and arrive in phase.
This page titled 11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.2: Young's Double-Slit Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

11.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8414811.6: Mathematics of Interference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Determine the angles for bright and dark fringes for doub le slit interference
Calculate the positions of bright fringes on a screen
Figure shows how to determine the path length differe nce for waves traveling from two slits to a common po int on a
screen. If the screen is a large distance away compa red with the distance between the slits, then the angl e θ between the path and a
line from the slits to the screen () is nearly the s ame for each path. In other words, and are essentia lly parallel. The
lengths of and differ by, as indicated by the two dashe d lines in the.
Figure: (a) To reach P, the light waves from and m ust travel different distances. (b) The path differenc e between the two
rays is.
Simple trigonometry shows
where d is the distance between the slits. Combining this with th e interference equations discussed previously, we obtain
constructive interference for a double slit when the path l ength difference is an integral multiple of the wavelength, or
and
where
is the wavelength of the light,
is the distance between slits, and
is the angle from the original direction of the beam as di scussed above.Learning Objectives

11.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84148We call the order of the interference. For example, is fourth-order interference.
Equations and for double-slit interference imply t hat a series of bright and dark lines are formed. For vertical slits, the
light spreads out horizontally on either side of the incident beam into a pattern called interference f ringes (Figure). The closer
the slits are, the more the bright fringes spread apar t. We can see this by examining the Equation. For fi xed and, the
smaller is, the larger must be, since. This is con sistent with our contention that wave effects are mos t noticeable
when the object the wave encounters (here, slits a distance d apart) is small. Small gives large, hence, a large effec t.
Referring back to Figure, is typically small enough tha t
where is the distance from the central maximum to t he m-th bright fringe and D is the distance between the slit and the screen.
Equation may then be written as
or
Figure: The interference pattern for a double slit h as an intensity that falls off with angle. The image sh ows multiple bright
and dark lines, or fringes, formed by light passing thr ough a double slit.
Suppose you pass light from a He-Ne laser through two sli ts separated by 0.0100 mm and find that the third bri ght line on a
screen is formed at an angle of 10.95° relative to the in cident beam. What is the wavelength of the light?
Strategy
The phenomenon is two-slit interference as illustrated in Figure and the third bright line is due to third -order constructive
interference, which means that. We are given and. The wavelength can thus be found using
Equation for constructive interference.
Solution
Solving Equation for the wavelength givesExample: Finding a Wavelength from an Interference Pattern

11.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84148Substituting known values yields
Significance
To three digits, this is the wavelength of light emitte d by the common He-Ne laser. Not by coincidence, this red color is similar
to that emitted by neon lights. More important, however, is the fact that interference patterns can be used to measure
wavelength. Young did this for visible wavelengths. This analytical technique is still widely used to measure electromagnetic
spectra. For a given order, the angle for constructive interference increases with, so that spectra (measurem ents of intensity
versus wavelength) can be obtained.
Interference patterns do not have an infinite number of lines, since there is a limit to how big m can be. What is the highestorder constructive interference possible with the system d escribed in the preceding example?
Strategy
Equation describes constructive interference from two slits. For fixed values of and, the larger is, th e larger is.
However, the maximum value that can have is 1, for an a ngle of 90°. (Larger angles imply that light goes b ackward and
does not reach the screen at all.) Let us find what valu e of corresponds to this maximum diffraction angle.
Solution
Solving the equation for m gives
Taking and substituting the values of d and λ from the preceding example gives
Therefore, the largest integer can be is 15, or.
Significance
The number of fringes depends on the wavelength and s lit separation. The number of fringes is very large for large slit
separations. However, recall (see The Propagation of Light) that wave interference is only prominent when the wav e interacts
with objects that are not large compared to the wavel ength. Therefore, if the slit separation and the siz es of the slits become
much greater than the wavelength, the intensity patte rn of light on the screen changes, so there are simp ly two bright lines cast
by the slits, as expected, when light behaves like ray s. We also note that the fringes get fainter farther away from the center.
Consequently, not all 15 fringes may be observable.
or
Suppose you pass light from a 633 nm He-Ne laser through two slits and find that the separation between two conse cutive
fringes at a screen 2.0 m away is 4.0 mm. What is the separa tion of slits?
StrategyExample: Calculating the Highest Order Possible
Example: Finding a slit separation from an Interference Pattern (2)

11.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84148The phenomenon is two-slit interference as illustrated in Figure and the third bright line is due to third -order constructive
interference, which means that. We are given and. The wavelength can thus be found using
Equation for constructive interference.
Solution
Solving Equation for the wavelength gives
Substituting known values yields
Significance
To three digits, this is the wavelength of light emitte d by the common He-Ne laser. Not by coincidence, this red color is similar
to that emitted by neon lights. More important, however, is the fact that interference patterns can be used to measure
wavelength. Young did this for visible wavelengths. This analytical technique is still widely used to measure electromagnetic
spectra. For a given order, the angle for constructive interference increases with, so that spectra (measurem ents of intensity
versus wavelength) can be obtained.
This page titled 11.6: Mathematics of Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.3: Mathematics of Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

11.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415211.7: Single-Slit Diffraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the phenomenon of diffraction and the conditi ons under which it is observed
Describe diffraction through a single slit
After passing through a narrow aperture (opening), a wa ve propagating in a specific direction tends to spre ad out. For example,
sound waves that enter a room through an open door ca n be heard even if the listener is in a part of the room where the geometry of
ray propagation dictates that there should only be silence. Similarly, ocean waves passing through an open ing in a breakwater can
spread throughout the bay inside. (Figure). The sprea ding and bending of sound and ocean waves are two exa mples of
diffraction, which is the bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle—a phenomenon ex hibited by all types of
waves.
Figure: Because of the diffraction of waves, ocean wa ves entering through an opening in a breakwater can spread throughout
the bay. (credit: modification of map data from Goo gle Earth)
The diffraction of sound waves is apparent to us becau se wavelengths in the audible region are approximate ly the same size as the
objects they encounter, a condition that must be sat isfied if diffraction effects are to be observed ea sily. Since the wavelengths of
visible light range from approximately 390 to 770 n m, most objects do not diffract light significantly. Howe ver, situations do occur
in which apertures are small enough that the diffracti on of light is observable. For example, if you place y our middle and index
fingers close together and look through the opening at a light bulb, you can see a rather clear diffrac tion pattern, consisting of light
and dark lines running parallel to your fingers.
Diffraction through a Single Slit
Light passing through a single slit forms a diffrac tion pattern somewhat different from those formed by double slits or diffraction
gratings, which we discussed in the chapter on interfe rence. Figure shows a single-slit diffraction pattern. Note that the
central maximum is larger than maxima on either side and that the intensity decreases rapidly on either side. In contrast, a
diffraction grating produces evenly spaced lines that dim slowly on either side of the center.Learning Objectives

11.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84152
Figure: Single-slit diffraction pattern. (a) Monochro matic light passing through a single slit has a central maximum and many
smaller and dimmer maxima on either side. The central maximum is six times higher than shown. (b) The diagra m shows the bright
central maximum, and the dimmer and thinner maxima on either side.
The analysis of single-slit diffraction is illustrated in Figure. Here, the light arrives at the slit, illu minating it uniformly and is
in phase across its width. We then consider light pr opagating onwards from different parts of the same slit. According to Huygens’s
principle, every part of the wave front in the slit emits wave lets, as we discussed in The Nature of Light. These are like rays that
start out in phase and head in all directions. (Eac h ray is perpendicular to the wave front of a wavelet.) Assuming the screen is very
far away compared with the size of the slit, rays heading toward a common destination are nearly parallel. Whe n they travel
straight ahead, as in part (a) of the figure, they r emain in phase, and we observe a central maximum. Howev er, when rays travel at
an angle θ relative to the original direction of th e beam, each ray travels a different distance to a c ommon location, and they can
arrive in or out of phase. In part (b), the ray from the bottom travels a distance of one wavelength λ f arther than the ray from the
top. Thus, a ray from the center travels a distance λ/2 less than the one at the bottom edge of the sli t, arrives out of phase, and
interferes destructively. A ray from slightly above t he center and one from slightly above the bottom als o cancel one another. In
fact, each ray from the slit interferes destructivel y with another ray. In other words, a pair-wise cancellat ion of all rays results in a
dark minimum in intensity at this angle. By symmetry, another minimum occurs at the same angle to the r ight of the incident
direction (toward the bottom of the figure) of the ligh t.
Figure: Light passing through a single slit is diffracte d in all directions and may interfere constructively or destructively,
depending on the angle. The difference in path leng th for rays from either side of the slit is seen to be a.
At the larger angle shown in part (c), the path length s differ by for rays from the top and bottom of th e slit. One ray travels a
distance different from the ray from the bottom an d arrives in phase, interfering constructively. Two rays, each from slightly

11.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84152above those two, also add constructively. Most rays from the slit have another ray to interfere with construct ively, and a maximum
in intensity occurs at this angle. However, not all ray s interfere constructively for this situation, so t he maximum is not as intense as
the central maximum. Finally, in part (d), the angle s hown is large enough to produce a second minimum. As seen in the figure, the
difference in path length for rays from either side o f the slit is, and we see that a destructive minimum is obtained when this
distance is an integral multiple of the wavelength.
Thus, to obtain destructive interference for a single slit,
where
is the slit width,
is the light’s wavelength,
is the angle relative to the original direction of t he light, and
is the order of the minimum.
Figure shows a graph of intensity for single-slit in terference, and it is apparent that the maxima on ei ther side of the central
maximum are much less intense and not as wide. This effe ct is explored in Double-Slit Diffraction.
Figure: A graph of single-slit diffraction intensity sh owing the central maximum to be wider and much more intense than
those to the sides. In fact, the central maximum is six times higher than shown here.
Visible light of wavelength 550 nm falls on a single slit and produces its second diffraction minimum at an angle of 45.0°
relative to the incident direction of the light, as in Fig ure.
a. What is the width of the slit?
b. At what angle is the first minimum produced?Example: Calculating Single-Slit Diffraction

11.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84152
Figure: In this example, we analyze a graph of the si ngle-slit diffraction pattern.
Strategy
From the given information, and assuming the screen is far away from the slit, we can use the equation first to find
, and again to find the angle for the first minimum.
Solution
a. We are given that,, and. Solving the equation for and substituting known values
gives
b. Solving the equation for and substituting the known values gives
Thus the angle is
Significance
We see that the slit is narrow (it is only a few times greater than the wavelength of light). This is consisten t with the fact that
light must interact with an object comparable in siz e to its wavelength in order to exhibit significant wave effects such as this
single-slit diffraction pattern. We also see that the central maximum extends 20.7° on either side of th e original beam, for a
width of about 41°. The angle between the first and sec ond minima is only about 24°(45.0°−20.7°). Thus, th e second maximum
is only about half as wide as the central maximum.
Suppose the slit width in Example is increased to. Wh at are the new angular positions for the first, secon d,
and third minima? Would a fourth minimum exist?Exercise

11.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84152Answer
,,; no
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the intensity relative to the central maximum of the single-slit diffraction peaks
Calculate the intensity relative to the central maximum of an arbitrary point on the screen
To calculate the intensity of the diffraction patte rn, we follow the phasor method used for calculations with ac circuits in
Alternating-Current Circuits. If we consider that there are Huygens sources acros s the slit shown previously, with each source
separated by a distance a/N from its adjacent neighbor s, the path difference between waves from adjacent so urces reaching the
arbitrary point on the screen is. This distance is equivalent to a phase difference of. The phasor
diagram for the waves arriving at the point whose ang ular position is is shown in Figure. The amplitude of the phasor for
each Huygens wavelet is, the amplitude of the resulta nt phasor is, and the phase difference between the wavelets from the
first and the last sources is
With, the phasor diagram approaches a circular arc of length and radius. Since the length of the arc is for
any, the radius of the arc must decrease as increases (or equivalently, as the phasors form tighter spirals).
Figure: (a) Phasor diagram corresponding to the angula r position θθ in the single-slit diffraction pattern. The phase difference
between the wavelets from the first and last sources is. (b) The geometry of the phasor diagram.
The phasor diagram for ϕ = 0 (the center of the diffraction pattern) is sho wn in Figure using N=30. In this case, the phasors
are laid end to end in a straight line of length, the radius r goes to infinity, and the resultant has its maximu m value
. The intensity of the light can be obtained using the relation from Electromagnetic Waves. The intensity of the
maximum is then
where. The phasor diagrams for the first two zeros of the diffraction pattern are shown in Figure and Figur e
. In both cases, the phasors add to zero, after rotating through rad for m = 1 and rad for m = 2.Learning Objectives

11.7.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84152
Figure: Phasor diagrams (with 30 phasors) for various poi nts on the single-slit diffraction pattern. Multiple r otations around a
given circle have been separated slightly so that the phasors can be seen. (a) Central maximum, (b) first min imum, (c) first
maximum beyond central maximum, (d) second minimum, and (e) second maximum beyond central maximum.
The next two maxima beyond the central maxima are re presented by the phasor diagrams of parts (c) and (e). In part (c), the
phasors have rotated through rad and have formed a resultant phasor of magnitude. The length of the a rc formed by the
phasors is. Since this corresponds to 1.5 rotations aroun d a circle of diameter, we have
so
and
where
In part (e), the phasors have rotated through rad, c orresponding to 2.5 rotations around a circle of diame ter and arc length
. This results in. The proof is left as an exercise for th e student (Exercise 4.119).
These two maxima actually correspond to values of ϕ slightly less than rad and rad. Since the total len gth of the arc of the
phasor diagram is always, the radius of the arc dec reases as increases. As a result, and turn out to be slightly larger
for arcs that have not quite curled through rad an d rad, respectively. The exact values of for the max ima are investigated in
Exercise 4.120. In solving that problem, you will find that they are less than, but very close to, … rad.
To calculate the intensity at an arbitrary point on the screen, we return to the phasor diagram of Figure. Since the arc
subtends an angle ϕ at the center of the circle,
and
where is the amplitude of the resultant field. Solvi ng the Equation for and then substituting from E quation, we
find

11.7.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84152Now defining
we obtain
Equation relates the amplitude of the resultant fiel d at any point in the diffraction pattern to the amp litude at the
central maximum. The intensity is proportional to the square of the amplitude, so
where is the intensity at the center of the pattern.
For the central maximum, ϕ = 0, β is also zero and we see from l’Hôpital’s rule that, so that. For
the next maximum, rad, we have rad and when substituted into Equation, it yields
in agreement with what we found earlier in this sectio n using the diameters and circumferences of phasor d iagrams. Substituting
rad into Equation yields a similar result for.
A plot of Equation is shown in Figure and directly below it is a photograph of an actual diffraction pa ttern. Notice that
the central peak is much brighter than the others, and that the zeros of the pattern are located at th ose points where, which
occurs when rad. This corresponds to
or
which we derived for the destructive interference ro a single slit previously.

11.7.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84152
Figure: (a) The calculated intensity distribution of a single-slit diffraction pattern. (b) The actual dif fraction pattern.
Light of wavelength 550 nm passes through a slit of wid th 2.00 μm and produces a diffraction pattern similar to that shown in
Figure.
a. Find the locations of the first two minima in terms of the a ngle from the central maximum.
b. Determine the intensity relative to the central maxim um at a point halfway between these two minima.
Strategy
The minima are given by Equation 4.2.1,. The first two minima are for m = 1 and m = 2. Eq uation and
Equation can be used to determine the intensity once the an gle has been worked out.
Solution
1. Solving Equation 4.2.1 for θ gives us, so that
and
2. The halfway point between and is
Equation gives
From Equation, we can calculateExample: Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction

11.7.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84152Significance
This position, halfway between two minima, is very close to t he location of the maximum, expected near, or.
For the experiment in Example, at what angle from th e center is the third maximum and what is its intensi ty relative to
the central maximum?
Answer
If the slit width is varied, the intensity distribut ion changes, as illustrated in Figure. The central p eak is distributed over the
region from to. For small θ, this corresponds to an a ngular width. Hence, an increase in the
slit width results in a decrease in the width of the central peak. For a slit with a ≫ λ, the central peak is very sharp, whereas if a ≈
λ, it becomes quite broad.
Figure: Single-slit diffraction patterns for various sl it widths. As the slit width a increases from a=λ to 5λ and then to 10λ, the
width of the central peak decreases as the angles for t he first minima decrease as predicted by Equation 4.2.1.
A diffraction experiment in optics can require a lo t of preparation but this simulation by Andrew Duffy o ffers not only a quick
set up but also the ability to change the slit width instantly. Run the simulation and select “Single sli t.” You can adjust the slit
width and see the effect on the diffraction pattern on a scre en and as a graph.
This page titled 11.7: Single-Slit Diffraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.2: Single-Slit Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.
4.3: Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.Exercise
Diffraction Simulation

11.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415311.8: Double-Slit Diffraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the combined effect of interference and diffra ction with two slits, each with finite width
Determine the relative intensities of interference fri nges within a diffraction pattern
Identify missing orders, if any
When we studied interference in Young’s double-slit experiment, we ignored the diffraction effect in eac h slit. We assumed that the
slits were so narrow that on the screen you saw only th e interference of light from just two point sources. I f the slit is smaller than
the wavelength, then Figure 4.3.4a shows that there is just a spreading of light and no peaks or troughs on the screen. Therefore, it
was reasonable to leave out the diffraction effect i n that chapter. However, if you make the slit wider, Figure 4.3.4b and (c) show
that you cannot ignore diffraction. In this section, we study the complications to the double-slit experi ment that arise when you also
need to take into account the diffraction effect of each slit.
To calculate the diffraction pattern for two (or any number of) slits, we need to generalize the method we just used for a single slit.
That is, across each slit, we place a uniform distrib ution of point sources that radiate Huygens wavelets, and then we sum the
wavelets from all the slits. This gives the intensity a t any point on the screen. Although the details of that calculation can be
complicated, the final result is quite simple:
Two-Slit Diffraction Pattern
The diffraction pattern of two slits of width that a re separated by a distance d is the interference pattern of two point sources
separated by d multiplied by the diffraction pattern of a slit of width.
In other words, the locations of the interference fringes are given by the equatio n
the same as when we considered the slits to be point so urces, but the intensities of the fringes are now reduced by diffraction
effects, according to Equation 4.3.11. [Note that in the chapter on interference, we wrote and used the integer to
refer to interference fringes. Equation 4.2.1 also uses, but this time to refer to diffraction m inima. If both equations are used
simultaneously, it is good practice to use a different vari able (such as) for one of these integers in order to keep them distinct.]
Interference and diffraction effects operate simulta neously and generally produce minima at different a ngles. This gives rise to a
complicated pattern on the screen, in which some of the maxima of interference from the two slits are miss ing if the maximum of
the interference is in the same direction as the mi nimum of the diffraction. We refer to such a missing peak as a missing order. One
example of a diffraction pattern on the screen is sh own in Figure. The solid line with multiple peaks of v arious heights is the
intensity observed on the screen. It is a product of the interference pattern of waves from separate slits and the diffraction of waves
from within one slit.Learning Objectives

11.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84153
Figure: Diffraction from a double slit. The purple l ine with peaks of the same height are from the interf erence of the waves
from two slits; the blue line with one big hump in th e middle is the diffraction of waves from within one slit; and the thick red line
is the product of the two, which is the pattern observ ed on the screen. The plot shows the expected result fo r a slit width and
slit separation. The maximum of order for the inter ference is missing because the minimum of the diffracti on occurs
in the same direction.
Figure shows that the intensity of the fringe for m=3 is zero, but what about the other fringes? Calculate the intensity for
the fringe at m=1 relative to, the intensity of the cen tral peak.
Strategy
Determine the angle for the double-slit interference fringe, using the equation from Interference, then determine the relative
intensity in that direction due to diffraction by using E quation 4.3.11.
Solution
From the chapter on interference, we know that the bright i nterference fringes occur at, or
From Equation 4.3.11,
where
Substituting from above,
For, and,
Then, the intensity is
SignificanceExample: Intensity of the Fringes

11.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84153Note that this approach is relatively straightforward and gives a result that is almost exactly the same as the more complicated
analysis using phasors to work out the intensity val ues of the double-slit interference (thin line in Fi gure). The phasor
approach accounts for the downward slope in the diffrac tion intensity (blue line) so that the peak near m=1 occurs at a value of
θ ever so slightly smaller than we have shown here.
Suppose that in Young’s experiment, slits of width 0.020 mm are separated by 0.20 mm. If the slits are illuminat ed by
monochromatic light of wavelength 500 nm, how many br ight fringes are observed in the central peak of the diffraction
pattern?
Solution
From Equation 4.2.1, the angular position of the first diffraction minimum i s.
Using for, we find
which is the maximum interference order that fits in side the central peak. We note that are missing orde rs as
matches exactly. Accordingly, we observe bright fringes for
m = −9, −8, −7, −6, −5, −4, −3, −2, −1, 0, +1, +2, +3, +4, +5, +6, +7, +8, and +9
for a total of 19 bright fringes.
For the experiment in Example, show that m=20 is also a m issing order.
Solution
From, the interference maximum occurs at for. From Equation 4.2.1, this is also the angle for the
second diffraction minimum. (Note: Both equations use the index m but they refer to separate phenomena.)
Explore the effects of double-slit diffraction. In t his simulation written by Fu-Kwun Hwang, select N=2 using the slider and see
what happens when you control the slit width, slit separation and the wavelength. Can you make an order go “missing?”
This page titled 11.8: Double-Slit Diffraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.4: Double-Slit Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.Example: Two-Slit Diffraction
Exercise

11.9.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8414911.9: Multiple-Slit Interference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the locations and intensities of secondary m axima for multiple-slit interference
Analyzing the interference of light passing through t wo slits lays out the theoretical framework of interf erence and gives us a
historical insight into Thomas Young’s experiments. However, much of the modern-day application of slit i nterference uses not just
two slits but many, approaching infinity for practic al purposes. The key optical element is called a diffraction grating, an
important tool in optical analysis, which we discuss in d etail in chapter on Diffraction. Here, we start the analysis of multiple-slit
interference by taking the results from our analysis o f the double slit (N=2) and extending it to configura tions with three, four, and
much larger numbers of slits.
Figure shows the simplest case of multiple-slit interf erence, with three slits, or N=3. The spacing between sl its is d, and the
path length difference between adjacent slits is d sin θ, same as the case for the double slit. What is new is that the path length
difference for the first and the third slits is 2d sin θ. The condition for constructive interference i s the same as for the double slit,
that is
When this condition is met, 2d sin θ is automatical ly a multiple of λ, so all three rays combine construct ively, and the bright fringes
that occur here are called principal maxima. But what happens when the path length difference between adjac ent slits is only λ/2?
We can think of the first and second rays as interf ering destructively, but the third ray remains unalte red. Instead of obtaining a dark
fringe, or a minimum, as we did for the double slit, we see a se condary maximum with intensity lower than the principal ma xima.
Figure: Interference with three slits. Different pair s of emerging rays can combine constructively or destru ctively at the same
time, leading to secondary maxima.
In general, for N slits, these secondary maxima occur whenever an unpai red ray is present that does not go away due to destr uctive
interference. This occurs at (N−2) evenly spaced posit ions between the principal maxima. The amplitude of the electromagnetic
wave is correspondingly diminished to 1/N of the wave a t the principal maxima, and the light intensity, being proportional to the
square of the wave amplitude, is diminished to of th e intensity compared to the principal maxima. As Figu re
Interference fringe patterns for two, three and four slits. As the number of slits increases, more secondary m axima appear, but the
principal maxima shows, a dark fringe is located betwe en every maximum (principal or secondary). As N grows larger and the
number of bright and dark fringes increase, the width s of the maxima become narrower due to the closely loc ated neighboring dark
fringes. Because the total amount of light energy rem ains unaltered, narrower maxima require that each max imum reaches a
correspondingly higher intensity.Learning Objectives

11.9.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84149
Figure: Interference fringe patterns for two, three and four slits. As the number of slits increases, more seco ndary maxima
appear, but the principal maxima become brighter an d narrower. (a) Graph and (b) photographs of fringe patterns.
This page titled 11.9: Multiple-Slit Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.4: Multiple-Slit Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

11.10.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415411.10: Diffraction Gratings
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Discuss the pattern obtained from diffraction gratings
Explain diffraction grating effects
Analyzing the interference of light passing through t wo slits lays out the theoretical framework of interf erence and gives us a
historical insight into Thomas Young’s experiments. However, most modern-day applications of slit interfer ence use not just two
slits but many, approaching infinity for practical p urposes. The key optical element is called a diffra ction grating, an important tool
in optical analysis.
Diffraction Gratings: An Infinite Number of Slits
The analysis of multi-slit interference in Interference allows us to consider what happens when the number of slits N approaches
infinity. Recall that secondary maxima appear betwee n the principal maxima. We can see there will be an i nfinite number of
secondary maxima that appear, and an infinite number of dark fringes between them. This makes the spacing between the fringes,
and therefore the width of the maxima, infinitesimall y small. Furthermore, because the intensity of the seco ndary maxima is
proportional to, it approaches zero so that the sec ondary maxima are no longer seen. What remains are o nly the principal
maxima, now very bright and very narrow (Figure).
Figure: (a) Intensity of light transmitted through a large number of slits. When N approaches infinity, onl y the principal
maxima remain as very bright and very narrow lines. (b) A laser beam passed through a diffraction grating. (credit b: modification
of work by Sebastian Stapelberg)
In reality, the number of slits is not infinite, but it can be very large—large enough to produce the eq uivalent effect. A prime
example is an optical element called a diffraction grating. A diffraction grating can be manufactured by carving glass with a sharp
tool in a large number of precisely positioned paral lel lines, with untouched regions acting like slits (Figure). This type of
grating can be photographically mass produced rathe r cheaply. Because there can be over 1000 lines per m illimeter across theLearning Objectives

11.10.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84154grating, when a section as small as a few millimeters i s illuminated by an incoming ray, the number of ill uminated slits is
effectively infinite, providing for very sharp principa l maxima.
Figure: A diffraction grating can be manufactured b y carving glass with a sharp tool in a large number of precisely
positioned parallel lines.
Diffraction gratings work both for transmission of lig ht, as in Figure, and for reflection of light, as on butterfly wings and
the Australian opal in Figure. Natural diffraction gr atings also occur in the feathers of certain birds su ch as the
hummingbird. Tiny, finger-like structures in regular patterns act as reflection gratings, producing const ructive interference that
gives the feathers colors not solely due to their pigment ation. This is called iridescence.
Figure: (a) Light passing through a diffraction grati ng is diffracted in a pattern similar to a double slit, with bright regions at
various angles. (b) The pattern obtained for white li ght incident on a grating. The central maximum is wh ite, and the higher-order
maxima disperse white light into a rainbow of colors.
Figure: (a) This Australian opal and (b) butterfly wi ngs have rows of reflectors that act like reflection g ratings, reflecting
different colors at different angles. (credit a: modi fication of work by "Opals-On-Black"/Flickr; credit b: modification of work by
“whologwhy”/Flickr)

11.10.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84154Applications of Diffraction Gratings
Where are diffraction gratings used in applications? Diffraction gratings are commonly used for spectroscopic dispersion and
analysis of light. What makes them particularly use ful is the fact that they form a sharper pattern than double slits do. That is, their
bright fringes are narrower and brighter while their dark regions are darker. Diffraction gratings are key components of
monochromators used, for example, in optical imaging o f particular wavelengths from biological or medical samples. A diffraction
grating can be chosen to specifically analyze a wave length emitted by molecules in diseased cells in a biopsy sample or to help
excite strategic molecules in the sample with a select ed wavelength of light. Another vital use is in optica l fiber technologies where
fibers are designed to provide optimum performance a t specific wavelengths. A range of diffraction gratin gs are available for
selecting wavelengths for such use.
Diffraction gratings with 10,000 lines per centimeter are readily available. Suppose you have one, and you s end a beam of
white light through it to a screen 2.00 m away.
a. Find the angles for the first-order diffraction of the sho rtest and longest wavelengths of visible light (380 and 760 nm,
respectively).
b. What is the distance between the ends of the rainbow of v isible light produced on the screen for first-order interf erence?
(Figure).
c.
Figure: (a) The diffraction grating considered in th is example produces a rainbow of colors on a screen a d istance
from the grating. The distances along the screen are measured perpendicular to the x-direction. In other words, the
rainbow pattern extends out of the page.
(b) In a bird’s-eye view, the rainbow pattern can be seen o n a table where the equipment is placed.
Strategy
Once a value for the diffraction grating’s slit spaci ng has been determined, the angles for the sharp lin es can be found using
the equation
for.
Since there are 10,000 lines per centimeter, each li ne is separated by 1/10,000 of a centimeter. Once we kn ow the angles, we an
find the distances along the screen by using simple trigo nometry.Example: Calculating Typical Diffraction Grating Effects

11.10.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84154Solution
1. The distance between slits is or. Let us call the two angl es for violet
(380 nm) and for red (760 nm). Solving the equation for,
where m = 1 for the first-order and. Substituting these valu es gives
Thus the angle is
Similarly,
Thus the angle is
Notice that in both equations, we reported the results of th ese intermediate calculations to four significant fig ures to use
with the calculation in part (b).
2. The distances on the screen are labeled and in Figure. Notice that. We can solve for and.
That is,
and
The distance between them is therefore
Significance
The large distance between the red and violet ends o f the rainbow produced from the white light indicates the potential this
diffraction grating has as a spectroscopic tool. The m ore it can spread out the wavelengths (greater dispersi on), the more detail
can be seen in a spectrum. This depends on the qualit y of the diffraction grating—it must be very precis ely made in addition to
having closely spaced lines.
If the line spacing of a diffraction grating is no t precisely known, we can use a light source with a well -determined
wavelength to measure it. Suppose the first-order con structive fringe of the emission line of hydrogen () is
measured at 11.36° using a spectrometer with a diffraction grating. What is the line spacing of this grating?
Answer
or 300 lines per millimeter
Take the same simulation we used for double-slit diffra ction and try increasing the number of slits from to. The
primary peaks become sharper, and the secondary peak s become less and less pronounced. By the time you reac h the maximum
number of, the system is behaving much like a diffract ion grating.Exercise

11.10.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84154This page titled 11.10: Diffraction Gratings is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.5: Diffraction Gratings by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

11.11.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413611.11: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Discuss the propagation of transverse waves.
Discuss Huygens’s principle.
Explain the bending of light.
Figure shows how a transverse wave looks as viewed from abo ve and from the side. A light wave can be imagined t o
propagate like this, although we do not actually see it wiggling through space. From above, we view the wavefro nts (or wave
crests) as we would by looking down on the ocean waves. T he side view would be a graph of the electric or magn etic field. The
view from above is perhaps the most useful in developing concepts about wave optics.
Figure: A transverse wave, such as an electromagnetic w ave like light, as viewed from above and from the sid e. The
direction of propagation is perpendicular to the wav efronts (or wave crests) and is represented by an arrow like a ray.
The Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) dev eloped a useful technique for determining in detail how and where waves
propagate, which is known as Huygen's principle:
Every point on a wavefront is a source of wavelets tha t spread out in the forward direction at the same sp eed as the wave itself.
The new wavefront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets.
Figure shows how Huygens’s principle is applied. A wavefro nt is the long edge that moves, for example, the cr est or the
trough. Each point on the wavefront emits a semicircul ar wave that moves at the propagation speed. These ar e drawn at a time
later, so that they have moved a distance. The new wav efront is a line tangent to the wavelets and is where we would expect
the wave to be a time later. Huygens’s principle work s for all types of waves, including water waves, sound wa ves, and light
waves. We will find it useful not only in describing h ow light waves propagate, but also in explaining the l aws of reflection and
refraction. In addition, we will see that Huygens’s princip le tells us how and where light rays interfere.Learning Objectives
Huygen's Principle

11.11.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84136
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wave front. Each point on the wavefront emits a semicircul ar wavelet that
moves a distance. The new wavefront is a line tangent to the wavelets.
Figure shows how a mirror reflects an incoming wave at an angle equal to the incident angle, verifying the law of reflection.
As the wavefront strikes the mirror, wavelets are first em itted from the left part of the mirror and then the right. The wavelets closer
to the left have had time to travel farther, producing a wa vefront traveling in the direction shown.
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wave front striking a mirror. The wavelets shown were emitt ed as each
point on the wavefront struck the mirror. The tangen t to these wavelets shows that the new wavefront has bee n reflected at an angle
equal to the incident angle. The direction of propa gation is perpendicular to the wavefront, as shown by the downward-pointing
arrows.
The law of refraction can be explained by applying Hu ygens’s principle to a wavefront passing from one medi um to another
(Figure). Each wavelet in the figure was emitted when t he wavefront crossed the interface between the media. Since the
speed of light is smaller in the second medium, the wa ves do not travel as far in a given time, and the new wavefront changes
direction as shown. This explains why a ray changes di rection to become closer to the perpendicular when l ight slows down.
Snell’s law can be derived from the geometry in Figure but this is left as an exercise for ambitious readers.
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wave front traveling from one medium to another where it s speed is less.
The ray bends toward the perpendicular, since the wav elets have a lower speed in the second medium.

11.11.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84136What happens when a wave passes through an opening, su ch as light shining through an open door into a dar k room? For light, we
expect to see a sharp shadow of the doorway on the fl oor of the room, and we expect no light to bend aroun d corners into other
parts of the room. When sound passes through a door, we expect to hear it everywhere in the room and, thus, expect that sound
spreads out when passing through such an opening (Figu re). What is the difference between the behavior of sound waves
and light waves in this case? The answer is that light h as very short wavelengths and acts like a ray. Sound h as wavelengths on the
order of the size of the door and bends around corn ers (for frequency of 1000 Hz,, about
three times smaller than the width of the doorway).
Figure: (a) Light passing through a doorway makes a sha rp outline on the floor. Since light’s wavelength is v ery small
compared with the size of the door, it acts like a ra y. (b) Sound waves bend into all parts of the room, a wave effect, because their
wavelength is similar to the size of the door.
If we pass light through smaller openings, often calle d slits, we can use Huygens’s principle to see that ligh t bends as sound does
(Figure). The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle is called diffraction. Diffraction is a wave
characteristic and occurs for all types of waves. If diffraction is observed for some phenomenon, it is evidence that the phenomenon
is a wave.
Figure: Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wave front striking an opening. The edges of the wavefront bend after
passing through the opening, a process called diffracti on. The amount of bending is more extreme for a small opening, consistent
with the fact that wave characteristics are most notic eable for interactions with objects about the same size as the wavelength.
Summary
An accurate technique for determining how and where waves p ropagate is given by Huygens’s principle: Every point on a
wavefront is a source of wavelets that spread out in the forwar d direction at the same speed as the wave itself. The new
wavefront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets.
Diffraction is the bending of a wave around the edges of a n opening or other obstacle.
Glossary
diffraction
the bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle
Huygens’s principle
every point on a wavefront is a source of wavelets that spr ead out in the forward direction at the same speed as the wav e itself.
The new wavefront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets
This page titled 11.11: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.11.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8413627.2: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/collegephysics.

11.12.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415511.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the diffraction limit on resolution
Describe the diffraction limit on beam propagation
Light diffracts as it moves through space, bending ar ound obstacles, interfering constructively and destruct ively. This can be used
as a spectroscopic tool—a diffraction grating dispe rses light according to wavelength, for example, and i s used to produce spectra
—but diffraction also limits the detail we can obtain in im ages.
Figure shows the effect of passing light through a s mall circular aperture. Instead of a bright spot with sharp edges, we
obtain a spot with a fuzzy edge surrounded by circles of light. This pattern is caused by diffraction, sim ilar to that produced by a
single slit. Light from different parts of the circu lar aperture interferes constructively and destruct ively. The effect is most
noticeable when the aperture is small, but the effect is there for large apertures as well.
Figure: (a) Monochromatic light passed through a small circular aperture produces this diffraction pattern. (b) Two pointlight sources that are close to one another produce ov erlapping images because of diffraction. (c) If the so urces are closer together,
they cannot be distinguished or resolved.
How does diffraction affect the detail that can be ob served when light passes through an aperture? Figure sh ows the
diffraction pattern produced by two point-light sourc es that are close to one another. The pattern is simi lar to that for a single point
source, and it is still possible to tell that there a re two light sources rather than one. If they are cl oser together, as in Figure,
we cannot distinguish them, thus limiting the detail or resolution we can obtain. This limit is an inescapable consequen ce of the
wave nature of light.
Diffraction limits the resolution in many situations. The acuity of our vision is limited because light p asses through the pupil, which
is the circular aperture of the eye. Be aware that t he diffraction-like spreading of light is due to th e limited diameter of a light beam,
not the interaction with an aperture. Thus, light passi ng through a lens with a diameter shows this effect an d spreads, blurring the
image, just as light passing through an aperture of di ameter does. Thus, diffraction limits the resolution of any system having a
lens or mirror. Telescopes are also limited by diffract ion, because of the finite diameter of the primary mir ror.
Just what is the limit? To answer that question, consi der the diffraction pattern for a circular aperture, which has a central maximum
that is wider and brighter than the maxima surroundi ng it (similar to a slit) (Figure). It can be shown t hat, for a circular
aperture of diameter, the first minimum in the diff raction pattern occurs at (providing the aperture is large compared
with the wavelength of light, which is the case for mos t optical instruments). The accepted criterion for d etermining the diffraction
limit to resolution based on this angle is known as th e Rayleigh criterion, which was developed by Lord Rayleigh in the
nineteenth century.
The diffraction limit to resolution states that two images are just resolvable when the center of the dif fraction pattern of one is
directly over the first minimum of the diffraction pa ttern of the other (Figure).Learning Objectives
Rayleigh Criterion

11.12.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84155The first minimum is at an angle of, so that two point ob jects are just resolvable if they are separated by the an gle
where is the wavelength of light (or other electroma gnetic radiation) and is the diameter of the apert ure, lens, mirror, etc., with
which the two objects are observed. In this expression, has units of radians. This angle is also commonly kn own as the
diffraction limit.
Figure: (a) Graph of intensity of the diffraction pa ttern for a circular aperture. Note that, similar to a single slit, the central
maximum is wider and brighter than those to the sides. (b) Two point objects produce overlapping diffractio n patterns. Shown here
is the Rayleigh criterion for being just resolvable. T he central maximum of one pattern lies on the first m inimum of the other.
All attempts to observe the size and shape of object s are limited by the wavelength of the probe. Even th e small wavelength of light
prohibits exact precision. When extremely small wave length probes are used, as with an electron microscop e, the system is
disturbed, still limiting our knowledge. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle asserts that this limit is fu ndamental and inescapable, as
we shall see in the chapter on quantum mechanics.
The primary mirror of the orbiting Hubble Space Teles cope has a diameter of 2.40 m. Being in orbit, this telescope avoids the
degrading effects of atmospheric distortion on its reso lution. (a) What is the angle between two just-resolva ble point light
sources (perhaps two stars)? Assume an average light wav elength of 550 nm. (b) If these two stars are at a dis tance of 2 million
light-years, which is the distance of the Andromeda Galax y, how close together can they be and still be resolv ed? (A light-year,
or ly, is the distance light travels in 1 year.)
Strategy
The Rayleigh criterion stated in Equation,, gives the smal lest possible angle θ between point sources, or the
best obtainable resolution. Once this angle is known, we can calculate the distance between the stars, since we are given how
far away they are.
Solution
1. The Rayleigh criterion for the minimum resolvable a ngle is
Entering known values givesExample: Calculating Diffraction Limits of the Hubble Space Telescope

11.12.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841552. The distance s between two objects a distance r away and separated by an angle θ is. Substituting known va lues
gives
Significance
The angle found in part (a) is extraordinarily small (less than 1/50,000 of a degree), because the primary mirror is so large
compared with the wavelength of light. As noticed, diff raction effects are most noticeable when light inter acts with objects
having sizes on the order of the wavelength of light. However, the effect is still there, and there is a di ffraction limit to what is
observable. The actual resolution of the Hubble Teles cope is not quite as good as that found here. As with a ll instruments, there
are other effects, such as nonuniformities in mirror s or aberrations in lenses that further limit resoluti on. However, Figure
gives an indication of the extent of the detail ob servable with the Hubble because of its size and qualit y, and especially
because it is above Earth’s atmosphere.
Figure: These two photographs of the M82 Galaxy give an idea of the observable detail using (a) a ground-b ased
telescope and (b) the Hubble Space Telescope. (credit a: modification of work by “Ricnun”/Wikimedia Comm ons)
The answer in part (b) indicates that two stars separat ed by about half a light-year can be resolved. The av erage distance
between stars in a galaxy is on the order of five lig ht-years in the outer parts and about one light-yea r near the galactic center.
Therefore, the Hubble can resolve most of the individu al stars in Andromeda Galaxy, even though it lies at suc h a huge
distance that its light takes 2 million years to rea ch us. Figure shows another mirror used to observe ra dio waves from
outer space.
Figure: A 305-m-diameter paraboloid at Arecibo in P uerto Rico is lined with reflective material, making it into a radio
telescope. It is the largest curved focusing dish in the world. Although for Arecibo is much larger than fo r the Hubble
Telescope, it detects radiation of a much longer wave length and its diffraction limit is significantly poor er than Hubble’s. The
Arecibo telescope is still very useful, because importan t information is carried by radio waves that is not ca rried by visible
light. (credit: Jeff Hitchcock)

11.12.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84155What is the angular resolution of the Arecibo telesco pe shown in Figure when operated at 21-cm wavelength? Ho w
does it compare to the resolution of the Hubble Telescope?
Answer
, 3000 times broader than the Hubble Telescope
Diffraction is not only a problem for optical instrum ents but also for the electromagnetic radiation itse lf. Any beam of light having
a finite diameter and a wavelength λ exhibits diffra ction spreading. The beam spreads out with an angle θ given by Equation
,. Take, for example, a laser beam made of rays as pa rallel as possible (angles between rays as close to θ = 0° as
possible) instead spreads out at an angle, where is the diameter of the beam and λ is its wavelength. Th is spreading
is impossible to observe for a flashlight because its beam is not very parallel to start with. However, for l ong-distance transmission
of laser beams or microwave signals, diffraction spreadi ng can be significant (Figure). To avoid this, we can increase D.
This is done for laser light sent to the moon to mea sure its distance from Earth. The laser beam is expand ed through a telescope to
make much larger and θ smaller.
Figure: The beam produced by this microwave transmissio n antenna spreads out at a minimum angle due to
diffraction. It is impossible to produce a near-parall el beam because the beam has a limited diameter.
In most biology laboratories, resolution is an issue whe n the use of the microscope is introduced. The smaller the distance x by
which two objects can be separated and still be seen as distinct, the greater the resolution. The resolvin g power of a lens is defined
as that distance x. An expression for resolving power is obtained from t he Rayleigh criterion. Figure shows two point
objects separated by a distance x. According to the Rayleigh criterion, resolution is possible when the minimum angular separation
is
where is the distance between the specimen and the o bjective lens, and we have used the small angle appro ximation (i.e., we
have assumed that x is much smaller than d), so that. Therefore, the resolving power is
Another way to look at this is by the concept of nume rical aperture (NA), which is a measure of the maximum acceptance angle at
which a lens will take light and still contain it with in the lens. Figure shows a lens and an object at poi nt P. The NA here is
a measure of the ability of the lens to gather light and resolve fine detail. The angle subtended by th e lens at its focus is defined to
be. From the figure and again using the small angle approx imation, we can write
The NA for a lens is, where n is the index of refraction of the medium between th e objective lens and the object at
point P. From this definition for NA, we can see thatExercise

11.12.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84155In a microscope, NA is important because it relates to the resolving power of a lens. A lens with a large NA is able to resolve finer
details. Lenses with larger NA are also able to collect more light and so give a b righter image. Another way to describe this
situation is that the larger the NA, the larger the cone of light that can be brought into the lens, so more of the diffraction modes are
collected. Thus the microscope has more information to fo rm a clear image, and its resolving power is higher.
Figure: (a) Two points separated by a distance x and p ositioned a distance away from the objective. (b) Te rms and
symbols used in discussion of resolving power for a lens an d an object at point P (credit a: modification of w ork by
“Infopro”/Wikimedia Commons).
One of the consequences of diffraction is that the foc al point of a beam has a finite width and intensity distribution. Imagine
focusing when only considering geometric optics, as i n Figure. The focal point is regarded as an infinit ely small point with
a huge intensity and the capacity to incinerate most samples, irrespective of the NA of the objective lens—an unphysical
oversimplification. For wave optics, due to diffractio n, we take into account the phenomenon in which the f ocal point spreads to
become a focal spot (Figure) with the size of the spot decreasing with increasing NA. Consequently, the intensity in the
focal spot increases with increasing NA. The higher the NA, the greater the chances of photodegrading the spec imen. However, the
spot never becomes a true point.
Figure:(a) In geometric optics, the focus is modelled as a point, but it is not physically possible to produce such a point
because it implies infinite intensity. (b) In wave opt ics, the focus is an extended region.
In a different type of microscope, molecules within a specimen are made to emit light through a mechanism called fluorescence. By
controlling the molecules emitting light, it has beco me possible to construct images with resolution much f iner than the Rayleigh
criterion, thus circumventing the diffraction limit. The development of super-resolved fluorescence micro scopy led to the 2014
Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

11.12.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84155In this Optical Resolution Model, two diffraction patter ns for light through two circular apertures are shown side by side in this
simulation by Fu-Kwun Hwang. Watch the patterns merge as you de crease the aperture diameters.
This page titled 11.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.6: Circular Apertures and Resolution by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.Optical Resolution Simulation

11.13.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415011.13: Interference in Thin Films
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the phase changes that occur upon reflection
Describe fringes established by reflected rays of a comm on source
Explain the appearance of colors in thin films
The bright colors seen in an oil slick floating on wat er or in a sunlit soap bubble are caused by interfe rence. The brightest colors are
those that interfere constructively. This interfere nce is between light reflected from different surfaces of a thin film; thus, the effect
is known as thin-film interference.
As we noted before, interference effects are most promi nent when light interacts with something having a siz e similar to its
wavelength. A thin film is one having a thickness sma ller than a few times the wavelength of light,. Since color is associated
indirectly with and because all interference depend s in some way on the ratio of to the size of the obje ct involved, we should
expect to see different colors for different thicknesses o f a film, as in Figure.
Figure: These soap bubbles exhibit brilliant colors whe n exposed to sunlight. (credit: Scott Robinson)
What causes thin-film interference? Figure shows how lig ht reflected from the top and bottom surfaces of a film can
interfere. Incident light is only partially reflect ed from the top surface of the film (ray 1). The rem ainder enters the film and is itself
partially reflected from the bottom surface. Part of the light reflected from the bottom surface can eme rge from the top of the film
(ray 2) and interfere with light reflected from the top (ray 1). The ray that enters the film travels a greater distance, so it may be in
or out of phase with the ray reflected from the top. However, consider for a moment, again, the bubbles in Fi gure. The
bubbles are darkest where they are thinnest. Furthermor e, if you observe a soap bubble carefully, you will no te it gets dark at the
point where it breaks. For very thin films, the diffe rence in path lengths of rays 1 and 2 in Figure is neg ligible, so why
should they interfere destructively and not construc tively? The answer is that a phase change can occur upon reflection, as
discussed next.Learning Objectives

11.13.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84150
Figure: Light striking a thin film is partially refle cted (ray 1) and partially refracted at the top surf ace. The refracted ray is
partially reflected at the bottom surface and emerge s as ray 2. These rays interfere in a way that depends o n the thickness of the
film and the indices of refraction of the various med ia.
Changes in Phase due to Reflection
We saw earlier (Waves) that reflection of mechanical waves can involve a 180° phase change. For example, a traveling wave on a
string is inverted (i.e., a 180° phase change) upon reflection at a boundary to which a heavier string i s tied. However, if the second
string is lighter (or more precisely, of a lower line ar density), no inversion occurs. Light waves produce the same effect, but the
deciding parameter for light is the index of refract ion. Light waves undergo a 180° or radians phase cha nge upon reflection at an
interface beyond which is a medium of higher index o f refraction. No phase change takes place when reflectin g from a medium of
lower refractive index (Figure). Because of the perio dic nature of waves, this phase change or inversion is equivalent to
in distance travelled, or path length. Both the path le ngth and refractive indices are important factors in thin -film interference.
Figure: Reflection at an interface for light travel ing from a medium with index of refraction to a me dium with index of
refraction,, causes the phase of the wave to change by radians.
If the film in Figure is a soap bubble (essentially water with air on both sides), then a pha se shift of occurs for ray 1 but
not for ray 2. Thus, when the film is very thin and t he path length difference between the two rays is negl igible, they are exactly out
of phase, and destructive interference occurs at all wavelengths. Thus, the soap bubble is dark here. The thi ckness of the film
relative to the wavelength of light is the other cruc ial factor in thin-film interference. Ray 2 in Figur e travels a greater
distance than ray 1. For light incident perpendicular to the surface, ray 2 travels a distance approximat ely farther than ray 1.
When this distance is an integral or half-integral m ultiple of the wavelength in the medium (, where λ is the wavelength in
vacuum and is the index of refraction), constructi ve or destructive interference occurs, depending als o on whether there is a phase
change in either ray.

11.13.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84150Sophisticated cameras use a series of several lenses. Light can reflect from the surfaces of these vario us lenses and degrade
image clarity. To limit these reflections, lenses a re coated with a thin layer of magnesium fluoride, whi ch causes destructive
thin-film interference. What is the thinnest this f ilm can be, if its index of refraction is 1.38 and it is designed to limit the
reflection of 550-nm light, normally the most intense vis ible wavelength? Assume the index of refraction of the glas s is 1.52.
Strategy
Refer to Figure and use for air,, and. Both ray 1 and ray 2 have a λ/2 shift upon reflection.
Thus, to obtain destructive interference, ray 2 needs to travel a half wavelength farther than ray 1. For ra ys incident
perpendicularly, the path length difference is 2 t.
Solution
To obtain destructive interference here,
where is the wavelength in the film and is given by. T hus,
Solving for t and entering known values yields
Significance
Films such as the one in this example are most effective in producing destructive interference when the thinn est layer is used,
since light over a broader range of incident angles is reduced in intensity. These films are called nonreflective coatings; this is
only an approximately correct description, though, since other wavelengths are only partially cancelled. Nonreflective coatings
are also used in car windows and sunglasses.
Combining Path Length Difference with Phase Change
Thin-film interference is most constructive or most de structive when the path length difference for the two rays is an integral or
half-integral wavelength. That is, for rays incident perpe ndicularly,
To know whether interference is constructive or destru ctive, you must also determine if there is a phase ch ange upon reflection.
Thin-film interference thus depends on film thickne ss, the wavelength of light, and the refractive indices. For white light incident
on a film that varies in thickness, you can observe r ainbow colors of constructive interference for various wavelengths as the
thickness varies.
a. What are the three smallest thicknesses of a soap bubble that produce constructive interference for red light wi th a
wavelength of 650 nm? The index of refraction of soap is ta ken to be the same as that of water.
b. What three smallest thicknesses give destructive inte rference?
Strategy
Use Figure to visualize the bubble, which acts as a thin film between two layers of air. Thus for air, and
for soap (equivalent to water). There is a λ/2 shift for ray 1 reflected from the top surface of the bubb le and no shift
for ray 2 reflected from the bottom surface. To get constructive interference, then, the path length di fference (2 t) must be aExample: Calculating the Thickness of a Nonreflective Lens Coating
Example: Soap Bubbles

11.13.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84150half-integral multiple of the wavelength—the first t hree being, and. To get destructive interference, t he path
length difference must be an integral multiple of the wavel ength—the first three being 0,, and.
Solution
a. Constructive interference occurs here when
Thus, the smallest constructive thickness is
The next thickness that gives constructive interferen ce is, so that
Finally, the third thickness producing constructive inte rference is, so that
b. For destructive interference, the path length diffe rence here is an integral multiple of the wavelength. The first occurs for
zero thickness, since there is a phase change at the top sur face, that is,
the very thin (or negligibly thin) case discussed above. The first non-zero thickness producing destructive in terference is
Substituting known values gives
Finally, the third destructive thickness is, so that
Significance
If the bubble were illuminated with pure red light, we would see bright and dark bands at very uniform incr eases in thickness.
First would be a dark band at 0 thickness, then bright at 122 nm thickness, then dark at 244 nm, bright at 3 66 nm, dark at 488
nm, and bright at 610 nm. If the bubble varied smoothl y in thickness, like a smooth wedge, then the bands would be evenly
spaced.
Going further with Example, what are the next two thicknesse s of soap bubble that would lead to
a. constructive interference, and
b. destructive interference?
Answer a
853 nm and 1097 nm
Answer b
731 nm and 975 nmExercise

11.13.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84150Another example of thin-film interference can be see n when microscope slides are separated (see Figure). The slides are
very flat, so that the wedge of air between them incr eases in thickness very uniformly. A phase change occ urs at the second surface
but not the first, so a dark band forms where the sli des touch. The rainbow colors of constructive interferen ce repeat, going from
violet to red again and again as the distance between the slides increases. As the layer of air increases, the bands become more
difficult to see, because slight changes in incident angle have greater effects on path length difference s. If monochromatic light
instead of white light is used, then bright and dark bands are obtained rather than repeating rainbow colors.
Figure: (a) The rainbow-color bands are produced by thin-film interference in the air between the two g lass slides. (b)
Schematic of the paths taken by rays in the wedge of a ir between the slides. (c) If the air wedge is illumin ated with monochromatic
light, bright and dark bands are obtained rather tha n repeating rainbow colors.
An important application of thin-film interference i s found in the manufacturing of optical instruments. A lens or mirror can be
compared with a master as it is being ground, allowing it to be shaped to an accuracy of less than a wavele ngth over its entire
surface. Figure illustrates the phenomenon called Ne wton’s rings, which occurs when the plane surfaces of t wo lenses are
placed together. (The circular bands are called Newto n’s rings because Isaac Newton described them and their use in detail.
Newton did not discover them; Robert Hooke did, and Newton did not believe they were due to the wave character of light.) Each
successive ring of a given color indicates an increa se of only half a wavelength in the distance between t he lens and the blank, so
that great precision can be obtained. Once the lens is per fect, no rings appear.

11.13.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84150
Figure:“Newton’s rings” interference fringes are produ ced when two plano-convex lenses are placed together with their
plane surfaces in contact. The rings are created by in terference between the light reflected off the two surfaces as a result of a slight
gap between them, indicating that these surfaces are n ot precisely plane but are slightly convex. (credit: Ulf Seifert)
Thin-film interference has many other applications, bo th in nature and in manufacturing. The wings of certai n moths and butterflies
have nearly iridescent colors due to thin-film inter ference. In addition to pigmentation, the wing’s col or is affected greatly by
constructive interference of certain wavelengths ref lected from its film-coated surface. Some car manufa cturers offer special paint
jobs that use thin-film interference to produce col ors that change with angle. This expensive option is based on variation of thinfilm path length differences with angle. Security feat ures on credit cards, banknotes, driving licenses, and similar items prone to
forgery use thin-film interference, diffraction grat ings, or holograms. As early as 1998, Australia led the wa y with dollar bills
printed on polymer with a diffraction grating securi ty feature, making the currency difficult to forge. Ot her countries, such as
Canada, New Zealand, and Taiwan, are using similar technolog ies, while US currency includes a thin-film interference ef fect.
This page titled 11.13: Interference in Thin Films is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.5: Interference in Thin Films by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

11.14.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8414111.14: Thin Film Interference
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Discuss the rainbow formation by thin films.
The bright colors seen in an oil slick floating on wat er or in a sunlit soap bubble are caused by interfe rence. The brightest colors are
those that interfere constructively. This interfere nce is between light reflected from different surfaces of a thin film; thus, the effect
is known as thin film interference. As noticed before, interference effects are most promi nent when light interacts with something
having a size similar to its wavelength. A thin film is one having a thickness smaller than a few times the wavelength of light,.
Since color is associated indirectly with and since al l interference depends in some way on the ratio of to the size of the object
involved, we should expect to see different colors for diffe rent thicknesses of a film like in Figure.
Figure: These soap bubbles exhibit brilliant colors whe n exposed to sunlight. (credit: Scott Robinson, Flickr).
What causes thin film interference? Figure 2 shows how l ight reflected from the top and bottom surfaces of a film can interfere.
Incident light is only partially reflected from the top surface of the film (ray 1). The remainder enter s the film and is itself partially
reflected from the bottom surface. Part of the light reflected from the bottom surface can emerge from t he top of the film (ray 2)
and interfere with light reflected from the top (ray 1). Since the ray that enters the film travels a grea ter distance, it may be in or out
of phase with the ray reflected from the top. However, consider for a moment, again, the bubbles in Figure. The bubbles are
darkest where they are thinnest. Furthermore, if you o bserve a soap bubble carefully, you will note it gets d ark at the point where it
breaks. For very thin films, the difference in path leng ths of ray 1 and ray 2 in Figure is negligible; so wh y should they
interfere destructively and not constructively? The answe r is that a phase change can occur upon reflection. The r ule is as follows:
When light reflects from a medium having an index of refracti on greater than that of the medium in which it is traveling, a
phase change (or a) occurs.Learning Objectives

11.14.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84141
Figure: Light striking a thin film is partially refle cted (ray 1) and partially refracted at the top surf ace. The refracted ray is
partially reflected at the bottom surface and emerge s as ray 2. These rays will interfere in a way that dep ends on the thickness of the
film and the indices of refraction of the various med ia.
In the film in Figure is a soap bubble (essentially water with air on both sides), then there is a shift for ray 1 and none
for ray 2. Thus, when the film is very thin, the path l ength difference between the two rays is negligible, t hey are exactly out of
phase, and destructive interference will occur at all wavel engths and so the soap bubble will be dark here.
The thickness of the film relative to the wavelength of light is the other crucial factor in thin film i nterference. Ray 2 in Figure
travels a greater distance than ray 1. For light in cident perpendicular to the surface, ray 2 travels a distance approximately
farther than Ray 1. When this distance is an integral or half-integral multiple of the wavelength in the m edium (, where
is the wavelength in vacuum and is the index of ref raction), constructive or destructive interference o ccurs, depending also on
whether there is a phase change in either ray.
Sophisticated cameras use a series of several lenses. Light can reflect from the surfaces of these vario us lenses and degrade
image clarity. To limit these reflections, lenses are coated with a thin layer of magnesium fluoride that c auses destructive thin
film interference. What is the thinnest this film c an be, if its index of refraction is 1.38 and it is de signed to limit the reflection
of 550-nm light, normally the most intense visible wave length? The index of refraction of glass is 1.52.
Strategy
Refer to Figure and use for air,, and. Both ray 1 and ray 2 will have a shift upon
reflection. Thus, to obtain destructive interference, ray 2 will need to travel a half wavelength farther than ray 1. For rays
incident perpendicularly, the path length difference is.
Solution
To obtain destructive interference here,
where is the wavelength in the film and is given by.
Thus,
Solving for and entering known values yieldsExample: Calculating Non-reflective Lens Coating Using Thin Film Interference

11.14.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84141Discussion
Films such as the one in this example are most effective in producing destructive interference when the thinn est layer is used,
since light over a broader range of incident angles will be reduced in intensity. These films are called non-reflective coatings;
this is only an approximately correct description, tho ugh, since other wavelengths will only be partially can celled. Nonreflective coatings are used in car windows and sunglasse s.
Thin film interference is most constructive or most destructive when the path length difference for the two rays is an integral or
half-integral wavelength, respectively. That is, for rays incident perpendicularly, or
To know whether interference is constructive or destru ctive, you must also determine if there is a phase ch ange upon reflection.
Thin film interference thus depends on film thicknes s, the wavelength of light, and the refractive indic es. For white light incident
on a film that varies in thickness, you will observe r ainbow colors of constructive interference for vario us wavelengths as the
thickness varies.
a. What are the three smallest thicknesses of a soap bubble that produce constructive interference for red light wi th a
wavelength of 650 nm? The index of refraction of soap is ta ken to be the same as that of water.
b. What three smallest thicknesses will give destructive interference?
Strategy and Concept:
Use Figure to visualize the bubble. Note that for air, and for soap (equivalent to water). There
is a shift for ray 1 reflected from the top surface of the bubble, and no shift for ray 2 reflected fro m the bottom surface. To
get constructive interference, then, the path length difference () must be a half-integral multiple of t he wavelength -- the first
three being, and. To get destructive interference, the path length difference must be an integral mu ltiple of
the wavelength -- the first three being and.
Solution (a):
Constructive interference occurs here when
The smallest constructive thickness thus is
The next thickness that gives constructive interferen ce is, so that
Finally, the third thickness producing constructive inte rference is, so that
Solution (b):
For destructive interference, the path length difference here is an integral multi ple of the wavelength. The first occurs for zero
thickness, since there is a phase change at the top surface. T hat is,Example: Soap Bubbles: More Than One Thickness can be Constructive

11.14.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84141The first non-zero thickness producing destructive inte rference is
Substituting known values gives
Finally, the third destructive thickness is, so that
Discussion:
If the bubble was illuminated with pure red light, we wou ld see bright and dark bands at very uniform increase s in thickness.
First would be a dark band at 0 thickness, then bright at 122 nm thickness, then dark at 244 nm, bright at 3 66 nm, dark at 488
nm, and bright at 610 nm. If the bubble varied smoothl y in thickness, like a smooth wedge, then the bands would be evenly
spaced.
Another example of thin film interference can be see n when microscope slides are separated (Figure). The sl ides are very
flat, so that the wedge of air between them increases in thickness very uniformly. A phase change occurs at t he second surface but
not the first, and so there is a dark band where the slides touch. The rainbow colors of constructive interf erence repeat, going from
violet to red again and again as the distance between the slides increases. As the layer of air increases, the bands become more
difficult to see, because slight changes in incident angle have greater effects on path length difference s. If pure-wavelength light
instead of white light is used, then bright and dark bands are obtained rather than repeating rainbow colors.
Figure: (a) The rainbow color bands are produced by thin film interference in the air between the two g lass slides. (b)
Schematic of the paths taken by rays in the wedge of a ir between the slides.
An important application of thin film interference i s found in the manufacturing of optical instruments. A lens or mirror can be
compared with a master as it is being ground, allowing it to be shaped to an accuracy of less than a wavele ngth over its entire
surface. Figure illustrates the phenomenon called Ne wton’s rings, which occurs when the plane surfaces of t wo lenses are
placed together. (The circular bands are called Newto n’s rings because Isaac Newton described them and their use in detail.
Newton did not discover them; Robert Hooke did, and Newton did not believe they were due to the wave character of light.) Each
successive ring of a given color indicates an increa se of only one wavelength in the distance between the lens and the blank, so that
great precision can be obtained. Once the lens is perfect, there will be no rings.

11.14.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84141
Figure: “Newton's rings” interference fringes are prod uced when two plano-convex lenses are placed together with their
plane surfaces in contact. The rings are created by in terference between the light reflected off the two surfaces as a result of a slight
gap between them, indicating that these surfaces are n ot precisely plane but are slightly convex. (credit: Ulf Seifert, Wikimedia
Commons)
The wings of certain moths and butterflies have nearly iridescent colors due to thin film interference. In addition to pigmentation,
the wing’s color is affected greatly by constructive interference of certain wavelengths reflected from it s film-coated surface. Car
manufacturers are offering special paint jobs that u se thin film interference to produce colors that chan ge with angle. This
expensive option is based on variation of thin film p ath length differences with angle. Security features o n credit cards, banknotes,
driving licenses and similar items prone to forgery use thin film interference, diffraction gratings, or h olograms. Australia led the
way with dollar bills printed on polymer with a diffrac tion grating security feature making the currency di fficult to forge. Other
countries such as New Zealand and Taiwan are using sim ilar technologies, while the United States currency in cludes a thin film
interference effect.
One feature of thin film interference and diffractio n gratings is that the pattern shifts as you change the angle at which you look
or move your head. Find examples of thin film interfer ence and gratings around you. Explain how the patter ns change for each
specific example. Find examples where the thickness cha nges giving rise to changing colors. If you can fin d two microscope
slides, then try observing the effect shown in Figure 3. Try separating one end of the two slides with a hair or maybe a thin
piece of paper and observe the effect.
Step 1. Examine the situation to determine that interference is inv olved. Identify whether slits or thin film interference are
considered in the problem.
Step 2. If slits are involved, note that diffraction gratings and double slits produ ce very similar interference patterns, but
that gratings have narrower (sharper) maxima. Single slit patte rns are characterized by a large central maximum and smalle r
maxima to the sides.
Step 3. If thin film interference is involved, take note of the pat h length difference between the two rays that interfere. Be
certain to use the wavelength in the medium involved, since i t differs from the wavelength in vacuum. Note also that th ere
is an additional phase shift when light reflects from a medium with a greater index of refraction.
Step 4. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the proble m (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful. Draw a
diagram of the situation. Labeling the diagram is useful.
Step 5. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the proble m as stated (identify the knowns).
Step 6. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determi ned (the unknown), and enter the knowns. Slits,
gratings, and the Rayleigh limit involve equations.
Step 7. For thin film interference, you will have constructive int erference for a total shift that is an integral number of
wavelengths. You will have destructive interference for a to tal shift of a half-integral number of wavelengths. Always keep
in mind that crest to crest is constructive whereas crest to t rough is destructive.
Step 8. Check to see if the answer is reasonable: Does it make sense? Angles in interference patterns cannot be greater than
, for example.MAKING CONNECTIONS: TAKE-HOME EXPERIMENT -- THIN FILM INTERFERENCE
Problem-Solving Strategies for Wave Optics

11.14.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84141Summary
Thin film interference occurs between the light reflecte d from the top and bottom surfaces of a film. In addition t o the path
length difference, there can be a phase change.
When light reflects from a medium having an index of ref raction greater than that of the medium in which it is traveling, a
phase change (or a shift) occurs.
Glossary
thin film interference
interference between light reflected from different surf aces of a thin film
This page titled 11.14: Thin Film Interference is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
27.7: Thin Film Interference by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/college-physics.

11.15.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415611.15: X-Ray Diffraction
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe interference and diffraction effects exhibite d by X-rays in interaction with atomic-scale structures
Since X-ray photons are very energetic, they have rela tively short wavelengths, on the order of m to m. Th us, typical Xray photons act like rays when they encounter macros copic objects, like teeth, and produce sharp shadows. Ho wever, since atoms
are on the order of 0.1 nm in size, X-rays can be used t o detect the location, shape, and size of atoms and mo lecules. The process is
called X-ray diffraction, and it involves the interference of X-rays to prod uce patterns that can be analyzed for information abo ut
the structures that scattered the X-rays.
Perhaps the most famous example of X-ray diffraction is the discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA in 1953 by an
international team of scientists working at England’s Cavendish Laboratory—American James Watson, Englishm an Francis Crick,
and New Zealand-born Maurice Wilkins. Using X-ray diffract ion data produced by Rosalind Franklin, they were the f irst to model
the double-helix structure of DNA that is so crucial to life. For this work, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins were awarded the 1962 Nobel
Prize in Physiology or Medicine. (There is some debate and controversy over the issue that Rosalind Frankli n was not included in
the prize, although she died in 1958, before the prize was a warded.)
Figure shows a diffraction pattern produced by the s cattering of X-rays from a crystal. This process is known as X-ray
crystallography because of the information it can y ield about crystal structure, and it was the type of data Rosalind Franklin
supplied to Watson and Crick for DNA. Not only do X-rays confirm the size and shape of atoms, they give informa tion about the
atomic arrangements in materials. For example, more rec ent research in high-temperature superconductors inv olves complex
materials whose lattice arrangements are crucial to o btaining a superconducting material. These can be studi ed using X-ray
crystallography.
Figure: X-ray diffraction from the crystal of a prot ein (hen egg lysozyme) produced this interference pat tern. Analysis of the
pattern yields information about the structure of the protein. (credit: “Del45”/Wikimedia Commons)
Historically, the scattering of X-rays from crystals wa s used to prove that X-rays are energetic electromag netic (EM) waves. This
was suspected from the time of the discovery of X-rays in 1895, but it was not until 1912 that the German Ma x von Laue (1879–
1960) convinced two of his colleagues to scatter X-rays from crystals. If a diffraction pattern is obtained, h e reasoned, then the Xrays must be waves, and their wavelength could be determ ined. (The spacing of atoms in various crystals was r easonably well
known at the time, based on good values for Avogadro ’s number.) The experiments were convincing, and the 19 14 Nobel Prize in
Physics was given to von Laue for his suggestion leadin g to the proof that X-rays are EM waves. In 1915, the unique father-and-Learning Objectives

11.15.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84156son team of Sir William Henry Bragg and his son Sir William Lawrence Bragg were awarded a jo int Nobel Prize for inventing the
X-ray spectrometer and the then-new science of X-ray analy sis.
In ways reminiscent of thin-film interference, we con sider two plane waves at X-ray wavelengths, each one refl ecting off a
different plane of atoms within a crystal’s lattice, as shown in Figure. From the geometry, the difference in path lengths is
. Constructive interference results when this distance is an integer multiple of the wavelength. This condit ion is captured by
the Bragg equation,
for.
where is a positive integer and is the spacing betwe en the planes. Following the Law of Reflection, both t he incident and
reflected waves are described by the same angle,, bu t unlike the general practice in geometric optics, i s measured with respect to
the surface itself, rather than the normal.
Figure: X-ray diffraction with a crystal. Two incide nt waves reflect off two planes of a crystal. The diff erence in path
lengths is indicated by the dashed line.
Common table salt is composed mainly of crystals. In a crystal, there is a family of planes 0.252 nm apar t. If the
first-order maximum is observed at an incidence ang le of 18.1°, what is the wavelength of the X-ray scatter ing from this
crystal?
Strategy:
Use the Bragg equation, Equation, to solve for.
Solution
For first-order,, and the plane spacing is known. Solving t he Bragg equation for wavelength yields
Significance
The determined wavelength fits within the X-ray region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Once again, the wave nature of light
makes itself prominent when the wavelength () is comp arable to the size of the physical structures ()
it interacts with.Example: X-Ray Diffraction with Salt Crystals

11.15.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84156For the experiment described in Example, what are th e two other angles where interference maxima may be o bserved?
What limits the number of maxima?
Answer
and; Between, orders 1, 2, and 3, are all that exist.
Although Figure depicts a crystal as a two-dimensiona l array of scattering centers for simplicity, real c rystals are structures
in three dimensions. Scattering can occur simultaneo usly from different families of planes at different orientations and spacing
patterns known as called Bragg planes, as shown in Figure. The resulting interference pattern ca n be quite complex.
Figure: Because of the regularity that makes a crystal structure, one crystal can have many families of plan es within its
geometry, each one giving rise to X-ray diffraction.
This page titled 11.15: X-Ray Diffraction is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.7: X-Ray Diffraction by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.Exercise

11.16.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415711.16: Holography
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how a three-dimensional image is recorded as a hologram
Describe how a three-dimensional image is formed from a hologram
A hologram, such as the one in Figure, is a true thr ee-dimensional image recorded on film by lasers. Holo grams are used for
amusement; decoration on novelty items and magazine covers; security on credit cards and driver’s license s (a laser and other
equipment are needed to reproduce them); and for se rious three-dimensional information storage. You can s ee that a hologram is a
true three-dimensional image because objects change re lative position in the image when viewed from different angle s.
Figure: Credit cards commonly have holograms for logo s, making them difficult to reproduce. (credit: Domi nic Alves)
The name hologram means “entire picture” (from the Gr eek holo, as in holistic) because the image is three-dimensiona l.
Holography is the process of producing holograms and, although t hey are recorded on photographic film, the process is quite
different from normal photography. Holography uses l ight interference or wave optics, whereas normal photo graphy uses geometric
optics. Figure shows one method of producing a holog ram. Coherent light from a laser is split by a mirror, with part of the
light illuminating the object. The remainder, calle d the reference beam, shines directly on a piece of film. Light scattered from the
object interferes with the reference beam, producing constructive and destructive interference. As a resul t, the exposed film looks
foggy, but close examination reveals a complicated interference pattern stored on it. Where the interfer ence was constructive, the
film (a negative actually) is darkened. Holography i s sometimes called lens-less photography, because it u ses the wave
characteristics of light, as contrasted to normal phot ography, which uses geometric optics and requires lens es.
Figure: Production of a hologram. Single-wavelength coherent light from a laser produces a well-defined i nterference
pattern on a piece of film. The laser beam is split by a partially silvered mirror, with part of the light illuminating the object and the
remainder shining directly on the film. (credit: mod ification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)Learning Objectives

11.16.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84157Light falling on a hologram can form a three-dimensi onal image of the original object. The process is comp licated in detail, but the
basics can be understood, as shown in Figure, in which a laser of the same type that exposed the film is no w used to
illuminate it. The myriad tiny exposed regions of th e film are dark and block the light, whereas less expo sed regions allow light to
pass. The film thus acts much like a collection of di ffraction gratings with various spacing patterns. Light passing through the
hologram is diffracted in various directions, produc ing both real and virtual images of the object used to expose the film. The
interference pattern is the same as that produced by the object. Moving your eye to various places in the i nterference pattern gives
you different perspectives, just as looking directly at the object would. The image thus looks like the ob ject and is three
dimensional like the object.
Figure: A transmission hologram is one that produces rea l and virtual images when a laser of the same type as t hat which
exposed the hologram is passed through it. Diffraction from various parts of the film produces the same interf erence pattern that
was produced by the object that was used to expose it. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villa rreal)
The hologram illustrated in Figure is a transmission hologram. Holograms that are viewed with reflected lig ht, such as the
white light holograms on credit cards, are reflection holograms and are more common. White light hologram s often appear a little
blurry with rainbow edges, because the diffraction patt erns of various colors of light are at slightly diffe rent locations due to their
different wavelengths. Further uses of holography inclu de all types of three-dimensional information storag e, such as of statues in
museums, engineering studies of structures, and images of h uman organs.
Invented in the late 1940s by Dennis Gabor (1900–1970), who won the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work, hologr aphy
became far more practical with the development of th e laser. Since lasers produce coherent single-waveleng th light, their
interference patterns are more pronounced. The prec ision is so great that it is even possible to record nu merous holograms on a
single piece of film by just changing the angle of t he film for each successive image. This is how the holog rams that move as you
walk by them are produced—a kind of lens-less movie.
In a similar way, in the medical field, holograms have allowed complete three-dimensional holographic displ ays of objects from a
stack of images. Storing these images for future use is relatively easy. With the use of an endoscope, high-re solution, threedimensional holographic images of internal organs and tissues can be made.
This page titled 11.16: Holography is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.8: Holography by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

11.17.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415811.17: The Michelson Interferometer
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain changes in fringes observed with a Michelson interfer ometer caused by mirror movements
Explain changes in fringes observed with a Michelson interfer ometer caused by changes in medium
The Michelson interferometer (invented by the American physicist Albert A. Michelson, 1852–1931) is a precision instrument
that produces interference fringes by splitting a li ght beam into two parts and then recombining them af ter they have traveled
different optical paths. Figure depicts the interferom eter and the path of a light beam from a single poi nt on the extended
source S, which is a ground-glass plate that diffuses t he light from a monochromatic lamp of wavelength. Th e beam strikes the
half-silvered mirror M, where half of it is reflected to the side and half passes through the mirror. The r eflected light travels to the
movable plane mirror, where it is reflected back th rough M to the observer. The transmitted half of the original beam is
reflected back by the stationary mirror and then toward the observer by M.
Figure: (a) The Michelson interferometer. The extend ed light source is a ground-glass plate that diffuses the light from a
laser. (b) A planar view of the interferometer.
Because both beams originate from the same point on the source, they are coherent and therefore interfer e. Notice from the figure
that one beam passes through M three times and the ot her only once. To ensure that both beams traverse th e same thickness of
glass, a compensator plate C of transparent glass is pl aced in the arm containing. This plate is a duplica te of M (without the
silvering) and is usually cut from the same piece o f glass used to produce M. With the compensator in plac e, any phase difference
between the two beams is due solely to the difference in t he distances they travel.
The path difference of the two beams when they recomb ine is, where is the distance between M and, and i s the
distance between M and. Suppose this path difference i s an integer number of wavelengths. Then, constructiv e interference
occurs and a bright image of the point on the source is seen at the observer. Now the light from any other po int on the source whose
two beams have this same path difference also undergoe s constructive interference and produces a bright im age. The collection of
these point images is a bright fringe corresponding t o a path difference of (Figure). When is moved a di stance
, this path difference changes by, and each fringe moves to the position previously occupied by an adja cent fringe.
Consequently, by counting the number of fringes m passing a given point as is moved, an observer can measure minute
displacements that are accurate to a fraction of a wavele ngth, as shown by the relationLearning Objectives

11.17.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84158
Figure: Fringes produced with a Michelson interferomet er. (credit: “SILLAGESvideos”/YouTube)
A red laser light of wavelength 630 nm is used in a Mi chelson interferometer. While keeping the mirror f ixed, mirror is
moved. The fringes are found to move past a fixed cr oss-hair in the viewer. Find the distance the mirror i s moved for a
single fringe to move past the reference line.
Strategy
Refer to Figure for the geometry. We use the result of the Michelson interferometer interference conditio n to find the
distance moved,.
Solution
For a 630-nm red laser light, and for each fringe crossing (), the distance traveled by if you keep fixed is
Significance
An important application of this measurement is the d efinition of the standard meter. As mentioned in Units and Measurement,
the length of the standard meter was once defined as the mirror displacement in a Michelson interferomete r corresponding to
1,650,763.73 wavelengths of the particular fringe of kryp ton-86 in a gas discharge tube.
Measuring the Refractive Index of a Gas
In one arm of a Michelson interferometer, a glass cham ber is placed with attachments for evacuating the in side and putting
gases in it. The space inside the container is 2 cm wi de. Initially, the container is empty. As gas is slowl y let into the chamber,
you observe that dark fringes move past a reference l ine in the field of observation. By the time the cha mber is filled to the
desired pressure, you have counted 122 fringes move p ast the reference line. The wavelength of the light use d is 632.8 nm.
What is the refractive index of this gas?
Example: Precise Distance Measurements by Michelson Interferometer

11.17.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84158Strategy
The m = 122 fringes observed compose the difference b etween the number of wavelengths that fit within the e mpty chamber
(vacuum) and the number of wavelengths that fit withi n the same chamber when it is gas-filled. The waveleng th in the filled
chamber is shorter by a factor of n, the index of refraction.
Solution
The ray travels a distance t = 2 cm to the right thr ough the glass chamber and another distance t to the left upon reflection. The
total travel is L = 2t. When empty, the number of wavelen gths that fit in this chamber is
where nm is the wavelength in vacuum of the light use d. In any other medium, the wavelength is and the
number of wavelengths that fit in the gas-filled chambe r is
The number of fringes observed in the transition is
Solving for (n−1) gives
and
Significance
The indices of refraction for gases are so close to th at of vacuum, that we normally consider them equal to 1. The difference
between 1 and 1.0019 is so small that measuring it req uires a correspondingly sensitive technique such as interferometry. We
cannot, for example, hope to measure this value using tec hniques based simply on Snell’s law.
Although m, the number of fringes observed, is an integer, whic h is often regarded as having zero uncertainty, in p ractical
terms, it is all too easy to lose track when counting fringes. In Example, if you estimate that you might have missed as
many as five fringes when you reported fringes, (a) i s the value for the index of refraction worked out i n Example
too large or too small? (b) By how much?
Answer
a. too small; b. up to
Step 1. Examine the situation to determine that interference is involved. Identify whether slits, thin films, or
interferometers are considered in the problem.
Step 2. If slits are involved, note that diffraction gratings and double slits pro duce very similar interference patterns, but
that gratings have narrower (sharper) maxima. Single-slit pa tterns are characterized by a large central maximum an d
smaller maxima to the sides.Exercise
PROBLEM-SOLVING STRATEGY: WAVE OPTICS

11.17.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84158Step 3. If thin-film interference or an interferometer is involved, take note of the path length difference between the
two rays that interfere. Be certain to use the wavelength in the medium involved, si nce it differs from the wavelength in
vacuum. Note also that there is an additional λ/2λ/2 phase shift when light reflects from a medium with a greater index of
refraction.
Step 4. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unkno wns). A written list is useful.
Draw a diagram of the situation. Labeling the diagram is use ful.
Step 5. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as state d (identify the knowns).
Step 6. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown) a nd enter the knowns. Slits,
gratings, and the Rayleigh limit involve equations.
Step 7. For thin-film interference, you have constructive interference for a total shift that is an integral number of
wavelengths. You have destructive interference for a total shif t of a half-integral number of wavelengths. Always
keep in mind that crest to crest is constructive whereas cr est to trough is destructive.
Step 8. Check to see if the answer is reasonable: Does it make sense? Angles in interference patterns cannot be greater
than 90°, for example.
This page titled 11.17: The Michelson Interferometer is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.6: The Michelson Interferometer by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

11.18.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416011.18: Interference (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
3.1. and, respectively
3.2. a. 853 nm, 1097 nm;
b. 731 nm, 975 nm
3.3. a. too small;
b. up to
Conceptual Questions
1. No. Two independent light sources do not have coherent ph ase.
3. Because both the sodium lamps are not coherent pai rs of light sources. Two lasers operating independen tly are also not
coherent so no interference pattern results.
5. Monochromatic sources produce fringes at angles acc ording to. With white light, each constituent wavele ngth
will produce fringes at its own set of angles, blendin g into the fringes of adjacent wavelengths. This resu lts in rainbow
patterns.
7. Differing path lengths result in different phases at destination resulting in constructive or destructive interference
accordingly. Reflection can cause a phase change, whi ch also affects how waves interfere. Refraction into an other
medium changes the wavelength inside that medium such that a wave can emerge from the medium with a differ ent phase
compared to another wave that travelled the same distance i n a different medium.
9. Phase changes occur upon reflection at the top of glass cov er and the top of glass slide only.
11. The surface of the ham being moist means there is a t hin layer of fluid, resulting in thin-film interfer ence. Because the
exact thickness of the film varies across the piece of ham, which is illuminated by white light, different wa velengths produce
bright fringes at different locations, resulting in rainbow colors.
13. Other wavelengths will not generally satisfy for the s ame value of t so reflections will result in completely
destructive interference. For an incidence angle, th e path length inside the coating will be increased b y a factor so
the new condition for destructive interference becomes.
15. In one arm, place a transparent chamber to be filled with the gas. See Example 3.6.
Problems
17.
19.
21.
23. 62.5; since m must be an integer, the highest order is then.
25.
27. a.;
b.;
c. 5.76, the highest order is.
29. a. 2.37 cm;
b. 1.78 cm
31. 560 nm

11.18.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416033. 1.2 mm
35. a.;
b.
37. 1:9
39. 532 nm (green)
41.
43. 620 nm (orange)
45. 380 nm
47. a. Assuming n for the plane is greater than 1.20, then there are two ph ase changes: 0.833 cm.
b. It is too thick, and the plane would be too heavy.
c. It is unreasonable to think the layer of material could be any thickness when used on a real aircraft.
49.
51.
Additional Problems
53. and
55. a. 4.26 cm;
b. 2.84 cm
57. 6
59. 0.20 m
61. 0.0839 mm
63. a. 9.8, 10.4, 11.7, and 15.7 cm;
b. 3.9 cm
65.
67. 700 nm
69. 189 nm
71. a. green (504 nm);
b. magenta (white minus green)
73. 1.29
75. and
77. 125 nm
79. 413 nm and 689 nm
81.
83. 47
85.
87.

11.18.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84160Challenge Problems
89. Bright and dark fringes switch places.
91. The path length must be less than one-fourth of the shortest visible wavelength in oil. The thickness of the oil is half the
path length, so it must be less than one-eighth of t he shortest visible wavelength in oil. If we take 380 n m to be the shortest
visible wavelength in air, 33.9 nm.
93.
95. for one phase change: 950 nm (infrared); for three p hase changes: 317 nm (ultraviolet); Therefore, the o il film will appear
black, since the reflected light is not in the visible p art of the spectrum.
This page titled 11.18: Interference (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.A: Interference (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

11.18.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415911.18.A: Diffraction (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
4.1.; no
4.2.
4.3. From, the interference maximum occurs at for. From Equation 4.1, this is also the angle for the
second diffraction minimum. (Note: Both equations use the index m but they refer to separate phenomena.)
4.4. or 300 lines per millimeter
4.5., 3000 times broader than the Hubble Telescope
4.6. and; Between, orders 1, 2, and 3, are all that exist.
Conceptual Questions
1. The diffraction pattern becomes wider.
3. Walkie-talkies use radio waves whose wavelengths are comparable to the size of the hill and are thus abl e to diffract
around the hill. Visible wavelengths of the flashlight tra vel as rays at this size scale.
5. The diffraction pattern becomes two-dimensional, with main fringes, which are now spots, running in perpendicu lar
directions and fainter spots in intermediate directions.
7. The parameter is the arc angle shown in the phasor d iagram in Figure 4.7. The phase difference between the first
and last Huygens wavelet across the single slit is and is related to the curvature of the arc that forms th e resultant phasor
that determines the light intensity.
9. blue; The shorter wavelength of blue light results in a smaller angle for diffraction limit.
11. No, these distances are three orders of magnitude smal ler than the wavelength of visible light, so visible li ght makes a
poor probe for atoms.
13. UV wavelengths are much larger than lattice spacing in crystals such that there is no diffraction. The Bragg equation
implies a value for sin θ greater than unity, which has no so lution.
15. Image will appear at slightly different location an d/or size when viewed using shorter wavelength but at exactly half
the wavelength, a higher-order interference reconstruct s the original image, different color.
Problems
17. a.;
b. no
19. a.;
b.
21. 750 nm
23. 2.4 mm, 4.7 mm
25. a.;
b.;
c.
27. 1.92 m
29.
31.

11.18.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415933.
35. 0.200
37. 3
39. 9
41.
43.
45. 707 nm
47. a.;
b.; c. Decreasing the number of lines per centimeter by a factor of x means that the angle for the
x-order maximum is the same as the original angle for the fi rst-order maximum.
49. a. using;
b. using
51. a. 26,300 lines/cm;
b. yes;
c. no
53.
55. 107 m
57. a.;
b. 23.2 m;
c. 590 km
59. a.;
b. 5.81 km;
c. 0.179 mm;
d. can resolve details 0.2 mm apart at arm’s length
61.
63. 6.0 cm
65. 7.71 km
67. 1.0 m
69. 1.2 cm or closer
71. no
73. 0.120 nm
75.
77.
Additional Problems
79. a. 2.2 mm;
b., second-order yellow and third-order violet coincid e
81. 2.2 km

11.18.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8415983. 1.3 cm
85. a. 0.28 mm;
b. 0.28 m;
c. 280 m;
d. 113 km
87. 33 m
89. a. vertically;
b.;
c.;
d. 89 cm;
e. 71 cm
91. 0.98 cm
93.
95. 340 nm
97. a. 0.082 rad and 0.087 rad;
b. 480 nm and 660 nm
99. two orders
101. yes and N/A
103. 600 nm
105. a.;
b.
107. 0.63 m
109. 1
111. for only, no higher orders
113.
115. a. 42.3 nm;
b. This wavelength is not in the visible spectrum.
c. The number of slits in this diffraction grating is too large. Etching in integrated circuits can be do ne to a resolution
of 50 nm, so slit separations of 400 nm are at the lim it of what we can do today. This line spacing is too s mall to
produce diffraction of light.
117. a. 549 km;
b. This is an unreasonably large telescope.
c. Unreasonable to assume diffraction limit for optical tele scopes unless in space due to atmospheric effects.
Challenge Problems
119. a.;
b.
121. 12,800

11.18.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84159123.
This page titled 11.18.A: Diffraction (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.A: Diffraction (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

11.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416211.E: Interference (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
3.1 Young's Double-Slit Interference
1. Young’s double-slit experiment breaks a single light b eam into two sources. Would the same pattern be obtain ed for two
independent sources of light, such as the headlights of a distant car? Explain.
2. Is it possible to create a experimental setup in which there is only destructive interference? Explain.
3. Why won’t two small sodium lamps, held close together, produce an interference pattern on a distant scree n? What if the
sodium lamps were replaced by two laser pointers held close together?
3.2 Mathematics of Interference
4. Suppose you use the same double slit to perform Young ’s double-slit experiment in air and then repeat th e experiment in
water. Do the angles to the same parts of the interfe rence pattern get larger or smaller? Does the color of the light change?
Explain.
5. Why is monochromatic light used in the double slit exper iment? What would happen if white light were used?
3.4 Interference in Thin Films
6. What effect does increasing the wedge angle have on t he spacing of interference fringes? If the wedge ang le is too large,
fringes are not observed. Why?
7. How is the difference in paths taken by two originally in-phase light waves related to whether they interfer e constructively
or destructively? How can this be affected by reflectio n? By refraction?
8. Is there a phase change in the light reflected from e ither surface of a contact lens floating on a perso n’s tear layer? The
index of refraction of the lens is about 1.5, and its top surface is dry.
9. In placing a sample on a microscope slide, a glass cover is placed over a water drop on the glass slide. Li ght incident from
above can reflect from the top and bottom of the gl ass cover and from the glass slide below the water dro p. At which surfaces
will there be a phase change in the reflected light?
10. Answer the above question if the fluid between the two pieces o f crown glass is carbon disulfide.
11. While contemplating the food value of a slice of ham, you notice a rainbow of color reflected from its mo ist surface.
Explain its origin.
12. An inventor notices that a soap bubble is dark at it s thinnest and realizes that destructive interferenc e is taking place for
all wavelengths. How could she use this knowledge to ma ke a nonreflective coating for lenses that is effecti ve at all
wavelengths? That is, what limits would there be on the index of refraction and thickness of the coating? Ho w might this be
impractical?
13. A nonreflective coating like the one described in E xample 3.3 works ideally for a single wavelength and f or
perpendicular incidence. What happens for other wavelen gths and other incident directions? Be specific.
14. Why is it much more difficult to see interference f ringes for light reflected from a thick piece of gl ass than from a thin
film? Would it be easier if monochromatic light were use d?
3.5 The Michelson Interferometer
15. Describe how a Michelson interferometer can be used to me asure the index of refraction of a gas (including air).
Problems
3.2 Mathematics of Interference
16. At what angle is the first-order maximum for 450-nm wav elength blue light falling on double slits separated by 0.0500
mm?

11.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416217. Calculate the angle for the third-order maximum of 580-nm wavelength yellow light falling on double slit s separated by
0.100 mm.
18. What is the separation between two slits for which 610-nm o range light has its first maximum at an angle of?
19. Find the distance between two slits that produces the firs t minimum for 410-nm violet light at an angle of.
20. Calculate the wavelength of light that has its third minimum at an angle of when falling on double slits separated by
. Explicitly show how you follow the steps from the Proble m-Solving Strategy: Wave Optics, located at the end of the
chapter.
21. What is the wavelength of light falling on double sl its separated by if the third-order maximum is at an angle of
22. At what angle is the fourth-order maximum for the situation i n the preceding problem?
23. What is the highest-order maximum for 400-nm light fall ing on double slits separated by?
24. Find the largest wavelength of light falling on doub le slits separated by for which there is a first-orde r maximum.
Is this in the visible part of the spectrum?
25. What is the smallest separation between two slits that wil l produce a second-order maximum for 720-nm red light?
26. (a) What is the smallest separation between two slits that wi ll produce a second-order maximum for any visible light?
(b) For all visible light?
27. (a) If the first-order maximum for monochromatic li ght falling on a double slit is at an angle of, at what angle is the
second-order maximum?
(b) What is the angle of the first minimum?
(c) What is the highest-order maximum possible here?
28. Shown below is a double slit located a distance x from a screen, with the distance from the center of the screen given by
y. When the distance d between the slits is relatively large, numerous brigh t spots appear, called fringes. Show that, for small
angles (where, with in radians), the distance between fr inges is given by
Picture shows a double slit located a distance x from a screen, with the distance from the center of the s creen
given by y. Distance between the slits is d.
29. Using the result of the preceding problem,
(a) calculate the distance between fringes for 633-n m light falling on double slits separated by 0.0800 mm, located
3.00 m from a screen.
(b) What would be the distance between fringes if the entire apparatus were submersed in water, whose index of
refraction is 1.33?

11.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416230. Using the result of the problem two problems prior, find the wavelength of light that produces fringes 7.50 m m apart on a
screen 2.00 m from double slits separated by 0.120 mm.
31. In a double-slit experiment, the fifth maximum is 2.8 cm from the central maximum on a screen that is 1.5 m away from
the slits. If the slits are 0.15 mm apart, what is the wav elength of the light being used?
32. The source in Young’s experiment emits at two wavelengt hs. On the viewing screen, the fourth maximum for one
wavelength is located at the same spot as the fifth ma ximum for the other wavelength. What is the ratio of the two
wavelengths?
33. If 500-nm and 650-nm light illuminates two slits tha t are separated by 0.50 mm, how far apart are the second -order
maxima for these two wavelengths on a screen 2.0 m away?
34. Red light of wavelength of 700 nm falls on a double slit sepa rated by 400 nm.
(a) At what angle is the first-order maximum in the diffr action pattern?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
3.3 Multiple-Slit Interference
35. Ten narrow slits are equally spaced 0.25 mm apart and illuminated with yellow light of wavelength 580 nm. (a) What are
the angular positions of the third and fourth princi pal maxima? (b) What is the separation of these max ima on a screen 2.0 m
from the slits?
36. The width of bright fringes can be calculated as the se paration between the two adjacent dark fringes on eit her side. Find
the angular widths of the third- and fourth-order brigh t fringes from the preceding problem.
37. For a three-slit interference pattern, find the ratio of the peak intensities of a secondary maximum to a principal
maximum.
38. What is the angular width of the central fringe of the in terference pattern of
(a) 20 slits separated by?
(b) 50 slits with the same separation? Assume that.
3.4 Interference in Thin Films
39. A soap bubble is 100 nm thick and illuminated by white light incident perpendicular to its surface. What wav elength and
color of visible light is most constructively reflected, assuming the same index of refraction as water?
40. An oil slick on water is 120 nm thick and illuminated by white light incident perpendicular to its surfac e. What color does
the oil appear (what is the most constructively reflecte d wavelength), given its index of refraction is 1.40?
41. Calculate the minimum thickness of an oil slick on water that appears blue when illuminated by white ligh t perpendicular
to its surface. Take the blue wavelength to be 470 nm and the index of refraction of oil to be 1.40.
42. Find the minimum thickness of a soap bubble that appe ars red when illuminated by white light perpendicular to its
surface. Take the wavelength to be 680 nm, and assume th e same index of refraction as water.
43. A film of soapy water () on top of a plastic cuttin g board has a thickness of 233 nm. What color is most strongly
reflected if it is illuminated perpendicular to its surfa ce?
44. What are the three smallest non-zero thicknesses of soapy water () on Plexiglas if it appears green (const ructively
reflecting 520-nm light) when illuminated perpendicularl y by white light?
45. Suppose you have a lens system that is to be used pri marily for 700-nm red light. What is the second thinne st coating of
fluorite (magnesium fluoride) that would be nonreflecti ve for this wavelength?
46. (a) As a soap bubble thins it becomes dark, because t he path length difference becomes small compared wit h the
wavelength of light and there is a phase shift at th e top surface. If it becomes dark when the path leng th difference is less

11.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84162than one-fourth the wavelength, what is the thickest the bubble can be and appear dark at all visible wave lengths? Assume
the same index of refraction as water.
(b) Discuss the fragility of the film considering the thickn ess found.
47. To save money on making military aircraft invisible t o radar, an inventor decides to coat them with a non reflective
material having an index of refraction of 1.20, which is between that of air and the surface of the plane. This, he reasons,
should be much cheaper than designing Stealth bombers.
(a) What thickness should the coating be to inhibit the reflection of 4.00-cm wavelength radar?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
3.5 The Michelson Interferometer
48. A Michelson interferometer has two equal arms. A merc ury light of wavelength 546 nm is used for the inter ferometer and
stable fringes are found. One of the arms is moved by. How many fringes will cross the observing field?
49. What is the distance moved by the traveling mirror o f a Michelson interferometer that corresponds to 1500 fringes
passing by a point of the observation screen? Assume that the interferometer is illuminated with a 606 nm spectral line of
krypton-86.
50. When the traveling mirror of a Michelson interferom eter is moved, 90 fringes pass by a point on the
observation screen. What is the wavelength of the light used?
51. In a Michelson interferometer, light of wavelength 632.8 nm from a He-Ne laser is used. When one of the mirrors i s
moved by a distance D, 8 fringes move past the field of view. What is the value of the distance D?
52. A chamber 5.0 cm long with flat, parallel windows at the ends is placed in one arm of a Michelson interferomet er (see
below). The light used has a wavelength of 500 nm in a vacuum. While all the air is being pumped out of th e chamber, 29
fringes pass by a point on the observation screen. What is the refractive index of the air?
Picture shows a schematics of a set-up utilized to measu re the refractive index of a gas. The glass chamber wi th
a gas is placed in the Michelson interferometer betwe en the half-silvered mirror M and mirror M1. The spa ce
inside the container is 5 cm wide.
Additional Problems
53. For 600-nm wavelength light and a slit separation of 0.12 mm, what are the angular positions of the first and third
maxima in the double slit interference pattern?
54. If the light source in the preceding problem is cha nged, the angular position of the third maximum is fo und to be.
What is the wavelength of light being used now?
55. Red light () illuminates double slits separated by a d istance. The screen and the slits are 3.00 m
apart.
(a) Find the distance on the screen between the central m aximum and the third maximum.

11.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84162(b) What is the distance between the second and the fou rth maxima?
56. Two sources as in phase and emit waves with. Determine wh ether constructive or destructive interference
occurs at points whose distances from the two sources are
(a) 0.84 and 0.42 m,
(b) 0.21 and 0.42 m,
(c) 1.26 and 0.42 m,
(d) 1.87 and 1.45 m,
(e) 0.63 and 0.84 m and
(f) 1.47 and 1.26 m.
57. Two slits apart are illuminated by light of wavelengt h 600 nm. What is the highest order fringe in the
interference pattern?
58. Suppose that the highest order fringe that can be obse rved is the eighth in a double-slit experiment where 5 50-nm
wavelength light is used. What is the minimum separation of the slits?
59. The interference pattern of a He-Ne laser light () pass ing through two slits 0.031 mm apart is projected on a
screen 10.0 m away. Determine the distance between the adjac ent bright fringes.
60. Young’s double-slit experiment is performed immersed i n water (). The light source is a He-Ne laser,
in vacuum.
(a) What is the wavelength of this light in water?
(b) What is the angle for the third order maximum for t wo slits separated by 0.100 mm.
61. A double-slit experiment is to be set up so that th e bright fringes appear 1.27 cm apart on a screen 2. 13 m away from the
two slits. The light source was wavelength 500 nm. What should be the separation between the two slits?
62. An effect analogous to two-slit interference can occ ur with sound waves, instead of light. In an open fie ld, two speakers
placed 1.30 m apart are powered by a single-function generator producing sine waves at 1200-Hz frequency. A student walks
along a line 12.5 m away and parallel to the line be tween the speakers. She hears an alternating pattern of loud and quiet, due
to constructive and destructive interference. What i s (a) the wavelength of this sound and (b) the dista nce between the central
maximum and the first maximum (loud) position along t his line?
63. A hydrogen gas discharge lamp emits visible light at four wavelengths, 410, 434, 486, and 656 nm. (a) If l ight from
this lamp falls on a N slits separated by 0.025 mm, how far from the central maximum are the third maxima wh en viewed on
a screen 2.0 m from the slits? (b) By what distance are the second and third maxima separated for?
64. Monochromatic light of frequency falls on 10 slits s eparated by 0.020 mm. What is the separation between
the first and third maxima on a screen that is 2.0 m from th e slits?
65. Eight slits equally separated by 0.149 mm is uniformly illuminated by a monochromatic light at. What is the
width of the central principal maximum on a screen 2.35 m away?
66. Eight slits equally separated by 0.149 mm is uniformly illuminated by a monochromatic light at. What is the
intensity of a secondary maxima compared to that of the principal maxima?
67. A transparent film of thickness 250 nm and index of refraction of 1.40 is surrounded by air. What waveleng th in a beam
of white light at near-normal incidence to the film und ergoes destructive interference when reflected?
68. An intensity minimum is found for 450 nm light transmitt ed through a transparent film () in air.
(a) What is minimum thickness of the film?
(b) If this wavelength is the longest for which the in tensity minimum occurs, what are the next three lower values of
for which this happens?

11.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416269. A thin film with is surrounded by air. What is the minimum thickness of this film such that the reflect ion of
normally incident light with is minimized?
70. Repeat your calculation of the previous problem with the thin film placed on a flat glass () surface.
71. After a minor oil spill, a think film of oil () of th ickness 450 nm floats on the water surface in a bay. (a) What
predominant color is seen by a bird flying overhead? (b) What predominant color is seen by a seal swimming unde rwater?
72. A microscope slide 10 cm long is separated from a gla ss plate at one end by a sheet of paper. As shown below, the other
end of the slide is in contact with the plate. he sli de is illuminated from above by light from a sodium lamp (), and
14 fringes per centimeter are seen along the slide. What is the thickness of the piece of paper? Picture shows a microscope
slide that touches the glass plate at one end and is separated from it at another end by a sheet of paper.
73. Suppose that the setup of the preceding problem is imm ersed in an unknown liquid. If 18 fringes per centim eter are now
seen along the slide, what is the index of refraction of t he liquid?
74. A thin wedge filled with air is produced when two flat glass plates are placed on top of one another and a slip of paper is
inserted between them at one edge. Interference fring es are observed when monochromatic light falling vert ically on the
plates are seen in reflection. Is the first fringe ne ar the edge where the plates are in contact a bright fringe or a dark fringe?
Explain.
75. Two identical pieces of rectangular plate glass are u sed to measure the thickness of a hair. The glass plat es are in direct
contact at one edge and a single hair is placed bet ween them hear the opposite edge. When illuminated wit h a sodium lamp (
), the hair is seen between the 180th and 181st dark fringes. What are the lower and upper limits on the ha ir’s
diameter?
76. Two microscope slides made of glass are illuminated b y monochromatic () light incident perpendicularly. The
top slide touches the bottom slide at one end and r ests on a thin copper wire at the other end, forming a wedge of air. The
diameter of the copper wire is 29.45μm. How many bright fringes are seen across these slides?
77. A good quality camera “lens” is actually a system of lenses, rather than a single lens, but a side effect is that a reflection
from the surface of one lens can bounce around many t imes within the system, creating artifacts in the photo graph. To
counteract this problem, one of the lenses in such a sy stem is coated with a thin layer of material () on o ne side. The
index of refraction of the lens glass is 1.68. What is the smallest thickness of the coating that reduces th e reflection at 640 nm
by destructive interference? (In other words, the coatin g’s effect is to be optimized for.)
78. Constructive interference is observed from directly above an oil slick for wavelengths (in air) 440 nm a nd 616 nm. The
index of refraction of this oil is. What is the film’s minimum possible thickness?
79. A soap bubble is blown outdoors. What colors (indic ate by wavelengths) of the reflected sunlight are se en enhanced? The
soap bubble has index of refraction 1.36 and thickness 380 nm.
80. A Michelson interferometer with a He-Ne laser light sou rce () projects its interference pattern on a screen. I f
the movable mirror is caused to move by, how many fr inges will be observed shifting through a reference p oint on a
screen?
81. An experimenter detects 251 fringes when the movable mirror in a Michelson interferometer is displaced. Th e light
source used is a sodium lamp, wavelength 589 nm. By what distan ce did the movable mirror move?
82. A Michelson interferometer is used to measure the wavel ength of light put through it. When the movable mirr or is moved
by exactly 0.100 mm, the number of fringes observed movi ng through is 316. What is the wavelength of the light?

11.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416283. A 5.08-cm-long rectangular glass chamber is inserte d into one arm of a Michelson interferometer using a 633-nm light
source. This chamber is initially filled with air () a t standard atmospheric pressure but the air is grad ually
pumped out using a vacuum pump until a near perfect vacuum is achieved. How many fringes are observed movin g by
during the transition?
84. Into one arm of a Michelson interferometer, a plastic sheet of thickness is inserted, which causes a shift i n the
interference pattern by 86 fringes. The light source has wavelength of 610 nm in air. What is the index of refraction of this
plastic?
85. The thickness of an aluminum foil is measured using a Michelson interferometer that has its movable mir ror mounted on
a micrometer. There is a difference of 27 fringes in t he observed interference pattern when the micrometer clamps down on
the foil compared to when the micrometer is empty. Calcu late the thickness of the foil?
86. The movable mirror of a Michelson interferometer is a ttached to one end of a thin metal rod of length 23.3 mm. The
other end of the rod is anchored so it does not move. As the temperature of the rod changes from to, a change of 14
fringes is observed. The light source is a He Ne laser,. What is the change in length of the metal bar, and what is
its thermal expansion coefficient?
87. In a thermally stabilized lab, a Michelson interferome ter is used to monitor the temperature to ensure it st ays constant.
The movable mirror is mounted on the end of a 1.00- m-long aluminum rod, held fixed at the other end. Th e light source is a
He Ne laser,. The resolution of this apparatus corres ponds to the temperature difference when a change of just
one fringe is observed. What is this temperature differenc e?
88. A 65-fringe shift results in a Michelson interferom eter when a film made of an unknown material is plac ed in
one arm. The light source has wavelength 632.9 nm. Identify the material using the indices of refraction found in Tabl e 1.1.
Challenge Problems
89. Determine what happens to the double-slit interferen ce pattern if one of the slits is covered with a thi n, transparent film
whose thickness is λ/[2(n−1)]λ/[2(n−1)], where λλ is the wavelength of the incident light and n is the index o f refraction of
the film.
90. Fifty-one narrow slits are equally spaced and separate d by 0.10 mm. The slits are illuminated by blue light of wavelength
400 nm. What is angular position of the twenty-fifth s econdary maximum? What is its peak intensity in com parison with that
of the primary maximum?
91. A film of oil on water will appear dark when it is ver y thin, because the path length difference becomes s mall compared
with the wavelength of light and there is a phase shift at the top surface. If it becomes dark when the path l ength difference is
less than one-fourth the wavelength, what is the thicke st the oil can be and appear dark at all visible wav elengths? Oil has an
index of refraction of 1.40.
92. Figure 3.14 shows two glass slides illuminated by monoch romatic light incident perpendicularly. The top slid e touches
the bottom slide at one end and rests on a 0.100-mm- diameter hair at the other end, forming a wedge of ai r. (a) How far apart
are the dark bands, if the slides are 7.50 cm long and 589-nm light is used? (b) Is there any difference i f the slides are made
from crown or flint glass? Explain.
93. Figure 3.14 shows two 7.50-cm-long glass slides illumina ted by pure 589-nm wavelength light incident perpend icularly.
The top slide touches the bottom slide at one end and rests on some debris at the other end, forming a wedge of air. How
thick is the debris, if the dark bands are 1.00 mm apart?
94. A soap bubble is 100 nm thick and illuminated by white light incident at a angle to its surface. What wave length and
color of visible light is most constructively reflected, assuming the same index of refraction as water?
95. An oil slick on water is 120 nm thick and illuminated by white light incident at a angle to its surface. Wh at color does
the oil appear (what is the most constructively reflecte d wavelength), given its index of refraction is 1.40?
This page titled 11.E: Interference (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841623.E: Interference (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

1.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841611.E: Diffraction (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
4.1 Single-Slit Diffraction
1. As the width of the slit producing a single-slit diffr action pattern is reduced, how will the diffraction p attern produced
change?
2. Compare interference and diffraction.
3. If you and a friend are on opposite sides of a hill, you can communicate with walkie-talkies but not with fl ashlights.
Explain.
4. What happens to the diffraction pattern of a single slit wh en the entire optical apparatus is immersed in water?
5. In our study of diffraction by a single slit, we assume that the length of the slit is much larger than the width. What
happens to the diffraction pattern if these two dimensions were comparable?
6. A rectangular slit is twice as wide as it is high. Is t he central diffraction peak wider in the vertical di rection or in the
horizontal direction?
4.2 Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
7. In Equation 4.4, the parameter ββ looks like an ang le but is not an angle that you can measure with a p rotractor in the
physical world. Explain what ββ represents.
4.3 Double-Slit Diffraction
8. Shown below is the central part of the interference p attern for a pure wavelength of red light projected onto a double slit.
The pattern is actually a combination of single- and double-slit interference. Note that the bright spots are evenly spaced. Is
this a double- or single-slit characteristic? Note th at some of the bright spots are dim on either side of the center. Is this a
single- or double-slit characteristic? Which is smal ler, the slit width or the separation between slits? Exp lain your responses.
Figure is an image showing red interference pattern on a black background. The central part has brighter l ines. The lines are
cut off at the top and bottom, seemingly enclosed between t wo sinusoidal waves of opposite phase.
4.5 Circular Apertures and Resolution
9. Is higher resolution obtained in a microscope with red o r blue light? Explain your answer.
10. The resolving power of refracting telescope increases with the size of its objective lens. What other advant age is gained
with a larger lens?
11. The distance between atoms in a molecule is about. Can visibl e light be used to “see” molecules?
12. A beam of light always spreads out. Why can a beam n ot be created with parallel rays to prevent spreadin g? Why can
lenses, mirrors, or apertures not be used to correct the sprea ding?
4.6 X-Ray Diffraction
13. Crystal lattices can be examined with X-rays but not UV. Why?
4.7 Holography
14. How can you tell that a hologram is a true three-dimensional image and that those in three-dimensional movies are not?

1.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416115. If a hologram is recorded using monochromatic ligh t at one wavelength but its image is viewed at anothe r wavelength,
say shorter, what will you see? What if it is viewed using light of exactly half the original wavelength?
16. What image will one see if a hologram is recorded usin g monochromatic light but its image is viewed in whit e light?
Explain.
Problems
4.1 Single-Slit Diffraction
17. (a) At what angle is the first minimum for 550-nm light f alling on a single slit of width?
(b) Will there be a second minimum?
18. (a) Calculate the angle at which a -wide slit produces its fir st minimum for 410-nm violet light.
(b) Where is the first minimum for 700-nm red light?
19. (a) How wide is a single slit that produces its first mini mum for 633-nm light at an angle of?
(b) At what angle will the second minimum be?
20. (a) What is the width of a single slit that produces its f irst minimum at for 600-nm light?
(b) Find the wavelength of light that has its first minim um at.
21. Find the wavelength of light that has its third minimu m at an angle of when it falls on a single slit of width.
22. (a) Sodium vapor light averaging 589 nm in wavelengt h falls on a single slit of width. At what angle does it
produces its second minimum?
(b) What is the highest-order minimum produced?
23. Consider a single-slit diffraction pattern for, pr ojected on a screen that is 1.00 m from a slit of widt h 0.25 mm.
How far from the center of the pattern are the centers of th e first and second dark fringes?
24. (a) Find the angle between the first minima for the t wo sodium vapor lines, which have wavelengths of 589.1 a nd 589.6
nm, when they fall upon a single slit of width.
(b) What is the distance between these minima if the diffra ction pattern falls on a screen 1.00 m from the slit?
(c) Discuss the ease or difficulty of measuring such a distanc e.
25. (a) What is the minimum width of a single slit (in multi ples of) that will produce a first minimum for a wavelengt h?
(b) What is its minimum width if it produces 50 minima?
(c) 1000 minima?
26. (a) If a single slit produces a first minimum at, at wha t angle is the second-order minimum?
(b) What is the angle of the third-order minimum?
(c) Is there a fourth-order minimum?
(d) Use your answers to illustrate how the angular width of the central maximum is about twice the angular wi dth of
the next maximum (which is the angle between the first an d second minima).
27. If the separation between the first and the second mi nima of a single-slit diffraction pattern is 6.0 mm, wh at is the
distance between the screen and the slit? The light wavelengt h is 500 nm and the slit width is 0.16 mm.
28. A water break at the entrance to a harbor consists o f a rock barrier with a 50.0-m-wide opening. Ocean waves of 20.0-m
wavelength approach the opening straight on. At what a ngles to the incident direction are the boats inside the harbor most
protected against wave action?
29. An aircraft maintenance technician walks past a tall hangar door that acts like a single slit for sound en tering the hangar.
Outside the door, on a line perpendicular to the ope ning in the door, a jet engine makes a 600-Hz sound. At what angle with

1.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84161the door will the technician observe the first minim um in sound intensity if the vertical opening is 0.800 m wide and the
speed of sound is 340 m/s?
4.2 Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
30. A single slit of width is illuminated by a sodium ye llow light of wavelength 589 nm. Find the intensity at a
angle to the axis in terms of the intensity of the centr al maximum.
31. A single slit of width 0.1 mm is illuminated by a m ercury light of wavelength 576 nm. Find the intensity at a 10°10°
angle to the axis in terms of the intensity of the centr al maximum.
32. The width of the central peak in a single-slit diffrac tion pattern is 5.0 mm. The wavelength of the light is 600 nm, and the
screen is 2.0 m from the slit. (a) What is the width of the slit? (b) Determine the ratio of the intensity at 4.5 mm from the
center of the pattern to the intensity at the center.
33. Consider the single-slit diffraction pattern for, and. Find the intensity in terms of at
, and.
4.3 Double-Slit Diffraction
34. Two slits of width, each in an opaque material, are separated by a center-to-center distance of. A
monochromatic light of wavelength 450 nm is incident on the double-slit. One finds a combined interference and diffraction
pattern on the screen.
(a) How many peaks of the interference will be observed in th e central maximum of the diffraction pattern?
(b) How many peaks of the interference will be observe d if the slit width is doubled while keeping the dist ance
between the slits same?
(c) How many peaks of interference will be observed if the slits are separated by twice the distance, that i s,,
while keeping the widths of the slits same?
(d) What will happen in (a) if instead of 450-nm ligh t another light of wavelength 680 nm is used?
(e) What is the value of the ratio of the intensity of the central peak to the intensity of the next bright peak in (a)?
(f) Does this ratio depend on the wavelength of the light?
(g) Does this ratio depend on the width or separation of the slits?
35. A double slit produces a diffraction pattern that is a combination of single- and double-slit interferen ce. Find the ratio of
the width of the slits to the separation between them, if the first minimum of the single-slit pattern fa lls on the fifth maximum
of the double-slit pattern. (This will greatly reduce the in tensity of the fifth maximum.)
36. For a double-slit configuration where the slit separati on is four times the slit width, how many interference fringes lie in
the central peak of the diffraction pattern?
37. Light of wavelength 500 nm falls normally on 50 slit s that are wide and spaced apart. How
many interference fringes lie in the central peak of th e diffraction pattern?
38. A monochromatic light of wavelength 589 nm incident on a double slit with slit width and unknown separati on
results in a diffraction pattern containing nine interfer ence peaks inside the central maximum. Find the separat ion of the slits.
39. When a monochromatic light of wavelength 430 nm inci dent on a double slit of slit separation, there ar e 11
interference fringes in its central maximum. How many interference fringes will be in the central maximum of a light of the
same wavelength and slit widths, but a new slit separation of?
40. Determine the intensities of two interference peaks ot her than the central peak in the central maximum of the diffraction,
if possible, when a light of wavelength 628 nm is inci dent on a double slit of width 500 nm and separation 1500 nm. Use the
intensity of the central spot to be.

1.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841614.4 Diffraction Gratings
41. A diffraction grating has 2000 lines per centimeter. At what angle will the first-order maximum be for 520 -nmwavelength green light?
42. Find the angle for the third-order maximum for 580-n m-wavelength yellow light falling on a difraction gra ting having
1500 lines per centimeter.
43. How many lines per centimeter are there on a diffract ion grating that gives a first-order maximum for 470 -nm blue light
at an angle of?
44. What is the distance between lines on a diffraction g rating that produces a second-order maximum for 760-n m red light at
an angle of?
45. Calculate the wavelength of light that has its seco nd-order maximum at when falling on a diffraction g rating that
has 5000 lines per centimeter.
46. An electric current through hydrogen gas produces se veral distinct wavelengths of visible light. What are the
wavelengths of the hydrogen spectrum, if they form fi rst-order maxima at angles and when projected
on a diffraction grating having 10,000 lines per centi meter?
47. (a) What do the four angles in the preceding problem becom e if a 5000-line per centimeter diffraction grating is used?
(b) Using this grating, what would the angles be for the sec ond-order maxima?
(c) Discuss the relationship between integral reducti ons in lines per centimeter and the new angles of va rious order
maxima.
48. What is the spacing between structures in a feather tha t acts as a reflection grating, giving that they pro duce a first-order
maximum for 525-nm light at a angle?
49. An opal such as that shown in Figure 4.15 acts like a r eflection grating with rows separated by about If th e opal is
illuminated normally,
(a) at what angle will red light be seen and
(b) at what angle will blue light be seen?
50. At what angle does a diffraction grating produce a s econd-order maximum for light having a first-order m aximum at
51. (a) Find the maximum number of lines per centimeter a diffraction grating can have and produce a maximu m for the
smallest wavelength of visible light.
(b) Would such a grating be useful for ultraviolet spectra?
(c) For infrared spectra?
52. (a) Show that a 30,000 line per centimeter grating will n ot produce a maximum for visible light.
(b) What is the longest wavelength for which it does produ ce a first-order maximum?
(c) What is the greatest number of line per centimet er a diffraction grating can have and produce a com plete secondorder spectrum for visible light?
53. The analysis shown below also applies to diffraction g ratings with lines separated by a distance d. What is the distance
between fringes produced by a diffraction grating ha ving 125 lines per centimeter for 600-nm light, if t he screen is 1.50 m
away? (Hint: The distance between adjacent fringes is, assuming th e slit separation d is comparable to.)

1.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84161
4.5 Circular Apertures and Resolution
54. The 305-m-diameter Arecibo radio telescope pictured in Figure 4.20 detects radio waves with a 4.00-cm ave rage
wavelength.
(a) What is the angle between two just-resolvable point so urces for this telescope?
(b) How close together could these point sources be at the 2 million light-year distance of the Andromeda Galaxy?
55. Assuming the angular resolution found for the Hubble Telescope in Example 4.6, what is the smallest detail that could be
observed on the moon?
56. Diffraction spreading for a flashlight is insignifica nt compared with other limitations in its optics, such as spherical
aberrations in its mirror. To show this, calculate the minimum angular spreading of a flashlight beam tha t is originally 5.00
cm in diameter with an average wavelength of 600 nm.
57. (a) What is the minimum angular spread of a 633-nm wavelength He-Ne laser beam that is originally 1.00 mm in
diameter? (b) If this laser is aimed at a mountain c liff 15.0 km away, how big will the illuminated spot b e? (c) How big a spot
would be illuminated on the moon, neglecting atmosph eric effects? (This might be done to hit a corner r eflector to measure
the round-trip time and, hence, distance.)
58. A telescope can be used to enlarge the diameter of a laser beam and limit diffraction spreading. The laser beam is sent
through the telescope in opposite the normal directi on and can then be projected onto a satellite or th e moon. (a) If this is
done with the Mount Wilson telescope, producing a 2.54-m- diameter beam of 633-nm light, what is the minimum an gular
spread of the beam? (b) Neglecting atmospheric effect s, what is the size of the spot this beam would make on the moon,
assuming a lunar distance of.?
59. The limit to the eye’s acuity is actually related to diffra ction by the pupil.
(a) What is the angle between two just-resolvable poin ts of light for a 3.00-mm-diameter pupil, assuming an average
wavelength of 550 nm?
(b) Take your result to be the practical limit for the eye. What is the greatest possible distance a car can be from you if
you can resolve its two headlights, given they are 1.30 m a part?
(c) What is the distance between two just-resolvable point s held at an arm’s length (0.800 m) from your eye?
(d) How does your answer to (c) compare to details you normally observe in everyday circumstances?
60. What is the minimum diameter mirror on a telescope that would allow you to see details as small as 5.00 km on the moon
some 384,000 km away? Assume an average wavelength of 550 nm f or the light received.
61. Find the radius of a star’s image on the retina of a n eye if its pupil is open to 0.65 cm and the distan ce from the pupil to
the retina is 2.8 cm. Assume.
62. (a) The dwarf planet Pluto and its moon, Charon, are separated by 19,600 km. Neglecting atmospheric effects, should the
5.08-m-diameter Palomar Mountain telescope be able t o resolve these bodies when they are from Earth?

1.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84161Assume an average wavelength of 550 nm.
(b) In actuality, it is just barely possible to discer n that Pluto and Charon are separate bodies using a gr ound-based
telescope. What are the reasons for this?
63. A spy satellite orbits Earth at a height of 180 km. What is the minimum diameter of the objective lens i n a telescope that
must be used to resolve columns of troops marching 2.0 m apart? Assume λ=550nm.λ=550nm.
64. What is the minimum angular separation of two stars th at are just-resolvable by the 8.1-m Gemini South tele scope, if
atmospheric effects do not limit resolution? Use 550 nm f or the wavelength of the light from the stars.
65. The headlights of a car are 1.3 m apart. What is the maximum distance at which the eye can resolve these two headlights?
Take the pupil diameter to be 0.40 cm.
66. When dots are placed on a page from a laser printe r, they must be close enough so that you do not see t he individual dots
of ink. To do this, the separation of the dots must b e less than Raleigh’s criterion. Take the pupil of th e eye to be 3.0 mm and
the distance from the paper to the eye of 35 cm; fi nd the minimum separation of two dots such that they cannot be resolved.
How many dots per inch (dpi) does this correspond to?
67. Suppose you are looking down at a highway from a jetlin er flying at an altitude of 6.0 km. How far apart must two cars
be if you are able to distinguish them? Assume that and that the diameter of your pupils is 4.0 mm.
68. Can an astronaut orbiting Earth in a satellite at a distance of 180 km from the surface distinguish two s kyscrapers that are
20 m apart? Assume that the pupils of the astronaut’s eyes have a diameter of 5.0 mm and that most of the light is centered
around 500 nm.
69. The characters of a stadium scoreboard are formed wi th closely spaced lightbulbs that radiate primarily ye llow light. (Use
.) How closely must the bulbs be spaced so that an observ er 80 m away sees a display of continuous lines rath er
than the individual bulbs? Assume that the pupil of the observer’s eye has a diameter of 5.0 mm.
70. If a microscope can accept light from objects at an gles as large as, what is the smallest structure that can be
resolved when illuminated with light of wavelength 500 nm and
(a) the specimen is in air?
(b) When the specimen is immersed in oil, with index of ref raction of 1.52?
71. A camera uses a lens with aperture 2.0 cm. What is th e angular resolution of a photograph taken at 700 n m wavelength?
Can it resolve the millimeter markings of a ruler place d 35 m away?
4.6 X-Ray Diffraction
72. X-rays of wavelength 0.103 nm reflects off a crystal and a second-order maximum is recorded at a Bragg a ngle of.
What is the spacing between the scattering planes in this crystal?
73. A first-order Bragg reflection maximum is observed when a monochromatic X-ray falls on a crystal at a an gle to a
reflecting plane. What is the wavelength of this X-ray?
74. An X-ray scattering experiment is performed on a cry stal whose atoms form planes separated by 0.440 nm. Usin g an Xray source of wavelength 0.548 nm, what is the angle (wi th respect to the planes in question) at which the ex perimenter
needs to illuminate the crystal in order to observe a fir st-order maximum?
75. The structure of the NaCl crystal forms reflecting pl anes 0.541 nm apart. What is the smallest angle, meas ured from these
planes, at which X-ray diffraction can be observed, if X-rays o f wavelength 0.085 nm are used?
76. On a certain crystal, a first-order X-ray diffraction maximum is observed at an angle of relative to its surface, using
an X-ray source of unknown wavelength. Additionally, when illuminated with a different, this time of known wavele ngth
0.137 nm, a second-order maximum is detected at. Det ermine (a) the spacing between the reflecting planes, and (b) the
unknown wavelength.
77. Calcite crystals contain scattering planes separated by 0.30 nm. What is the angular separation between first and secondorder diffraction maxima when X-rays of 0.130 nm wavelengt h are used?

1.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416178. The first-order Bragg angle for a certain crystal is. Wh at is the second-order angle?
Additional Problems
79. White light falls on two narrow slits separated by 0.4 0 mm. The interference pattern is observed on a scre en 3.0 m away.
(a) What is the separation between the first maxima for red light () and violet light ()? (b) At what poi nt
nearest the central maximum will a maximum for yello w light () coincide with a maximum for violet light?
Identify the order for each maximum.
80. Microwaves of wavelength 10.0 mm fall normally on a metal p late that contains a slit 25 mm wide.
(a) Where are the first minima of the diffraction pattern?
(b) Would there be minima if the wavelength were 30.0 m m?
81. Quasars, or quasi-stellar radio sources, are astronomical objects discovered in 1960. They are distant but strong
emitters of radio waves with angular size so small, t hey were originally unresolved, the same as stars. The quasar 3C405 is
actually two discrete radio sources that subtend an ang le of 82 arcsec. If this object is studied using radio emissions at a
frequency of 410 MHz, what is the minimum diameter of a rad io telescope that can resolve the two sources?
82. Two slits each of width 1800 nm and separated by the c enter-to-center distance of 1200 nm are illuminated by plane
waves from a krypton ion laser-emitting at wavelength 461.9 nm. Find the number of interference peaks in th e central
diffraction peak.
83. A microwave of an unknown wavelength is incident on a single slit of width 6 cm. The angular width of the ce ntral peak
is found to be. Find the wavelength.
84. Red light (wavelength 632.8 nm in air) from a Helium-Ne on laser is incident on a single slit of width 0.05 m m. The
entire apparatus is immersed in water of refractive inde x 1.333. Determine the angular width of the central peak.
85. A light ray of wavelength 461.9 nm emerges from a 2-m m circular aperture of a krypton ion laser. Due to di ffraction, the
beam expands as it moves out. How large is the central brigh t spot at
(a) 1 m,
(b) 1 km,
(c) 1000 km, and
(d) at the surface of the moon at a distance of 400,000 km fro m Earth.
86. How far apart must two objects be on the moon to be dis tinguishable by eye if only the diffraction effects of the eye’s
pupil limit the resolution? Assume 550 nm for the wav elength of light, the pupil diameter 5.0 mm, and 400, 000 km for the
distance to the moon.
87. How far apart must two objects be on the moon to be re solvable by the 8.1-m-diameter Gemini North telescope at Mauna
Kea, Hawaii, if only the diffraction effects of the teles cope aperture limit the resolution? Assume 550 nm for the wavelength
of light and 400,000 km for the distance to the moon.
88. A spy satellite is reputed to be able to resolve obj ects 10. cm apart while operating 197 km above the s urface of Earth.
What is the diameter of the aperture of the telesco pe if the resolution is only limited by the diffract ion effects? Use 550 nm
for light.
89. Monochromatic light of wavelength 530 nm passes through a horizontal single slit of width in an opaque plat e. A
screen of dimensions is 1.2 m away from the slit.
(a) Which way is the diffraction pattern spread out on the screen?
(b) What are the angles of the minima with respect to the center?
(c) What are the angles of the maxima?
(d) How wide is the central bright fringe on the screen?

1.E.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84161(e) How wide is the next bright fringe on the screen?
90. A monochromatic light of unknown wavelength is incid ent on a slit of width. A diffraction pattern is seen at a
screen 2.5 m away where the central maximum is spread over a distance of 10.0 cm. Find the wavelength.
91. A source of light having two wavelengths 550 nm and 600 nm of equal intensity is incident on a slit of width. Find
the separation of the bright spots of the two wavelengths on a screen 30.0 cm away.
92. A single slit of width 2100 nm is illuminated normall y by a wave of wavelength 632.8 nm. Find the phase diffe rence
between waves from the top and one third from the bot tom of the slit to a point on a screen at a horizont al distance of 2.0 m
and vertical distance of 10.0 cm from the center.
93. A single slit of width is illuminated by a sodium ye llow light of wavelength 589 nm. Find the intensity at a
angle to the axis in terms of the intensity of the centr al maximum.
94. A single slit of width 0.10 mm is illuminated by a merc ury lamp of wavelength 576 nm. Find the intensity at a angle
to the axis in terms of the intensity of the central maximum.
95. A diffraction grating produces a second maximum that is 89.7 cm from the central maximum on a screen 2.0 m away. If
the grating has 600 lines per centimeter, what is the wavele ngth of the light that produces the diffraction pattern?
96. A grating with 4000 lines per centimeter is used to diffract light that contains all wavelengths between 400 and 650 nm.
How wide is the first-order spectrum on a screen 3.0 m from the gra ting?
97. A diffraction grating with 2000 lines per centimete r is used to measure the wavelengths emitted by a hyd rogen gas
discharge tube. (a) At what angles will you find the max ima of the two first-order blue lines of wavelengths 4 10 and 434 nm?
(b) The maxima of two other first-order lines are fou nd at rad and rad. What are the wavelengths of these
lines?
98. For white light () falling normally on a diffraction grating, show that the second and third-order
spectra overlap no matter what the grating constant d is.
99. How many complete orders of the visible spectrum () ca n be produced with a diffraction grating that
contains 5000 lines per centimeter?
100. Two lamps producing light of wavelength 589 nm are f ixed 1.0 m apart on a wooden plank. What is the maxim um
distance an observer can be and still resolve the la mps as two separate sources of light, if the resolution is affected solely by
the diffraction of light entering the eye? Assume light enters the eye through a pupil of diameter 4.5 mm.
101. On a bright clear day, you are at the top of a mount ain and looking at a city 12 km away. There are two ta ll towers 20.0
m apart in the city. Can your eye resolve the two towe rs if the diameter of the pupil is 4.0 mm? If not, wh at should be the
minimum magnification power of the telescope needed to resolve the two towers? In your calculations use 55 0 nm for the
wavelength of the light.
102. Radio telescopes are telescopes used for the detecti on of radio emission from space. Because radio waves ha ve much
longer wavelengths than visible light, the diameter of a radio telescope must be very large to provide goo d resolution. For
example, the radio telescope in Penticton, BC in Can ada, has a diameter of 26 m and can be operated at f requencies as high
as 6.6 GHz.
(a) What is the wavelength corresponding to this freque ncy?
(b) What is the angular separation of two radio sources that can be resolved by this telescope?
(c) Compare the telescope’s resolution with the angular size of the moon.

1.E.9 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84161
Figure:4.30 (credit: Jason Nishiyama)
103. Calculate the wavelength of light that produces its first minimum at an angle of when falling on a single slit of
width.
104. (a) Find the angle of the third diffraction minimum for 633-nm light falling on a slit of width.
(b) What slit width would place this minimum at?
105. As an example of diffraction by apertures of everyday d imensions, consider a doorway of width 1.0 m.
(a) What is the angular position of the first minimum in th e diffraction pattern of 600-nm light?
(b) Repeat this calculation for a musical note of fre quency 440 Hz (A above middle C). Take the speed of s ound to be
343 m/s.
106. What are the angular positions of the first and sec ond minima in a diffraction pattern produced by a sl it of width 0.20
mm that is illuminated by 400 nm light? What is the angu lar width of the central peak?
107. How far would you place a screen from the slit of the previous problem so that the second minimum is a di stance of 2.5
mm from the center of the diffraction pattern?
108. How narrow is a slit that produces a diffraction patte rn on a screen 1.8 m away whose central peak is 1.0 m wide?
Assume.
109. Suppose that the central peak of a single-slit diffra ction pattern is so wide that the first minima can b e assumed to occur
at angular positions of ±90°±90°. For this case, what is the rat io of the slit width to the wavelength of the light?
110. The central diffraction peak of the double-slit in terference pattern contains exactly nine fringes. Wha t is the ratio of the
slit separation to the slit width?
111. Determine the intensities of three interference pea ks other than the central peak in the central maximu m of the
diffraction, if possible, when a light of wavelength 50 0 nm is incident normally on a double slit of width 1 000 nm and
separation 1500 nm. Use the intensity of the central spot to be.
112. The yellow light from a sodium vapor lamp seems to be of pure wavelength, but it produces two first-order m axima at
and when projected on a 10,000 line per centimeter diffraction grating. What are the two wavelengths to an
accuracy of 0.1 nm?

1.E.10 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84161113. Structures on a bird feather act like a reflection g rating having 8000 lines per centimeter. What is the angle of the firstorder maximum for 600-nm light?
114. If a diffraction grating produces a first-order maxi mum for the shortest wavelength of visible light at, at what angle
will the first-order maximum be for the largest wavelength of visible light?
115. (a) What visible wavelength has its fourth-order maxi mum at an angle of when projected on a 25,000-line per
centimeter diffraction grating?
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
116. Consider a spectrometer based on a diffraction grati ng. Construct a problem in which you calculate the d istance between
two wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation in your spectrometer. Among the things to be considered are t he wavelengths
you wish to be able to distinguish, the number of lin es per meter on the diffraction grating, and the di stance from the grating
to the screen or detector. Discuss the practicality of the device in terms of being able to discern between wavelengths of
interest.
117. An amateur astronomer wants to build a telescope with a diffraction limit that will allow him to see if th ere are people
on the moons of Jupiter.
(a) What diameter mirror is needed to be able to see 1.00-m detail on a Jovian moon at a distance of fro m
Earth? The wavelength of light averages 600 nm.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
Challenge Problems
118. Blue light of wavelength 450 nm falls on a slit of width 0.25 mm. A converging lens of focal length 20 cm is placed
behind the slit and focuses the diffraction pattern on a screen.
(a) How far is the screen from the lens?
(b) What is the distance between the first and the third minima of the diffraction pattern?
119. (a) Assume that the maxima are halfway between the mi nima of a single-slit diffraction pattern. The use t he diameter
and circumference of the phasor diagram, as describe d in Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction, to determine the intensities of
the third and fourth maxima in terms of the intensit y of the central maximum.
(b) Do the same calculation, using Equation 4.4.
120. (a) By differentiating Equation 4.4, show that the h igher-order maxima of the single-slit diffraction pa ttern occur at
values of that satisfy.
(b) Plot and versus and find the intersections of these two curves. What information do they give you
about the locations of the maxima?
(c) Convince yourself that these points do not appear exactly at, where but are quite close
to these values.
121. What is the maximum number of lines per centimeter a diffraction grating can have and produce a compl ete first-order
spectrum for visible light?
122. Show that a diffraction grating cannot produce a secon d-order maximum for a given wavelength of light unle ss the firstorder maximum is at an angle less than.
123. A He-Ne laser beam is reflected from the surface of a CD onto a wall. The brightest spot is the reflected b eam at an
angle equal to the angle of incidence. However, fringe s are also observed. If the wall is 1.50 m from the C D, and the first
fringe is 0.600 m from the central maximum, what is the spa cing of grooves on the CD?

1.E.11 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84161124. Objects viewed through a microscope are placed very c lose to the focal point of the objective lens. Show that th e
minimum separation x of two objects resolvable through the microscope is given by
where is the focal length and D is the diameter of the objective lens as shown below.
This page titled 1.E: Diffraction (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.E: Diffraction (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

11.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8416411.S: Interference (Summary)
Key Terms
coherent waves waves are in phase or have a definite ph ase relationship
fringes bright and dark patterns of interference
incoherent waves have random phase relationships
interferometer instrument that uses interference of waves to make measu rements
monochromatic light composed of one wavelength only
Newton’s ringscircular interference pattern created by interferen ce between the
light reflected off two surfaces as a result of a slight gap between
them
orderinteger m used in the equations for constructive and d estructive
interference for a double slit
principal maximum brightest interference fringes seen with multiple slits
secondary maximumbright interference fringes of intensity lower than th e principal
maxima
thin-film interferenceinterference between light reflected from different surfaces of a
thin film
Key Equations
Constructive interference, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Destructive interference, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Path length difference for waves from two slits to a co mmon point
on a screen
Constructive interference, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Destructive interference, for m = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Distance from central maximum to the m-th bright fringe
Displacement measured by a Michelson interferometer
Summary
3.1: Young's Double-Slit Interference
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).
This page titled 11.S: Interference (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.S: Interference (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

1.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/841631.S: Diffraction (Summary)
Key Terms
Bragg planesfamilies of planes within crystals that can give rise to X-ray
diffraction
destructive interference for a single slitoccurs when the width of the slit is comparable to the wavelength
of light illuminating it
diffraction bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle
diffraction grating large number of evenly spaced parallel slits
diffraction limit fundamental limit to resolution due to diffraction
hologramthree-dimensional image recorded on film by lasers; th e word
hologram means entire picture (from the Greek word ho lo, as in
holistic)
holography process of producing holograms with the use of lasers
missing orderinterference maximum that is not seen because it coinc ides with a
diffraction minimum
Rayleigh criteriontwo images are just-resolvable when the center of the d iffraction
pattern of one is directly over the first minimum of the diffraction
pattern of the other
resolution ability, or limit thereof, to distinguish small detail s in images
two-slit diffraction patterndiffraction pattern of two slits of width a that are separated by a
distance d is the interference pattern of two point sources
separated by d multiplied by the diffraction pattern of a slit of
width a
width of the central peak angle between the minimum for and
X-ray diffractiontechnique that provides the detailed information abo ut
crystallographic structure of natural and manufacture d materials
Key Equations
Destructive interference for a single slit for
Half phase angle
Field amplitude in the diffraction pattern
Intensity in the diffraction pattern
Rayleigh criterion for circular apertures
Bragg equation
Summary
4.1: Single-Slit Diffraction
Diffraction can send a wave around the edges of an opening or other obstacle.

1.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84163A single slit produces an interference pattern charac terized by a broad central maximum with narrower and dim mer maxima to
the sides.
4.2: Intensity in Single-Slit Diffraction
The intensity pattern for diffraction due to a single sl it can be calculated using phasors as
where, a is the slit width, is the wavelength, and is the angl e from the central peak.
4.3: Double-Slit Diffraction
With real slits with finite widths, the effects of interfe rence and diffraction operate simultaneously to form a complicated
intensity pattern.
Relative intensities of interference fringes within a di ffraction pattern can be determined.
Missing orders occur when an interference maximum and a di ffraction minimum are located together.
4.4: Diffraction Gratings
A diffraction grating consists of a large number of eve nly spaced parallel slits that produce an interference p attern similar to but
sharper than that of a double slit.
Constructive interference occurs when for, where d is the di stance between the slits, θθ is the
angle relative to the incident direction, and m is the o rder of the interference.
4.5: Circular Apertures and Resolution
Diffraction limits resolution.
The Rayleigh criterion states that two images are just resolvable when the center of the diffraction pattern of o ne is directly over
the first minimum of the diffraction pattern of the oth er.
4.6: X-Ray Diffraction
X-rays are relatively short-wavelength EM radiation an d can exhibit wave characteristics such as interference when interacting
with correspondingly small objects.
4.7: Holography
Holography is a technique based on wave interference to re cord and form three-dimensional images.
Lasers offer a practical way to produce sharp holographic ima ges because of their monochromatic and coherent light fo r
pronounced interference patterns.
This page titled 1.S: Diffraction (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.S: Diffraction (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
12: Nuclear Physics
In this chapter, we study the composition and propert ies of the atomic nucleus. The nucleus lies at the cent er of an atom, and
consists of protons and neutrons. A deep understanding of the nucleus leads to numerous valuable technologi es, including devices
to date ancient rocks, map the galactic arms of the Milky Way, and generate electrical power.
12.1: Introduction to Nuclear Physics
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy
12.4: Radioactive Decay
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
12.6: Fission
12.7: Nuclear Fusion
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuc lear Radiation
12.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers)
12.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises)
12.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary)
This page titled 12: Nuclear Physics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421012.1: Introduction to Nuclear Physics
In this chapter, we study the composition and propert ies of the atomic nucleus. The nucleus lies at the cent er of an atom, and
consists of protons and neutrons. A deep understanding of the nucleus leads to numerous valuable technologi es, including devices
to date ancient rocks, map the galactic arms of the Milky Way, and generate electrical power.
Figure: The Sun is powered by nuclear fusion in its cor e. The core converts approximately 10381038 protons/se cond into
helium at a temperature of 14 million K. This process releases energy in the form of photons, neutrinos, and other particles. (credit:
modification of work by EIT SOHO Consortium, ESA, NASA)
The Sun is the main source of energy in the solar syst em. The Sun is 109 Earth diameters across, and account s for more than
99%99% of the total mass of the solar system. The Sun sh ines by fusing hydrogen nuclei—protons—deep inside it s interior. Once
this fuel is spent, the Sun will burn helium and, later, other nuclei. Nuclear fusion in the Sun is discussed t oward the end of this
chapter. In the meantime, we will investigate nuclear prop erties that govern all nuclear processes, including fusio n.
This page titled 12.1: Introduction to Nuclear Physics is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.1: Prelude to Nuclear Physics by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.

12.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421112.2: Properties of Nuclei
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the composition and size of an atomic nucleus
Use a nuclear symbol to express the composition of an atom ic nucleus
Explain why the number of neutrons is greater than proton s in heavy nuclei
Calculate the atomic mass of an element given its isotope s
The atomic nucleus is composed of protons and neutrons (Figure). Protons and neutrons have approximately the same
mass, but protons carry one unit of positive charge (+e) and neutrons carry no charge. These particles are packed together into an
extremely small space at the center of an atom. Accord ing to scattering experiments, the nucleus is spherica l or ellipsoidal in shape,
and about 1/100,000th the size of a hydrogen atom. If an atom were the size of a major league baseball sta dium, the nucleus would
be roughly the size of the baseball. Protons and neutrons within the nucleus are called nucleons.
Figure: The atomic nucleus is composed of protons and n eutrons. Protons are shown in blue, and neutrons are show n in red.
Counts of Nucleons
The number of protons in the nucleus is given by the atomic number,. The number of neutrons in the nucl eus is the neutron
number,. The total number of nucleons is the mass num ber,. These numbers are related by
A nucleus is represented symbolically by
where represents the chemical element, is the mass n umber, and is the atomic number. For example, repre sents the
carbon nucleus with six protons and six neutrons (or 12 nucleons).
A graph of the number N of neutrons versus the number of protons for a rang e of stable nuclei (nuclides) is shown in Figure
. For a given value of, multiple values of (blue po ints) are possible. For small values of, the number o f neutrons equals
the number of protons and the data fall on the red line. For large values of, the number of neutrons i s greater than the
number of protons and the data points fall above t he red line. The number of neutrons is generally grea ter than the number
of protons for.Learning Objectives

12.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84211
Figure: This graph plots the number of neutrons N against the number of protons Z for stable atomic nuclei. Larger nuclei,
have more neutrons than protons.
A chart based on this graph that provides more deta iled information about each nucleus is given in Figu re. This chart is called
a chart of the nuclides. Each cell or tile represents a separate nucleus. T he nuclei are arranged in order of ascending Z (along the
horizontal direction) and ascending N (along the vertical direction).
Figure: Partial chart of the nuclides. For stable nucl ei (dark blue backgrounds), cell values represent the percentage of nuclei
found on Earth with the same atomic number (percent abundance). For the unstable nuclei, the number repre sents the half-life.
Atoms that contain nuclei with the same number of pro tons (Z) and different numbers of neutrons (N) are called isotopes. For
example, hydrogen has three isotopes: normal hydroge n (1 proton, no neutrons), deuterium (one proton and one neutron), and
tritium (one proton and two neutrons). Isotopes of a given a tom share the same chemical properties, since these properties are

12.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84211determined by interactions between the outer electro ns of the atom, and not the nucleons. For example, wate r that contains
deuterium rather than hydrogen (“heavy water”) looks and tastes like normal water. The following table shows a list of common
isotopes.
Table: Common Isotopes
Element Symbol Mass NumberMass (Atomic Mass
Units)Percent
Abundance*Half-life**
Hydrogen H 1 1.0078 99.99 stable
or D 2 2.0141 0.01 stable
3 3.0160 - 12.32 y
Carbon 12 12.0000 98.91 stable
13 13.0034 1.1 stable
14 14.0032 - 5730 y
Nitrogen 14 14.0031 00.6 stable
15 15.001 0.4 stable
16 16.0061 - 7.13 s
Oxygen 16 15.0040 99.76 stable
17 16.9991 0.04 stable
18 17.9992 0.20 stable
19 19.0035 - 26.46 s
*No entry if less than 0.001 (trace amount). **Stable if half-life > 10 seconds.
Why do neutrons outnumber protons in heavier nuclei (Figure)? The answer to this question requires an under standing of
forces inside the nucleus with two primary forces as play:
1. the long-range electrostatic (Coulomb) force that ma kes the positively charged protons repel one another; and
2. the short-range strong nuclear force that makes all nucleons in the nucleus attract one ano ther.
You may also have heard of a “weak” nuclear force. T his force is responsible for some nuclear decays, b ut as the name implies, it
does not play a role in stabilizing the nucleus aga inst the strong Coulomb repulsion it experiences. W e discuss strong nuclear force
in more detail in the next chapter when we cover part icle physics. Nuclear stability occurs when the attract ive forces between
nucleons compensate for the repulsive, long-range el ectrostatic forces between all protons in the nucleus. Fo r heavy nuclei
excess neutrons are necessary to keep the electrostatic in teractions from breaking the nucleus apart, as shown in Fi gure.

12.2.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84211
Figure: (a) The electrostatic force is repulsive and h as long range. The arrows represent outward forces on p rotons (in blue)
at the nuclear surface by a proton (also in blue) at the center. (b) The strong nuclear force acts between neighboring nucleons. The
arrows represent attractive forces exerted by a neutro n (in red) on its nearest neighbors.
Because of the existence of stable isotopes, we must ta ke special care when quoting the mass of an element. Fo r example, Copper
(Cu) has two stable isotopes:
Given these two “versions” of Cu, what is the mass of t his element? The atomic mass of an element is define d as the weighted
average of the masses of its isotopes. Thus, the atomic mass of Cu is
The mass of an individual nucleus is often expressed in atomic mass units (u), where. (An atomic mass unit
is defined as 1/12th the mass of a nucleus.) In atom ic mass units, the mass of a helium nucleus (A = 4) is approximately 4 u. A
helium nucleus is also called an alpha (α) particle.
Nuclear Size
The simplest model of the nucleus is a densely pack ed sphere of nucleons. The volume of the nucleus is therefore proportional to
the number of nucleons, expressed by
where is the radius of a nucleus and is a constant wit h units of volume. Solving for, we have
where is a constant. For hydrogen, corresponds to the radius of a single proton. Scattering experiments sup port this
general relationship for a wide range of nuclei, and they imply that neutrons have approximately the same radius as protons. The
experimentally measured value for is approximately 1.2 femtometer (recall that).
Find the radius (r) and approximate density of a Fe-56 nucleus. Assume t he mass of the Fe-56 nucleus is approximately 56
u.
Strategy
a. Finding the radius of is a straightforward application of, given.
b. To find the approximate density of this nucleus, assume the nucleus is spherical. Calculate its volume using the ra dius
found in part (a), and then find its density from.
Solution
a. The radius of a nucleus is given by Equation. Substitu ting the values for and A yieldsExample: The Iron Nucleus

12.2.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84211b. Density is defined to be, which for a sphere of radius r is
Substituting known values gives
Converting to units of, we find
Significance
a. The radius of the Fe-56 nucleus is found to be approxi mately 5 fm, so its diameter is about 10 fm, or. In previ ous
discussions of Rutherford’s scattering experiments, a lig ht nucleus was estimated to be in diameter. Therefore, the
result shown for a mid-sized nucleus is reasonable.
b. The density found here may seem incredible. However, it i s consistent with earlier comments about the nucleus cont aining
nearly all of the mass of the atom in a tiny region of spa ce. One cubic meter of nuclear matter has the same mass as a cube
of water 61 km on each side.
Nucleus X is two times larger than nucleus Y. What is the ratio of their atomic masses?
Answer
eight
This page titled 12.2: Properties of Nuclei is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.2: Properties of Nuclei by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.Exercise

12.3.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421212.3: Nuclear Binding Energy
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Calculate the mass defect and binding energy for a wide ra nge of nuclei
Use a graph of binding energy per nucleon (BEN) versus mass num ber (A) graph to assess the relative stability of a nucleus
Compare the binding energy of a nucleon in a nucleus to the i onization energy of an electron in an atom
The forces that bind nucleons together in an atomic nucleus are much greater than those that bind an e lectron to an atom through
electrostatic attraction. This is evident by the rela tive sizes of the atomic nucleus and the atom (and m, respectively).
The energy required to pry a nucleon from the nucle us is therefore much larger than that required to re move (or ionize) an electron
in an atom. In general, all nuclear changes involve large amounts of energy per particle undergoing the reaction. This has numerous
practical applications.
Mass Defect
According to nuclear particle experiments, the total mass of a nucleus is less than the sum of the masses of its constituent
nucleons (protons and neutrons). The mass difference, or mass defect, is given by
where is the total mass of the protons, is the total m ass of the neutrons, and is the mass of the nucleus.
According to Einstein’s special theory of relativity, mass is a measure of the total energy of a system (). T hus, the total
energy of a nucleus is less than the sum of the ene rgies of its constituent nucleons. The formation of a n ucleus from a system of
isolated protons and neutrons is therefore an exothe rmic reaction—meaning that it releases energy. The energy emitted, or radiated,
in this process is.
Figure: The binding energy is the energy required to break a nucleus into its constituent protons and neutr ons. A system of
separated nucleons has a greater mass than a system of bou nd nucleons.
Now imagine this process occurs in reverse. Instead of forming a nucleus, energy is put into the system to break apart the nucleus
(Figure). The amount of energy required is called the t otal binding energy (BE),.
The binding energy is equal to the amount of energy relea sed in forming the nucleus, and is therefore given by
Experimental results indicate that the binding energ y for a nucleus with mass number is roughly proport ional to the total
number of nucleons in the nucleus, A. The binding energy of a magnesium nucleus, for exa mple, is approximately two
times greater than for the carbon nucleus.Learning Objectives
Definition: Binding Energy

12.3.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84212Calculate the mass defect and the binding energy of the deuteron. The mass of the deuteron is or
Solution
For the deuteron and. From Equation, the mass defect for the deuteron is
The binding energy of the deuteron is then
Over two million electron volts are needed to break a part a deuteron into a proton and a neutron. This ver y large value
indicates the great strength of the nuclear force. B y comparison, the greatest amount of energy required to liberate an electron
bound to a hydrogen atom by an attractive Coulomb for ce (an electromagnetic force) is about 10 eV.
Graph of Binding Energy per Nucleon
In nuclear physics, one of the most important experim ental quantities is the binding energy per nucleon (BEN), which is defined
by
This quantity is the average energy required to remo ve an individual nucleon from a nucleus—analogous to the ionization energy
of an electron in an atom. If the BEN is relatively large, the nucleus is relatively stable. BEN values are estimated from nuclear
scattering experiments.
A graph of binding energy per nucleon versus atomic number A is given in Figure. This graph is considered by many
physicists to be one of the most important graphs in p hysics. Two notes are in order. First, typical BEN value s range from 6–10
MeV, with an average value of about 8 MeV. In other wor ds, it takes several million electron volts to pry a nucleon from a typical
nucleus, as compared to just 13.6 eV to ionize an el ectron in the ground state of hydrogen. This is why n uclear force is referred to
as the “strong” nuclear force.
Second, the graph rises at low A, peaks very near iron, and then tapers off at hig h. The peak value suggests that the
iron nucleus is the most stable nucleus in nature (it is also why nuclear fusion in the cores of stars ends wi th Fe). The reason the
graph rises and tapers off has to do with competing forces in the nucleus. At low values of, attractive nu clear forces between
nucleons dominate over repulsive electrostatic forces between protons. But at high values of, repulsive e lectrostatic forces
between forces begin to dominate, and these forces tend t o break apart the nucleus rather than hold it togeth er.Example: Mass Defect and Binding Energy of the Deuteron

12.3.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84212
Figure: In this graph of binding energy per nucleon for stable nuclei, the BEN is greatest for nuclei with a mass near.
Therefore, fusion of nuclei with mass numbers much less t han that of Fe, and fission of nuclei with mass numbers g reater than that
of Fe, are exothermic processes.
As we will see, the BEN-versus- A graph implies that nuclei divided or combined rele ase an enormous amount of energy. This is the
basis for a wide range of phenomena, from the production of electricity at a nuclear power plant to sunlight.
Calculate the binding energy per nucleon of an.
Strategy
Determine the total binding energy (BE) using the eq uation, where is the mass defect. The binding ener gy
per nucleon (BEN) is BE divided by (Equation).
Solution
For, we have. The total binding energy (Equation) is
These masses are,, and. Thus we have
Noting that, we find
Since, the total binding energy per nucleon (Equation) is
Significance
Notice that the binding energy per nucleon for is mu ch greater than for the hydrogen isotopes ().
Therefore, helium nuclei cannot break down hydrogen iso topes without energy being put into the system.Example: Tightly Bound Alpha Nuclides

12.3.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84212If the binding energy per nucleon is large, does this ma ke it harder or easier to strip off a nucleon from a nuc leus?
Answer
harder
This page titled 12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.3: Nuclear Binding Energy by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physicsvolume-3.Exercise

12.4.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421312.4: Radioactive Decay
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the decay of a radioactive substance in terms of its decay constant and half-life
Use the radioactive decay law to estimate the age of a sub stance
Explain the natural processes that allow the dating of liv ing tissue using C
In 1896, Antoine Becquerel discovered that a uranium-rich rock emits invisible r ays that can darken a photographic plate in an
enclosed container. Scientists offer three arguments f or the nuclear origin of these rays. First, the effects of the radiation do not vary
with chemical state; that is, whether the emitting ma terial is in the form of an element or compound. Sec ond, the radiation does not
vary with changes in temperature or pressure—both fact ors that in sufficient degree can affect electrons i n an atom. Third, the very
large energy of the invisible rays (up to hundreds of eV) is not consistent with atomic electron transition s (only a few eV). Today,
this radiation is explained by the conversion of mas s into energy deep within the nucleus of an atom. The spontaneous emission of
radiation from nuclei is called nuclear radioactivity (Figure).
Figure: The international ionizing radiation symbol is universally recognized as the warning symbol for nuc lear radiation.
Radioactive Decay Law
When an individual nucleus transforms into another with the emission of radiation, the nucleus is said to decay. Radioactive decay
occurs for all nuclei with, and also for some unstab le isotopes with. The decay rate is proportional to t he number of
original (undecayed) nuclei N in a substance. The number of nuclei lost to decay, i n time interval dt, is written
where is called the decay constant. (The minus sign indicates the number of original nuclei decreases o ver time.) In other words,
the more nuclei available to decay, the more that do d ecay (in time dt). Equation can be rewritten as
The solution to the equation leads to the radioactiv e decay law:
The total number of radioactive nuclei remaining afte r time is
where is the decay constant for the particular nucleus.
The total number of nuclei drops very rapidly at first, a nd then more slowly (Figure).Learning Objectives
Radioactive Decay Law

12.4.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84213
Figure: A plot of the radioactive decay law demonstr ates that the number of nuclei remaining in a decay sample drops
dramatically during the first moments of decay.
The half-life of a radioactive substance is defined as the time f or half of the original nuclei to decay (or the tim e at which
half of the original nuclei remain). The half-lives of unstable isotopes are shown in the chart of nuclides. The number of radioactive
nuclei remaining after an integer (n) number of half-lives is therefore
If the decay constant is large, the half-life is sma ll, and vice versa. To determine the relationship be tween these quantities, note
that when, then.
Thus, Equation can be rewritten as
Dividing both sides by and taking the natural logarith m yields
which reduces to
Thus, if we know the half-life T of a radioactive substance, we can find its decay co nstant. The lifetime of a radioactive
substance is defined as the average amount of time t hat a nucleus exists before decaying. The lifetime o f a substance is just the
reciprocal of the decay constant, written as
The activity A is defined as the magnitude of the decay rate, or
The infinitesimal change dN in the time interval dt is negative because the number of parent (undecaye d) particles is decreasing, so
the activity (A) is positive. Defining the initial activity as, we have
Thus, the activity A of a radioactive substance decreases exponentially with t ime (Figure).1/2

12.4.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84213
Figure: (a) A plot of the activity as a function of time (b) If we measure the activity at different tim es, we can plot \ln A
versus t, and obtain a straight line.
The half-life of strontium-90,, is 28.8 y. Find (a) its deca y constant and (b) the initial activity of 1.00 g of the ma terial.
Strategy
We can find the decay constant directly from Equati on. To determine the activity, we first need to find the number of
nuclei present.
Solution
a. The decay constant is found to be
b. The atomic mass of is 89.91 g. Using Avogadro’s nu mber atoms/mol, we find the initial number of
nuclei in 1.00 g of the material:
From this, we find that the activity at for 1.00 g of str ontium-90 is
Expressing in terms of the half-life of the substance, we get
Therefore, the activity is halved after one half-lif e. We can determine the decay constant by measuring the activity as a function
of time. Taking the natural logarithm of the left and r ight sides of Equation, we get
This equation follows the linear form. If we plot \ln A versus t, we expect a straight line with slope and y-intercept
(Figure). Activity A is expressed in units of becquerels (Bq), where one. This quantity can
also be expressed in decays per minute or decays per year. One of the most common units for activity is t he curie (Ci), defined to
be the activity of 1 g of. The relationship between the Bq and Ci isExample: Decay Constant and Activity of Strontium-90

12.4.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84213Approximately of the human body by mass is carbon. Calculate the activity due to in 1.00 kg of carbon found in a
living organism. Express the activity in units of Bq and Ci.
Strategy
The activity of is determined using the equation, where λ is the decay constant and is the number of
radioactive nuclei. The number of nuclei in a 1.00-k g sample is determined in two steps. First, we determine t he number of
nuclei using the concept of a mole. Second, we multi ply this value by (the known abundance of in a car bon
sample from a living organism) to determine the numb er of nuclei in a living organism. The decay consta nt is determined
from the known half-life of (available from [link]).
Solution
One mole of carbon has a mass of 12.0 g, since it is nearly p ure. Thus, the number of carbon nuclei in a kilogram is
The number of nuclei in 1 kg of carbon is therefore
Now we can find the activity by using Equation. Entering kn own values gives us
or decays per year. To convert this to the unit Bq, we simpl y convert years to seconds. Thus,
or 250 decays per second. To express A in curies, we use the definition of a curie,
Thus,
Significance
Approximately of the human body by weight is carbon. Hundreds of decays take place in the human body eve ry
second. Carbon-14 and other naturally occurring radi oactive substances in the body compose a person’s back ground exposure
to nuclear radiation. As we will see later in this chapter, thi s activity level is well below the maximum recommended dosa ges.
Radioactive Dating
Radioactive dating is a technique that uses naturally occurring radio activity to determine the age of a material, such a s a rock or
an ancient artifact. The basic approach is to estimate the original number of nuclei in a material and th e present number of nuclei in
the material (after decay), and then use the known v alue of the decay constant and Equation to calcula te the total time of the
decay,.
An important method of radioactive dating is carbon-14 dating. Carbon-14 nuclei are produced when high-energy sola r radiation
strikes nuclei in the upper atmosphere and subsequen tly decay with a half-life of 5730 years. Radioactive carbon has the same
chemistry as stable carbon, so it combines with the ec osphere and eventually becomes part of every living organism. Carbon-14 has
an abundance of 1.3 parts per trillion of normal car bon. Therefore, if you know the number of carbon nucle i in an object, you
multiply that number by to find the number of nuc lei in that object. When an organism dies, carbon ex change with
the environment ceases, and is not replenished as it de cays.Example: What is Activity in Living Tissue?

12.4.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84213By comparing the abundance of in an artifact, such as mummy wrappings, with the normal abundance in livin g tissue, it is
possible to determine the mummy’s age (or the time si nce the person’s death). Carbon-14 dating can be used for biological tissues
as old as 50,000 years, but is generally most accur ate for younger samples, since the abundance of nucl ei in them is greater.
Very old biological materials contain no at all. The validity of carbon dating can be checked by other means, such as by
historical knowledge or by tree-ring counting.
In an ancient burial cave, your team of archaeologi sts discovers ancient wood furniture. Only of the ori ginal remains
in the wood. How old is the furniture?
Strategy
The problem statement implies that. Therefore, we re arrange Equation to find the product,. We know the
half-life of is 5730 y, so we also know the decay constan t, and therefore the total decay time.
Solution
We rearrange Equation for to gives
Thus
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides yields
so that
Rearranging the equation to isolate gives us
Significance
The furniture is almost 2000 years old—an impressiv e discovery. The typical uncertainty on carbon-14 d ating is about, so
the furniture is anywhere between 1750 and 1950 years old. This date range must be confirmed by other evid ence, such as
historical records.
A radioactive nuclide has a high decay rate. What doe s this mean for its half-life and activity?
Answer
Half-life is inversely related to decay rate, so the h alf-life is short. Activity depends on both the number of decaying
particles and the decay rate, so the activity can be gr eat or small.
Visit the Radioactive Dating Game to learn about the types of radiometric dating and try your hand at dating some ancient
objects.
This page titled 12.4: Radioactive Decay is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.An Ancient Burial Cave
Exercise

12.4.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421310.4: Radioactive Decay by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me3.

12.5.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421412.5: Nuclear Reactions
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe and compare three types of nuclear radiation
Use nuclear symbols to describe changes that occur durin g nuclear reactions
Describe processes involved in the decay series of heavy e lements
Early experiments revealed three types of nuclear “ rays” or radiation: alpha rays, beta rays, and gam ma rays. These three
types of radiation are differentiated by their abili ty to penetrate matter. Alpha radiation is barely abl e to pass through a thin sheet of
paper. Beta radiation can penetrate aluminum to a d epth of about 3 mm, and gamma radiation can penetrat e lead to a depth of 2 or
more centimeters (Figure).
Figure: A comparison of the penetration depths of alp ha, beta, and gamma radiation through various mat erials.
The electrical properties of these three types of rad iation are investigated by passing them through a uni form magnetic field, as
shown in Figure. According to the magnetic force equatio n for a moving charge in a magnetic field
where positively charged particles are deflected upwar d, negatively charged particles are deflected downwar d, and particles with no
charge pass through the magnetic field undeflected. E ventually, rays were identified with helium nuclei, rays with
electrons and positrons (positively charged electrons or antielectrons), and rays with high-energy photons. We discuss alpha,
beta, and gamma radiation in detail in the remainder of t his section.
Figure: The effect of a magnetic field on alpha (), beta (), and gamma () radiation. This figure is a sch ematic only. The
relative paths of the particles depend on their masses a nd initial kinetic energies.Learning Objectives

12.5.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84214Alpha Decay
Heavy unstable nuclei emit radiation. In -particle d ecay (or alpha decay), the nucleus loses two protons and two neutrons, so
the atomic number decreases by two, whereas its mass numb er decreases by four. Before the decay, the nucleus is called the parent
nucleus. The nucleus or nuclei produced in the decay are r eferred to as the daughter nucleus or daughter nuclei. We represent an
decay symbolically by
where is the parent nucleus, is the daughter nucleu s, and is the particle. In decay, a nucleus of ato mic number Z
decays into a nucleus of atomic number and atomic mass. Interestingly, the dream of the ancient alchem ists to turn
other metals into gold is scientifically feasible th rough the alpha-decay process. The efforts of the a lchemists failed because they
relied on chemical interactions rather than nuclear inter actions.
Watch alpha particles escape from a polonium nucleu s, causing radioactive alpha decay. See how random dec ay times relate to
the half-life. To try a simulation of alpha decay, visit alpha particles
An example of alpha decay is uranium-238:
The atomic number has dropped from 92 to 90. The ch emical element with is thorium. Hence, Uranium-238 has decayed to
Thorium-234 by the emission of an particle, written
Subsequently, decays by emission with a half-life of 24 days. The energy released in this alpha decay ta kes the form of
kinetic energies of the thorium and helium nuclei, al though the kinetic energy of thorium is smaller tha n helium due to its heavier
mass and smaller velocity.
Find the energy emitted in the decay of can be fou nd using the equation. We must first find, the
difference in mass between the parent nucleus and the products of the decay.
Solution
The decay equation is
Thus, the pertinent masses are those of,, and the particle or, all of which are known. The initial mas s was
. The final mass is the sum
Thus,
Now we can find E by entering into the equation:
We know, so we haveExample: Plutonium Alpha Decay

12.5.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84214Significance
The energy released in this decay is in the MeV rang e, many times greater than chemical reaction energie s. Most of this
energy becomes kinetic energy of the particle (or nucleus), which moves away at high speed. The energy carri ed away
by the recoil of the nucleus is much smaller due to its relatively large mass. The nucleus can be left in an excited state
to later emit photons (rays).
Beta Decay
In most particle decays (or beta decay), either an electron () or positron () is emitted by a nucleus. A positron has the same
mass as the electron, but its charge is. For this re ason, a positron is sometimes called an antielectron. How does decay occur?
A possible explanation is the electron (positron) i s confined to the nucleus prior to the decay and so mehow escapes. To obtain a
rough estimate of the escape energy, consider a simpl ified model of an electron trapped in a box (or in t he terminology of quantum
mechanics, a one-dimensional square well) that has th e width of a typical nucleus (). According to the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle in Quantum Mechanics, the uncertainty of the momentum o f the electron is:
Taking this momentum value (an underestimate) to be t he “true value,” the kinetic energy of the electron o n escape is
approximately
Experimentally, the electrons emitted in decay are found to have kinetic energies of the order of only a few MeV. We therefore
conclude that the electron is somehow produced in th e decay rather than escaping the nucleus. Particle p roduction (annihilation) is
described by theories that combine quantum mechanics and relativity, a subject of a more advanced course in phy sics.
Nuclear beta decay involves the conversion of one nu cleon into another. For example, a neutron can decay to a proton by the
emission of an electron () and a nearly massless particle called an antineutrino ():
The notation is used to designate the electron. Its m ass number is 0 because it is not a nucleon, and its a tomic number is to
signify that it has a charge of. The proton is rep resented by because its mass number and atomic number are 1. When this
occurs within an atomic nucleus, we have the following equat ion for beta decay:
This process occurs due to the weak nuclear force.
Watch beta decay occur for a collection of nuclei or for an individual nucleus.
As an example, the isotope is unstable and decays by emiss ion with a half-life of 24 days. Its decay can be represent ed as
Since the chemical element with atomic number 91 is prot actinium (Pa), we can write the decay of thorium as
The reverse process is also possible: A proton can d ecay to a neutron by the emission of a positron (and a nearly massless
particle called a neutrino (). This reaction is written as

12.5.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84214The positron is emitted with the neutrino, and the neutron remains in the nucleus. (Like decay, the p ositron does not
precede the decay but is produced in the decay.) For an isolated proton, this process is impossible beca use the neutron is heavier
than the proton. However, this process is possible within the nucleus because the proton can receive energy from other nucleons for
the transition. As an example, the isotope of aluminu m decays by emission with a half-life of. The decay is
written as
The atomic number 12 corresponds to magnesium. Hence,
As a nuclear reaction, positron emission can be written as
The neutrino was not detected in the early experimen ts on decay. However, the laws of energy and momentum se emed to require
such a particle. Later, neutrinos were detected through th eir interactions with nuclei.
The nucleus undergoes both and decay. For each case, wha t is the daughter nucleus?
Strategy
We can use the processes described by Equation and Eq uation, as well as the Periodic Table, to identify th e
resulting elements.
Solution
The atomic number and the mass number for the parti cle are 2 and 4, respectively. Thus, when a bismuth-211 nucleus emits
an particle, the daughter nucleus has an atomic num ber of 81 and a mass number of 207. The element with an atomic number
of 81 is thallium, so the decay is given by
In decay, the atomic number increases by 1, while the mass number stays the same. The element with an atom ic number of
84 is polonium, so the decay is given by
In radioactive beta decay, does the atomic mass number, A, increase or decrease?
Solution
Neither; it stays the same.
Gamma Decay
A nucleus in an excited state can decay to a lower-le vel state by the emission of a “gamma-ray” photon, an d this is known as
gamma decay. This is analogous to de-excitation of an at omic electron. Gamma decay is represented symbolically by
where the asterisk (*) on the nucleus indicates an ex cited state. In decay, neither the atomic number no r the mass number
changes, so the type of nucleus does not change.Example: Bismuth Alpha and Beta Decay
Exercise

12.5.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84214Radioactive Decay Series
Nuclei with are unstable and decay naturally. Many of these nuclei have very short lifetimes, so they are no t found in nature.
Notable exceptions include (or Th-232) with a half-l ife of years, and (or U-238) with a half-life of
years. When a heavy nucleus decays to a lighter one, t he lighter daughter nucleus can become the parent n ucleus for the next decay,
and so on. This process can produce a long series of nuclear de cays called a decay series. The series ends with a stable nucleus.
To illustrate the concept of a decay series, conside r the decay of Th-232 series (Figure). The neutron n umber, N, is plotted on
the vertical y-axis, and the atomic number, Z, is plotted on the horizontal x-axis, so Th-232 is found at the coordinates
. Th-232 decays by emission with a half-life of year s. Alpha decay decreases the atomic number by 2 and
the mass number by 4, so we have
The neutron number for Radium-228 is 140, so it is fo und in the diagram at the coordinates. Radium-228 i s also
unstable and decays by emission with a half-life of 5.76 years to Actinum-228. The atomic number increas es by 1, the mass
number remains the same, and the neutron number decr eases by 1. Notice that in the graph, emission appears as a line sloping
downward to the left, with both N and Z decreasing by 2. Beta emission, on the other hand, a ppears as a line sloping downward to
the right with N decreasing by 1, and Z increasing by 1. After several additional alpha and beta decays, the series ends with the
stable nucleus Pb-208.
Figure: In the thorium decay series, alpha () decays reduce the atomic number, as indicated by the red ar rows. Beta (
) decays increase the atomic number, as indicated by t he blue arrows. The series ends at the stable nucleus Pb-2 08.
The relative frequency of different types of radioa ctive decays (alpha, beta, and gamma) depends on man y factors, including the
strength of the forces involved and the number of wa ys a given reaction can occur without violating the conservation of energy and
momentum. How often a radioactive decay occurs often depen ds on a sensitive balance of the strong and electromagnetic forces.

12.5.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84214As another example, consider the U-238 decay series shown in Figure. After numerous alpha and beta decays, the se ries ends
with the stable nucleus Pb-206.
Figure: In the Uranium-238 decay series, alpha decay s reduce the atomic number, as indicated by the red a rrows. Beta
decays increase the atomic number, as indicated by the blue arrows. The series ends at the stable nucleus Pb-206.
An example of a decay whose parent nucleus no longer exists naturally is shown in Figure. It starts with Neptuni um-237 and
ends in the stable nucleus Bismuth-209. Neptunium is called a transuranic element because it lies beyond uranium in the periodic
table. Uranium has the highest atomic number of any element found in nature. Elements with can be produc ed only
in the laboratory. They most probably also existed in nature at the time of the formation of Earth, but be cause of their relatively
short lifetimes, they have completely decayed. There is nothing fundamentally different between naturall y occurring and artificial
elements.

12.5.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84214
Figure: In the Neptunium-237 decay series, alpha dec ays reduce the atomic number, as indicated by the red arrows. Beta
decays increase the atomic number, as indicated by th e blue arrows. The series ends at the stable nucleus Bi-2 09.
Notice that for Bi (21), the decay may proceed through eit her alpha or beta decay.
Radioactivity in the Earth
According to geologists, if there were no heat source, Ea rth should have cooled to its present temperature in no more than 1 billion
years. Yet, Earth is more than 4 billion years old. Why is Earth cooling so slowly? The answer is nuclear radio activity, that is, highenergy particles produced in radioactive decays heat Ea rth from the inside (Figure).

12.5.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84214
Figure: Earth is heated by nuclear reactions (alpha, beta, and gamma decays). Without these reactions, Eart h’s core and
mantle would be much cooler than it is now.
Candidate nuclei for this heating model are and, which possess half-lives similar to or longer than th e age of Earth. The
energy produced by these decays (per second per cubic meter) is small, but the energy cannot escape easily, so Earth’s core is very
hot. Thermal energy in Earth’s core is transferred t o Earth’s surface and away from it through the proce sses of convection,
conduction, and radiation.
This page titled 12.5: Nuclear Reactions is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.5: Nuclear Reactions by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me3.

12.6.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421512.6: Fission
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the process of nuclear fission in terms of its p roduct and reactants
Calculate the energies of particles produced by a fissio n reaction
Explain the fission concept in the context of fission bom bs and nuclear reactions
In 1934, Enrico Fermi bombarded chemical elements with neutrons in order to create isotopes of other element s. He assumed that
bombarding uranium with neutrons would make it unstab le and produce a new element. Unfortunately, Fermi could not determine
the products of the reaction. Several years later, Otto Ha hn and Fritz Strassman reproduced these experiments an d discovered that
the products of these reactions were smaller nuclei. Fr om this, they concluded that the uranium nucleus ha d split into two smaller
nuclei.
Figure: The Phillipsburg Nuclear Power Plant in German y uses a fission reactor to generate electricity.
The splitting of a nucleus is called fission. Interestingly, U-235 fission does not always produce the same fragments. Example
fission reactions include:
In each case, the sum of the masses of the product nu clei are less than the masses of the reactants, so the fission of uranium is an
exothermic process. This is the idea behind the use of fission reactors as sources of energy (Figure). Th e energy
carried away by the reaction takes the form of parti cles with kinetic energy. The percent yield of fragme nts from a U-235 fission is
given in Figure.Learning Objectives

12.6.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84215
Figure: In this graph of fission fragments from U-235, the peaks in the graph indicate nuclei that are prod uced in the greatest
abundance by the fission process.
Energy changes in a nuclear fission reaction can be understood in terms of the binding energy per nucle on curve. The BEN value
for uranium is slightly lower than its daughter nucle i, which lie closer to the iron (Fe) peak. This means th at nucleons in
the nuclear fragments are more tightly bound than t hose in the U-235 nucleus. Therefore, a fission reactio n results in a drop in the
average energy of a nucleon. This energy is carried awa y by high-energy neutrons.
Niels Bohr and John Wheeler developed the liquid drop model to understand the fission process. According to this mo del, firing a
neutron at a nucleus is analogous to disturbing a d roplet of water (Figure). The analogy works because shor t-range forces
between nucleons in a nucleus are similar to the attra ctive forces between water molecules in a water droplet. In particular, forces
between nucleons at the surface of the nucleus result in a surface tension similar to that of a water dropl et. A neutron fired into a
uranium nucleus can set the nucleus into vibration. If this vibration is violent enough, the nucleus di vides into smaller nuclei and
also emits two or three individual neutrons.
Figure: In the liquid drop model of nuclear fission, the uranium nucleus is split into two lighter nuclei b y a high-energy
neutron.
U-235 fission can produce a nuclear chain reaction. In a compound consisting of many U-235 nuclei, neutro ns in the decay of one
U-235 nucleus can initiate the fission of additional U-235 nuclei (Figure). This chain reaction can proceed in a controlled
manner, as in a nuclear reactor at a power plant, or pro ceed uncontrollably, as in an explosion.

12.6.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84215
Figure: In a U-235 fission chain reaction, the fission of the m nucleus produces high-energy neutrons that go on to split more
nuclei. The energy released in this process can be used to produce electricity.
View a simulation on nuclear fission to start a chain reaction, or introduce nonradioacti ve isotopes to prevent one. Control
energy production in a nuclear reactor.
The Atomic Bomb
The possibility of a chain reaction in uranium, with its extremely large energy release, led nuclear scie ntists to conceive of making
a bomb—an atomic bomb. (These discoveries were taking place in the years ju st prior to the Second World War and many of the
European physicists involved in these discoveries came from countries that were being overrun.) Natural uran ium contains
U-238 and only U-235, and does not produce a chain r eaction. To produce a controlled, sustainable chain r eaction, the
percentage of U-235 must be increased to about. In addition, the uranium sample must be massive enough so a typical neutron
is more likely to induce fission than it is to escape. The minimum mass needed for the chain reaction to oc cur is called the critical
mass. When the critical mass reaches a point at which the chain reaction becomes self-sustaining, this is a condition known as
criticality. The original design required two pieces of U-235 bel ow the critical mass. When one piece in the form of a b ullet is fired
into the second piece, the critical mass is exceeded and a chain reaction is produced.
An important obstacle to the U-235 bomb is the product ion of a critical mass of fissionable material. Ther efore, scientists
developed a plutonium-239 bomb because Pu-239 is more fissionable than U-235 and thus requires a smaller c ritical mass. The
bomb was made in the form of a sphere with pieces of plutonium, each below the critical mass, at the edge of the sphere. A series
of chemical explosions fired the plutonium pieces to ward the center of the sphere simultaneously. When al l these pieces of
plutonium came together, the combination exceeded t he critical mass and produced a chain reaction. Bot h the U-235 and Pu-239
bombs were used in World War II. Whether to develop an d use atomic weapons remain two of the most important questions faced
by human civilization.

12.6.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84215Calculate the energy released in the following rare spont aneous fission reaction:
The atomic masses are,,, and.
Strategy
As always, the energy released is equal to the mass destroy ed times, so we must find the difference in mass betwe en the
parent and the fission products.
Solution
The products have a total mass of
The mass lost is the mass of or
Therefore, the energy released is
Significance
Several important things arise in this example. The en ergy release is large but less than it would be if the nucleus split into two
equal parts, since energy is carried away by neutrons. However, this fission reaction produces neutrons and does not split the
nucleus into two equal parts. Fission of a given nucl ide, such as, does not always produce the same produc ts. Fission is a
statistical process in which an entire range of produ cts are produced with various probabilities. Most fissio n produces neutrons,
although the number varies. This is an extremely impo rtant aspect of fission, because neutrons can induce more fission,
enabling self-sustaining chain reactions.
Fission Nuclear Reactors
The first nuclear reactor was built by Enrico Fermi on a squash court on the c ampus of the University of Chicago on December 2,
1942. The reactor itself contained U-238 enriched wit h U-235. Neutrons produced by the chain reaction move too fast to
initiate fission reactions. One way to slow them down is to enclose the entire reactor in a water bath under hig h pressure. The
neutrons collide with the water molecules and are slowe d enough to be used in the fission process. The slowed neutrons split more
U-235 nuclei and a chain reaction occurs. The rate a t which the chain reaction proceeds is controlled by a series of “control” rods
made of cadmium inserted into the reactor. Cadmium i s capable of absorbing a large number of neutrons witho ut becoming
unstable.
A nuclear reactor design, called a pressurized water r eactor, can also be used to generate electricity (Figu re). A pressurized
water reactor (on the left in the figure) is designe d to control the fission of large amounts of. The en ergy released in this
process is absorbed by water flowing through pipes in t he system (the “primary loop”) and steam is produced. Cadmium control
rods adjust the neutron flux (the rate of flow of ne utrons passing through the system) and therefore cont rol the reaction. In case the
reactor overheats and the water boils away, the chain reaction terminates, because water is used to thermal ize the neutrons. (This
safety feature can be overwhelmed in extreme circums tances.) The hot, high-pressure water then passes throug h a pipe to a second
tank of water at normal pressure in the steam generat or. The steam produced at one end of the steam gene rator fills a chamber that
contains a turbine. This steam is at a very high press ure. Meanwhile, a steam condenser connected to the othe r side of the turbine
chamber maintains steam at low pressure. The pressure differences force steam through the chamber, which t urns the turbine. The
turbine, in turn, powers an electric generator.Example: Calculating Energy Released by Fission

12.6.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84215
Figure: A nuclear reactor uses the energy produced in the fission of U-235 to produce electricity. Energy from a nuclear
fission reaction produces hot, high-pressure steam that t urns a turbine. As the turbine turns, electricity is pr oduced.
The major drawback to a fission reactor is nuclear was te. U-235 fission produces nuclei with long half-lives such as that must
be stored. These products cannot be dumped into ocea ns or left in any place where they will contaminate th e environment, such as
through the soil, air, or water. Many scientists believ e that the best place to store nuclear waste is the bo ttom of old salt mines or
inside of stable mountains.
Many people are fearful that a nuclear reactor may ex plode like an atomic bomb. However, a nuclear reactor does not contain
enough U-235 to do this. Also, a nuclear reactor is design ed so that failure of any mechanism of the reactor causes the cadmium
control rods to fall fully into the reactor, stoppin g the fission process. As evidenced by the Fukushima an d Chernobyl disasters,
such systems can fail. Systems and procedures to avoid such disasters is an important priority for advocates of nuc lear energy.
If all electrical power were produced by nuclear fissi on of U-235, Earth’s known reserves of uranium would be depleted in less
than a century. However, Earth’s supply of fissionable material can be expanded considerably using a breeder reactor. A
breeder reactor operates for the first time using th e fission of U-235 as just described for the pressurize d water reactor. But in
addition to producing energy, some of the fast neutro ns originating from the fission of U-235 are absorbed by U-238, resulting
in the production of Pu-239 via the set of reactions
The Pu-239 is itself highly fissionable and can theref ore be used as a nuclear fuel in place of U-235. Since of naturally
occurring uranium is the U-238 isotope, the use of br eeder reactors should increase our supply of nuclear fuel by roughly a
factor of 100. Breeder reactors are now in operation in Great Britain, France, and Russia. Breeder reactors a lso have
drawbacks. First, breeder reactors produce plutonium, whic h can, if leaked into the environment, produce seriou s public health
problems. Second, plutonium can be used to build bombs, th us increasing significantly the risk of nuclear prolifer ation.
Calculate the amount of energy produced by the fiss ion of 1.00 kg of given that the average fission r eaction of
produces 200 MeV.
Strategy
The total energy produced is the number of atoms ti mes the given energy per fission. We should therefo re find the
number of atoms in 1.00 kg.Breeder Reactors
Example: Calculating Energy of Fissionable Fuel

12.6.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84215Solution
The number of atoms in 1.00 kg is Avogadro’s number times the number of moles. One mole of has a mass of 2 35.04
g; thus, there are. The number of atoms is therefore
Thus, the total energy released is
Significance
This is another impressively large amount of energy, equivalent to about 14,000 barrels of crude oil or 60 0,000 gallons of
gasoline. However, it is only one-fourth the energy prod uced by the fusion of a kilogram mixture of deuteri um and tritium.
Even though each fission reaction yields about 10 ti mes the energy of a fusion reaction, the energy per kilogram of fission fuel
is less, because there are far fewer moles per kilogr am of the heavy nuclides. Fission fuel is also much scar cer than fusion fuel,
and less than of uranium (the) is readily usable.
Which has a larger energy yield per fission reaction, a large or small sample of pure?
Answer
the same
This page titled 12.6: Fission is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
10.6: Fission by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.Exercise

12.7.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421612.7: Nuclear Fusion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the process of nuclear fusion in terms of its product and reactants
Calculate the energies of particles produced by a fusion reaction
Explain the fission concept in the context of fusion bomb s, the production of energy by the Sun, and nucleosynthesi s
The process of combining lighter nuclei to make heav ier nuclei is called nuclear fusion. As with fission reactions, fusion reactions
are exothermic—they release energy. Suppose that we fuse a carbon and helium nuclei to produce oxygen:
The energy changes in this reaction can be understo od using a graph of binding energy per nucleon. Comparing the binding energy
per nucleon for oxygen, carbon, and helium, the oxyg en nucleus is much more tightly bound than the carbon and helium nuclei,
indicating that the reaction produces a drop in the energy of the system. This energy is released in the f orm of gamma radiation.
Fusion reactions are said to be exothermic when the am ount of energy released (known as the Q value) in each reaction is greater
than zero.
An important example of nuclear fusion in nature is t he production of energy in the Sun. In 1938, Hans Beth e proposed that the
Sun produces energy when hydrogen nuclei () fuse into stable helium nuclei () in the Sun’s core (Figure). T his process,
called the proton-proton chain, is summarized by three reactions:
Thus, a stable helium nucleus is formed from the fus ion of the nuclei of the hydrogen atom. These three reactions can be
summarized by
The net Q value is about 26 MeV. The release of this energy pr oduces an outward thermal gas pressure that prevents the Sun from
gravitational collapse. Astrophysicists find that hydro gen fusion supplies the energy stars require to mai ntain energy balance over
most of a star's life span.
Figure: The Sun produces energy by fusing hydrogen int o helium at the Sun’s core. The red arrows show outward pressure
due to thermal gas, which tends to make the Sun expand. The blue arrows show inward pressure due to gravity, which tends to
make the Sun contract. These two influences balance ea ch other.Learning Objectives

12.7.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84216Nucleosynthesis
Scientist now believe that many heavy elements found on Earth and throughout the universe were originally synthesized by fusion
within the hot cores of the stars. This process is k nown as nucleosynthesis. For example, in lighter star s, hydrogen combines to
form helium through the proton-proton chain. Once the hydro gen fuel is exhausted, the star enters the next stage of its life and fuses
helium. An example of a nuclear reaction chain that can o ccur is:
Carbon and oxygen nuclei produced in such processes eventually reach the star’s surface by convection. Ne ar the end of its
lifetime, the star loses its outer layers into space, th us enriching the interstellar medium with the nuclei of heavier elements (Figure
Figure: A planetary nebula is produced at the end of the life of a star. The greenish color of this planet ary nebula comes from
oxygen ions.
Stars similar in mass to the Sun do not become hot eno ugh to fuse nuclei as heavy (or heavier) than oxygen nuclei. However, in
massive stars whose cores become much hotter, even mor e complex nuclei are produced. Some representative
reactions are
Nucleosynthesis continues until the core is primarily iron-nickel metal. Now, iron has the peculiar property that any fusion or
fission reaction involving the iron nucleus is endo thermic, meaning that energy is absorbed rather than produced. Hence, nuclear
energy cannot be generated in an iron-rich core. Lac king an outward pressure from fusion reactions, the star begins to contract due
to gravity. This process heats the core to a temperat ure on the order of. Expanding shock waves generate d within the star
due to the collapse cause the star to quickly explo de. The luminosity of the star can increase temporar ily to nearly that of an entire
galaxy. During this event, the flood of energetic neut rons reacts with iron and the other nuclei to produc e elements heavier than
iron. These elements, along with much of the star, are ejected into space by the explosion. Supernovae and th e formation of
planetary nebulas together play a major role in the d ispersal of chemical elements into space.
Eventually, much of the material lost by stars is pul led together through the gravitational force, and i t condenses into a new
generation of stars and accompanying planets. Recent images from the Hubble Space Telescope provide a gli mpse of this
magnificent process taking place in the constellation Serpens (Figure). The new generation of stars begins the

12.7.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84216nucleosynthesis process anew, with a higher percentag e of heavier elements. Thus, stars are “factories” fo r the chemical elements,
and many of the atoms in our bodies were once a part of star s.
Figure: This image taken by NASA’s Spitzer Space Telesco pe and the Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), shows the
Serpens Cloud Core, a star-forming region in the conste llation Serpens (the “Serpent”). Located about 750 li ght-years away, this
cluster of stars is formed from cooling dust and gases. In frared light has been used to reveal the youngest stars in orange and
yellow. (credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/2MASS)
The power output of the Sun is approximately. Most o f this energy is produced in the Sun’s core by the prot onproton chain. This energy is transmitted outward by the pro cesses of convection and radiation.
a. How many of these fusion reactions per second must occur to supply the power radiated by the Sun?
b. What is the rate at which the mass of the Sun decreases?
c. In about five billion years, the central core of the Sun wi ll be depleted of hydrogen. By what percentage will the mas s of the
Sun have decreased from its present value when the core i s depleted of hydrogen?
Strategy
The total energy output per second is given in the problem statement. If we know the energy released in e ach fusion reaction,
we can determine the rate of the fusion reactions. If the mass loss per fusion reaction is known, the mass lo ss rate is known.
Multiplying this rate by five billion years gives the total mass lost by the Sun. This value is divided b y the original mass of the
Sun to determine the percentage of the Sun’s mass that has be en lost when the hydrogen fuel is depleted.
Solution
a. The decrease in mass for the fusion reaction is
The energy released per fusion reaction is
Thus, to supply, there must be
b. The Sun’s mass decreases by per fusion reaction, so the rate at which its mass decreases is
c. In, the Sun’s mass will therefore decrease byExample: Energy of the Sun

12.7.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84216The current mass of the Sun is about, so the percentage d ecrease in its mass when its hydrogen fuel is depleted
will be
Significance
After five billion years, the Sun is very nearly the same mass as it is now. Hydrogen burning does very lit tle to change the mass
of the Sun. This calculation assumes that only the proton-p roton decay change is responsible for the power output of t he Sun.
Where does the energy from the Sun originate?
Answer
the conversion of mass to energy
The Hydrogen Bomb
In 1942, Robert Oppenheimer suggested that the extreme ly high temperature of an atomic bomb could be used to trigger a fusion
reaction between deuterium and tritium, thus producin g a fusion (or hydrogen) bomb. The reaction between d euterium and tritium,
both isotopes of hydrogen, is given by
Deuterium is relatively abundant in ocean water, but t ritium is scarce. However, tritium can be generated in a nuclear reactor
through a reaction involving lithium. The neutrons from the reactor cause the reaction
to produce the desired tritium. The first hydrogen b omb was detonated in 1952 on the remote island of Eni wetok in the Marshall
Islands. A hydrogen bomb has never been used in war. Mo dern hydrogen bombs are approximately 1000 times more powerful than
the fission bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in World War II.
The Fusion Reactor
The fusion chain believed to be the most practical for use in a nuclear fusion reactor is the following two-step process:
This chain, like the proton-proton chain, produces ene rgy without any radioactive by-product. However, there is a very difficult
problem that must be overcome before fusion can be used to produce significant amounts of energy: Extre mely high temperatures
are needed to drive the fusion process. To meet this challenge, test fusion reactors are being developed to withstand
temperatures 20 times greater than the Sun’s core te mperature. An example is the Joint European Torus (JET) shown in Figure
. A great deal of work still has to be done on fusion reactor technology, but many scientists predict tha t fusion energy will
power the world’s cities by the end of the twentieth century.Exercise

12.7.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84216
Figure: The Joint European Torus (JET) tokamak fusion d etector uses magnetic fields to fuse deuterium and trit ium nuclei
(credit: EUROfusion).
This page titled 12.7: Nuclear Fusion is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.7: Nuclear Fusion by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.

12.8.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421712.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe two medical uses of nuclear technology
Explain the origin of biological effects due to nuclear ra diation
List common sources of radiation and their effects
Estimate exposure for nuclear radiation using common dos age units
Nuclear physics is an integral part of our everyday l ives (Figure). Radioactive compounds are used in to identify cancer,
study ancient artifacts, and power our cities. Nuclea r fusion also powers the Sun, the primary source of en ergy on Earth. The focus
of this chapter is nuclear radiation. In this section, we ask such questions as: How is nuclear radiation used to benefit society? What
are its health risks? How much nuclear radiation is the av erage person exposed to in a lifetime?
Figure: Dr. Tori Randall, a curator at the San Diego Museum of Man, uses nuclear radiation to study a 500-y ear-old Peruvian
child mummy. The origin of this radiation is the tran sformation of one nucleus to another. (credit: Samanth a A. Lewis)
Medical Applications
Medical use of nuclear radiation is quite common in today’s hospitals and clinics. One of the most important uses of nuclear
radiation is the location and study of diseased tissue. This application requires a special drug called a radiopharmaceutical. A
radiopharmaceutical contains an unstable radioactive isotope. When the drug enters the body, it tends to c oncentrate in inflamed
regions of the body. (Recall that the interaction of the drug with the body does not depend on whether a given nucleus is replaced
by one of its isotopes, since this interaction is deter mined by chemical interactions.) Radiation detectors u sed outside the body use
nuclear radiation from the radioisotopes to locate t he diseased tissue. Radiopharmaceuticals are called radioactive tags because
they allow doctors to track the movement of drugs in the body. Radioactive tags are for many purposes, in cluding the identification
of cancer cells in the bones, brain tumors, and Alzhei mer’s disease (Figure). Radioactive tags are also used t o monitor the
function of body organs, such as blood flow, heart muscle activity, and iodine uptake in the thyroid gland.Learning Objectives

12.8.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84217
Figure:These brain images are produced using a radioph armaceutical. The colors indicate relative metabolic or biochemical
activity (red indicates high activity and blue indic ates low activity). The figure on the left shows the n ormal brain of an individual
and the figure on the right shows the brain of someone diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. The brain image of the normal brain
indicates much greater metabolic activity (a larger fraction of red and orange areas). (credit: National Institutes of Health)
Table lists some medical diagnostic uses of radioph armaceuticals, including isotopes and typical activity (A) levels. One
common diagnostic test uses iodine to image the thyroi d, since iodine is concentrated in that organ. Anothe r common nuclear
diagnostic is the thallium scan for the cardiovascul ar system, which reveals blockages in the coronary arte ries and examines heart
activity. The salt TlCl can be used because it acts li ke NaCl and follows the blood. Note that Table lists man y diagnostic uses
for, where “m” stands for a metastable state of the te chnetium nucleus. This isotope is used in many compounds to image the
skeleton, heart, lungs, and kidneys. About of all rad iopharmaceuticals employ because it produces a sing le, easily
identified, 0.142-MeV ray and has a short 6.0-h half-life, which reduces radiation exposure.
Table
Procedure, IsotopeActivity (mCi), where Procedure, IsotopeActivity (mCi), where
Brain scan Thyroid scan
7.5 0.05
50 0.07
Lung scan Liver scan
7.5 colloid 0.1
2 2
Cardiovascular blood pool Bone scan
0.2 0.1
2 10
Cardiovascular arterial flow Kidney scan
3 0.1
7.5 1.5
Diagnostic Uses of Radiopharmaceuticals
The first radiation detectors produced two-dimension al images, like a photo taken from a camera. However, a circular array of
detectors that can be rotated can be used to produce three-dimensional images. This technique is similar to that used in X-ray

12.8.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84217computed tomography (CT) scans. One application of th is technique is called single-photon-emission CT (SPECT) (Figure
). The spatial resolution of this technique is about 1 cm.
Figure: The SPECT machine uses radiopharmaceutical com pounds to produce an image of the human body. The ma chine
takes advantage of the physics of nuclear beat decays a nd electron-positron collisions. (credit: â€œWoldoâ€ /Wikimedia
Commons)
Improved image resolution is achieved by a techniqu e known as positron emission tomography (PET). This technique use
radioisotopes that decay by radiation. When a posit ron encounters an electron, these particle annihilate to produce two gammaray photons. This reaction is represented by
These -ray photons have identical 0.511-MeV energies an d move directly away from one another (Figure). This easily
identified decay signature can be used to identify the location of the radioactive isotope. Examples o f -emitting isotopes used in
PET include,,, and. The nuclei have the advantag e of being able to function as tags for natural body compounds.
Its resolution of 0.5 cm is better than that of SPECT.
Figure: A PET system takes advantage of the two identic al -ray photons produced by positron-electron annihil ation. These
rays are emitted in opposite directions, so that the line al ong which each pair is emitted is determined.
PET scans are especially useful to examine the brain’ s anatomy and function. For example, PET scans can be u sed to monitor the
brain’s use of oxygen and water, identify regions of d ecreased metabolism (linked to Alzheimer’s disease), and locate different
parts of the brain responsible for sight, speech, and fine mot or activity
Is it a tumor? View an animation of simplified magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to see if you can tell. Your head is full of
tiny radio transmitters (the nuclear spins of the hydr ogen nuclei of your water molecules). In an MRI unit, these little radios
can be made to broadcast their positions, giving a detai led picture of the inside of your head.

12.8.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84217Biological Effects
Nuclear radiation can have both positive and negativ e effects on biological systems. However, it can also be used to treat and even
cure cancer. How do we understand these effects? To an swer this question, consider molecules within cells, p articularly DNA
molecules.
Cells have long, double-helical DNA molecules contain ing chemical codes that govern the function and proc esses of the cell.
Nuclear radiation can alter the structural features o f the DNA chain, leading to changes in the genetic co de. In human cells, we can
have as many as a million individual instances of d amage to DNA per cell per day. DNA contains codes that ch eck whether the
DNA is damaged and can repair itself. This repair abi lity of DNA is vital for maintaining the integrity of the genetic code and for
the normal functioning of the entire organism. It s hould be constantly active and needs to respond rapi dly. The rate of DNA repair
depends on various factors such as the type and age of the cell. If nuclear radiation damages the ability of the cell to repair DNA,
the cell can
1. Retreat to an irreversible state of dormancy (known a s senescence);
2. Commit suicide (known as programmed cell death); or
3. Progress into unregulated cell division, possibly leadi ng to tumors and cancers.
Nuclear radiation can harm the human body is many ot her ways as well. For example, high doses of nuclear ra diation can cause
burns and even hair loss.
Biological effects of nuclear radiation are expressed by many different physical quantities and in many d ifferent units. A common
unit to express the biological effects of nuclear rad iation is the rad or radiation dose unit. One rad is equal to 1/100 of a joule of
nuclear energy deposited per kilogram of tissue, written:
For example, if a 50.0-kg person is exposed to nuclea r radiation over her entire body and she absorbs 1.00 J, then her whole-body
radiation dose is
Nuclear radiation damages cells by ionizing atoms in the cells as they pass through the cells (Figure). Th e effects of ionizing
radiation depend on the dose in rads, but also on t he type of radiation (alpha, beta, gamma, or X-ray) an d the type of tissue. For
example, if the range of the radiation is small, as it is for rays, then the ionization and the damage created is more concentrated
and harder for the organism to repair. To account f or such affects, we define the relative biological effectiveness (RBE). Sample
RBE values for several types of ionizing nuclear radiat ion are given in Table.
Figure: The image shows ionization created in cells by and radiation. Because of its shorter range, the io nization and
damage created by rays is more concentrated and hard er for the organism to repair. Thus, the RBE for ray s is greater than the
RBE for rays, even though they create the same amoun t of ionization at the same energy.
Table: Relative Biological Effectiveness

12.8.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84217Type and Energy of Radiation RBE
X-rays 1
-rays 1
rays greater than 32 keV 1
rays less than 32 keV 1.7
Neutrons, thermal to slow (<20 keV) 2 - 5
Neutrons, fast (1–10 MeV) 10 (body), 32 (eyes)
Protons (1–10 MeV) 10 (body), 32 (eyes)
rays from radioactive decay 10–20
Heavy ions from accelerators 10–20
Values approximate. Difficult to determine.
A dose unit more closely related to effects in biolo gical tissue is called the roentgen equivalent man (rem) and is defined to be the
dose (in rads) multiplied by the relative biological effectiveness (RBE). Thus, if a person had a whole-bo dy dose of 2.00 rad of
radiation, the dose in rem would be rem for the whol e body. If the person had a whole-body dose of 2.00 ra d of
radiation, then the dose in rem would be rem for the whole body. The rays would have 20 times the effect
on the person than the rays for the same deposited energy. The SI equivalent of the rem, and the more st andard term, is the sievert
(Sv) is
The RBEs given in Table are approximate but reflec t an understanding of nuclear radiation and its inte raction with living
tissue. For example, neutrons are known to cause more da mage than rays, although both are neutral and have large ranges, due to
secondary radiation. Any dose less than 100 mSv (10 re m) is called a low dose, 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv (10 to 100 rem) is called a moderate
dose, and anything greater than 1 Sv (100 rem) is called a high dose. It is difficult to determine if a person has been ex posed to less
than 10 mSv.
Biological effects of different levels of nuclear ra diation on the human body are given in Table The f irst clue that a person
has been exposed to radiation is a change in blood c ount, which is not surprising since blood cells are th e most rapidly reproducing
cells in the body. At higher doses, nausea and hair loss are observed, which may be due to interference wit h cell reproduction. Cells
in the lining of the digestive system also rapidly r eproduce, and their destruction causes nausea. When t he growth of hair cells
slows, the hair follicles become thin and break off. High doses cause significant cell death in all systems, bu t the lowest doses that
cause fatalities do so by weakening the immune system throu gh the loss of white blood cells.
Table: Immediate Effects of Radiation (Adults, Whole -Body, Single Exposure)[1]
[1]

12.8.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84217Dose in Sv Effect
0–0.10 No observable effect.
0.1–1 Slight to moderate decrease in white blood cell c ounts.
0.5 Temporary sterility; 0.35 for women, 0.50 for men.
1–2Significant reduction in blood cell counts, brief nau sea and
vomiting. Rarely fatal.
2–5Nausea, vomiting, hair loss, severe blood damage, hemor rhage,
fatalities.
4.5Lethal to of the population within 32 days after exp osure if
not treated.
5–20Worst effects due to malfunction of small intestine and blood
systems. Limited survival.
>20 Fatal within hours due to collapse of central nervou s system.
Multiply by 100 to obtain dose in rem.
Sources of Radiation
Human are also exposed to many sources of nuclear rad iation. A summary of average radiation doses for diff erent sources by
country is given in Table. Earth emits radiation d ue to the isotopes of uranium, thorium, and potassium. Radiation levels
from these sources depend on location and can vary b y a factor of 10. Fertilizers contain isotopes of pota ssium and uranium, which
we digest in the food we eat. Fertilizers have more than 3000 Bq/kg radioactivity, compared to just 66 Bq/kg for Carbon -14.
Table: Background Radiation Sources and Average Doses
Source Dose (mSv/y)
Australia Germany US World
Natural radiation – external
Cosmic rays 0.30 0.28 0.30 0.39
Soil, building materials 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.48
Radon gas 0.90 1.1 2.0 1.2
Natural radiation – internal
,, 0.24 0.28 0.40 0.29
Artificial radiation
Medical and dental 0.80 0.90 0.53 0.40
TOTA L 2.6 3.0 3.5 2.8
Multiply by 100 to obtain does in mrem/y.
Medical visits are also a source of nuclear radiation. A sample of common nuclear radiation doses is given in Table. These
doses are generally low and can be lowered further wit h improved techniques and more sensitive detectors. Wi th the possible
exception of routine dental X-rays, medical use of nu clear radiation is used only when the risk-benefit is favorable. Chest X-rays
give the lowest doses—about 0.1 mSv to the tissue affec ted, with less than scattering into tissues that are n ot directly imaged.
Other X-ray procedures range upward to about 10 mSv in a CT scan, and about 5 mSv (0.5 rem) per dental X-ray, a gain both only
affecting the tissue imaged. Medical images with radio pharmaceuticals give doses ranging from 1 to 5 mSv, usually localized.[1]
[1]
[1]
[1]

12.8.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84217Table: Typical Doses Received During Diagnostic X-Ray Exams
Procedure Effective Dose (mSv)
Chest 0.02
Dental 0.01
Skull 0.07
Leg 0.02
Mammogram 0.40
Barium enema 7.0
Upper GI 3.0
CT head 2.0
CT abdomen 10.0
The Chernobyl accident in Ukraine (formerly in the So viet Union) exposed the surrounding population to a l arge amount of
radiation through the decay of. The initial radioac tivity level was approximately. Calculate the total mass of
involved in this accident.
Strategy
The total number of nuclei, N, can be determined from the known half-life and act ivity of (30.2 y). The mass can be
calculated from N using the concept of a mole.
Solution
Solving the equation for N gives
Entering the given values yields
To convert from curies to becquerels and years to secon ds, we write
One mole of a nuclide has a mass of A grams, so that one mole of has a mass of 137 g. A mo le has nuclei.
Thus the mass of released was
\[m = \left(\frac{137 \, g}{6.02 \times 10^{23}\right)(3.1 \times 10^{26}) = 70 \times 10^3 \, g = 70 \, kg. \nonumbe r \]
Significance
The mass of involved in the Chernobyl accident is a small material compared to the typical amount of fu el used in a
nuclear reactor. However, approximately 250 people were admitted to local hospitals immediately after the acc ident, and
diagnosed as suffering acute radiation syndrome. They received external radiation dosages between 1 and 16 Sv. Referring to
biological effects in Table, these dosages are extre mely hazardous. The eventual death toll is estimated t o be around 4000
people, primarily due to radiation-induced cancer.Example: What Mass of Escaped Chernobyl?

12.8.8 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84217Radiation propagates in all directions from its sour ce, much as electromagnetic radiation from a light bulb. Is activity concept
more analogous to power, intensity, or brightness?
Answer
power
This page titled 12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuc lear Radiation by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source:
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volu me-3.Exercise

12.A.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421812.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers)
Check Your Understanding
10.1. eight
10.2. harder
10.3. Half-life is inversely related to decay rate, so the half-life is short. Activity depends on both the numbe r of decaying
particles and the decay rate, so the activity can be gr eat or small.
10.4. Neither; it stays the same.
10.5. the same
10.6. the conversion of mass to energy
10.7. power
Conceptual Questions
1. The nucleus of an atom is made of one or more nucleo ns. A nucleon refers to either a proton or neutron. A nuclide is a
stable nucleus.
3. A bound system should have less mass than its component s because of energy-mass equivalence. If the energy
of a system is reduced, the total mass of the system i s reduced. If two bricks are placed next to one anot her, the attraction
between them is purely gravitational, assuming the bric ks are electrically neutral. The gravitational forc e between the bricks
is relatively small (compared to the strong nuclear force), so the mass defect is much too small to be o bserved. If the bricks
are glued together with cement, the mass defect is lik ewise small because the electrical interactions between the electrons
involved in the bonding are still relatively small.
5. Nucleons at the surface of a nucleus interact with fewer nucleons. This reduces the binding energy per nucleo n, which is
based on an average over all the nucleons in the nucleus.
7. That it is constant.
9. Gamma (γ) rays are produced by nuclear interactions and X-ra ys and light are produced by atomic interactions. Gamm a
rays are typically shorter wavelength than X-rays, and X- rays are shorter wavelength than light.
11. Assume a rectangular coordinate system with an xy-plane that corresponds to the plane of the paper. α α bends into the
page (trajectory parabolic in the xz-plane); bends into the page (trajectory parabolic i n the xz-plane); and is unbent.
13. Yes. An atomic bomb is a fission bomb, and a fission bomb occ urs by splitting the nucleus of atom.
15. Short-range forces between nucleons in a nucleus are analogous to the forces between water molecules in a wa ter droplet.
In particular, the forces between nucleons at the sur face of the nucleus produce a surface tension simila r to that of a water
droplet.
17. The nuclei produced in the fusion process have a lar ger binding energy per nucleon than the nuclei that are fused. That is,
nuclear fusion decreases average energy of the nucleons in the system. The energy difference is carried away as ra diation.
19. Alpha particles do not penetrate materials such as ski n and clothes easily. (Recall that alpha radiation i s barely able to
pass through a thin sheet of paper.) However, when produce inside the body, neighboring cells are vulnerable.

12.A.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84218Problems
21. Use the rule.
Atomic Number (Z) Neutron Number (N) Mass Number (A)
(a) 29 29 58
(b) 11 13 24
(c) 84 126 210
(d) 20 25 45
(e) 82 124 206
23. a.;
b.
25. side length =
27. 92.4 MeV
29.
31. a. 7.570 MeV;
b. graph’s value
33. The decay constant is equal to the negative value of the slope or. The half-life of the nuclei, and th us the material,
is million years.
35. a. The decay constant is
b. Since strontium-91 has an atomic mass of 90.90 g, the number of nuclei in a 1.00-g sample is initially
The initial activity for strontium-91 is
The activity at is
37.
39. a. 0.988 Ci;
b. The half-life of is more precisely known than it was when the Ci unit was established.
41. a.;
b.
43. a.;
b.
45. a. 4.273 MeV;
b.;
c. Since is a slowly decaying substance, only a very sm all number of nuclei decay on human timescales; ther efore,
although those nuclei that decay lose a noticeable fraction of their mass, the change in the total mass o f the sample is
not detectable for a macroscopic sample.

12.A.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421847. a.;
b. 0.546 MeV
49.
51. a.;
b. 0.862 MeV
53. a.;
b. 33.05 MeV
55. a. 177.1 MeV;
b. This value is approximately equal to the average BEN for heavy nuclei.
c.,
57. a.;
b. fissions/s;
c. 991 kg
59. i.
ii.
iii.
61. 26.73 MeV
63. a.;
b.;
This huge number is indicative of how rarely a neutrino int eracts, since large detectors observe very few per day.
65. a. The atomic mass of deuterium is 2.014102 u, while that of tritium is 3.016049 u, for a total of 5.032 151 u
per reaction. So a mole of reactants has a mass of 5.0 3 g, and in 1.00 kg, there are of
reactants. The number of reactions that take place is th erefore
The total energy output is the number of reactions tim es the energy per reaction:
b. Power is energy per unit time. One year has, so
We expect nuclear processes to yield large amounts of energy, and this is certainly the case here. The energy output of
from fusing 1.00 kg of deuterium and tritium is equiv alent to 2.6 million gallons of gasoline and about

12.A.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84218eight times the energy output of the bomb that destro yed Hiroshima. Yet the average backyard swimming pool has
about 6 kg of deuterium in it, so that fuel is plentiful if it can be utilized in a controlled manner.
67. \(\displaystyle G_y=\frac{Sv}{RBE}:
a. 0.01 Gy;
b. 0.0025 Gy;
c. 0.16 Gy
69. 1.24 MeV
71. 1.69 mm
73. For cancer: The risk each year of dying from induc ed cancer is 30 in a million. For genetic
defect: The chance each year of an induced genetic def ect is 10 in a million.
Additional Problems
75. atomic mass(Cl)=35.5g/mol
77. a.;
b. This mass is impossibly large; it is greater than the mass o f the entire Milky Way galaxy.
c. is not produced through natural processes operati ng over long times on Earth, but through artificial p rocesses in
a nuclear reactor.
79. If of rays are left after 2.00 cm, then only are left after 4.00 cm. This is much smaller than your lab
partner’s result ().
81. a.;
(b) From Appendix B, the energy released per decay is 4.27 MeV, so;
(c) The monetary value of the energy is
83. We know that and.
Thus, the age of the tomb is
Challenge Problems
85. a.;
b. 6.24 kW;
c. 5.67 kW
87. a. Due to the leak, the pressure in the turbine chamb er has dropped significantly. The pressure difference between the
turbine chamber and steam condenser is now very low.
b. A large pressure difference is required for steam to p ass through the turbine chamber and turn the turbine.
89. The energies are
Notice that most of the energy goes to the γγ ray.
This page titled 12.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.A.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421810.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

12.E.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421912.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises)
Conceptual Questions
10.1 Properties of Nuclei
1. Define and make clear distinctions between the terms neutron, nucleon, nucleus, and nuclide.
2. What are isotopes? Why do isotopes of the same atom sha re the same chemical properties?
10.2 Nuclear Binding Energy
3. Explain why a bound system should have less mass than i ts components. Why is this not observed traditional ly, say, for a
building made of bricks?
4. Why is the number of neutrons greater than the num ber of protons in stable nuclei that have an A great er than about 40?
Why is this effect more pronounced for the heaviest nu clei?
5. To obtain the most precise value of the binding ener gy per nucleon, it is important to take into accoun t forces between
nucleons at the surface of the nucleus. Will surface effe cts increase or decrease estimates of BEN?
10.3 Radioactive Decay
6. How is the initial activity rate of a radioactive substan ce related to its half-life?
7. For the carbon dating described in this chapter, what important assumption is made about the time variat ion in the intensity
of cosmic rays?
10.4 Nuclear Reactions
8. What is the key difference and the key similarity bet ween beta () decay and alpha decay?
9. What is the difference between rays and characteristi c X-rays and visible light?
10. What characteristics of radioactivity show it to be nu clear in origin and not atomic?
11. Consider Figure 10.12. If the magnetic field is repl aced by an electric field pointed in toward the page, in which
directions will the, and rays bend?
12. Why is Earth’s core molten?
10.5 Fission
13. Should an atomic bomb really be called nuclear bomb?
14. Why does a chain reaction occur during a fission reaction?
15. In what way is an atomic nucleus like a liquid drop?
10.6 Nuclear Fusion
16. Explain the difference between nuclear fission and nucl ear fusion.
17. Why does the fusion of light nuclei into heavier nuclei release energy?
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
18. Why is a PET scan more accurate than a SPECT scan?
19. Isotopes that emit radiation are relatively safe outsi de the body and exceptionally hazardous inside. Explain wh y.
20. Ionizing radiation can impair the ability of a cell to repair DNA. What are the three ways the cell can respond?
Problems

12.E.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421910.1 Properties of Nuclei
21. Find the atomic numbers, mass numbers, and neutron numbers fo r
(a),
(b),
(c),
(d), and
(e).
22. Silver has two stable isotopes. The nucleus,, has ato mic mass 106.905095 g/mol with an abundance of;
whereas has atomic mass 108.904754 g/mol with an abund ance of 48.17%. Find the atomic mass of the element
silver.
23. The mass (M) and the radius (r) of a nucleus can be expressed in terms of the mass number, A.
(a) Show that the density of a nucleus is independent of A.
(b) Calculate the density of a gold (Au) nucleus. Compar e your answer to that for iron (Fe).
24. A particle has a mass equal to 10 u. If this mass is converted completely into energy, how much energy is released?
Express your answer in mega-electron volts (MeV). (Recall th at.)
25. Find the length of a side of a cube having a mass of 1.0 kg and the density of nuclear matter.
26. The detail that you can observe using a probe is li mited by its wavelength. Calculate the energy of a p article that has a
wavelength of, small enough to detect details about one- tenth the size of a nucleon.
10.2 Nuclear Binding Energy
27. How much energy would be released if six hydrogen atoms and s ix neutrons were combined to form?
28. Find the mass defect and the binding energy for the helium- 4 nucleus.
29. is among the most tightly bound of all nuclides. It makes up more than of natural iron. Note that has even
numbers of protons and neutrons. Calculate the binding energy per nucleon for and compare it with the app roximate
value obtained from the graph in Figure 10.7.
30. is the heaviest stable nuclide, and its BEN is low compared with medium-mass nuclides. Calculate BEN for th is
nucleus and compare it with the approximate value obta ined from the graph in Figure 10.7.
31. (a) Calculate BEN for, the rarer of the two most common ur anium isotopes;
(b) Calculate BEN for. (Most of uranium is.)
32. The fact that BEN peaks at roughly implies that the range of the strong nuclear force is about the diamet er of this
nucleus.
(a) Calculate the diameter of nucleus.
(b) Compare BEN for and. The first is one of the m ost tightly bound nuclides, whereas the second is large r
and less tightly bound.
10.3 Radioactive Decay
33. A sample of radioactive material is obtained from a very old rock. A plot ln A verses t yields a slope value of
(see Figure 10.10(b)). What is the half-life of this mater ial?
34. Show that:.
35. The half-life of strontium-91, is 9.70 h. Find
(a) its decay constant and

12.E.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84219(b) for an initial 1.00-g sample, the activity after 15 h ours.
36. A sample of pure carbon-14 (has an activity of. Wha t is the mass of the sample?
37. A radioactive sample initially contains mol of a ra dioactive material whose half-life is 6.00 h. How many
moles of the radioactive material remain after 6.00 h? Aft er 12.0 h? After 36.0 h?
38. An old campfire is uncovered during an archaeological dig. Its charcoal is found to contain less than 1/10 00 the normal
amount of. Estimate the minimum age of the charcoal, noti ng that.
39. Calculate the activity, in curies of 1.00 g of.
(b) Explain why your answer is not exactly 1.00 Ci, giv en that the curie was originally supposed to be exact ly the
activity of a gram of radium.
40. Natural uranium consists of (percent abundance=0.7200%,) and (percent
abundance=99.27%,). What were the values for percent abundance of a nd when Earth formed
4.5×1094.5×109 years ago?
41. World War II aircraft had instruments with glowing r adium-painted dials. The activity of one such instru ment was
Bq when new.
(a) What mass of was present?
(b) After some years, the phosphors on the dials deter iorated chemically, but the radium did not escape. Wh at is the
activity of this instrument 57.0 years after it was made?
42. The source used in a physics laboratory is labeled as having an activity of on the date it was prepar ed. A
student measures the radioactivity of this source wit h a Geiger counter and observes 1500 counts per minu te. She notices that
the source was prepared 120 days before her lab. What fr action of the decays is she observing with her apparatus?
43. Armor-piercing shells with depleted uranium cores are fired by aircraft at tanks. (The high density of th e uranium makes
them effective.) The uranium is called depleted beca use it has had its removed for reactor use and is nearly pure.
Depleted uranium has been erroneously called nonradioa ctive. To demonstrate that this is wrong:
(a) Calculate the activity of 60.0 g of pure.
(b) Calculate the activity of 60.0 g of natural uranium, n eglecting the and all daughter nuclides.
10.4 Nuclear Reactions
44. undergoes alpha decay.
(a) Write the reaction equation.
(b) Find the energy released in the decay.
45. (a) Calculate the energy released in the decay of.
(b) What fraction of the mass of a single is destroyed in the decay? The mass of is 234.043593 u.
(c) Although the fractional mass loss is large for a si ngle nucleus, it is difficult to observe for an entir e macroscopic
sample of uranium. Why is this?
46. The particles emitted in the decay of (tritium) interact with matter to create light in a glow-in-the- dark exit sign.
At the time of manufacture, such a sign contains 15.0 Ci of.
(a) What is the mass of the tritium?
(b) What is its activity 5.00 y after manufacture?
47. (a) Write the complete decay equation for, a major was te product of nuclear reactors.
(b) Find the energy released in the decay.

12.E.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421948. Write a nuclear decay reaction that produces the nucleus. (Hint: The parent nuclide is a major waste product of
reactors and has chemistry similar to calcium, so that it is concentrated in bones if ingested.)
49. Write the complete decay equation in the complete notation for the beta () decay of (tritium), a ma nufactured
isotope of hydrogen used in some digital watch displays, an d manufactured primarily for use in hydrogen bombs.
50. If a 1.50-cm-thick piece of lead can absorb of the rays from a radioactive source, how many centimeters of lead are
needed to absorb all but of the rays?
51. An electron can interact with a nucleus through the beta-dec ay process:.
(a) Write the complete reaction equation for electron ca pture by.
(b) Calculate the energy released.
52. (a) Write the complete reaction equation for electron ca pture by.
(b) Calculate the energy released.
53. A rare decay mode has been observed in which emits a nucleus.
(a) The decay equation is. Identify the nuclide.
(b) Find the energy emitted in the decay. The mass of is 222.015353 u.
10.5 Fission
54. A large power reactor that has been in operation fo r some months is turned off, but residual activity in the core still
produces 150 MW of power. If the average energy per decay o f the fission products is 1.00 MeV, what is the core activity?
55. (a) Calculate the energy released in this rare neutro n-induced fission, given
and.
(b) This result is about 6 MeV greater than the result for spontaneous fission. Why? (c) Confirm that the total number
of nucleons and total charge are conserved in this reac tion.
56. (a) Calculate the energy released in the neutron-i nduced fission reaction, given
and.
(b) Confirm that the total number of nucleons and tota l charge are conserved in this reaction.
57. The electrical power output of a large nuclear react or facility is 900 MW. It has a efficiency in conve rting nuclear
power to electrical power.
(a) What is the thermal nuclear power output in megawatts?
(b) How many nuclei fission each second, assuming the avera ge fission produces 200 MeV?
(c) What mass of is fissioned in 1 year of full-power op eration?
58. Find the total energy released if 1.00 kg of were to underg o fission.
10.6 Nuclear Fusion
59. Verify that the total number of nucleons, and tota l charge are conserved for each of the following fus ion reactions in the
proton-proton chain.
(i),
(ii), and
(iii). (List the value of each of the conserved qua ntities before and after each of the
reactions.)
60. Calculate the energy output in each of the fusion re actions in the proton-proton chain, and verify the values determined in
the preceding problem.

12.E.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8421961. Show that the total energy released in the proton-pro ton chain is 26.7 MeV, considering the overall effect i n
, and. Be sure to include the annihilation energy.
62. Two fusion reactions mentioned in the text are and. Both reactions release energy,
but the second also creates more fuel. Confirm that th e energies produced in the reactions are 20.58 and 2. 22 MeV,
respectively. Comment on which product nuclide is most t ightly bound, or.
63. The power output of the Sun is.
(a) If of this energy is supplied by the proton-proton chai n, how many protons are consumed per second?
(b) How many neutrinos per second should there be per square m eter at the surface of Earth from this process?
64. Another set of reactions that fuses hydrogen into heliu m in the Sun and especially in hotter stars is called the CNO cycle:
This process is
a “cycle” because appears at the beginning and end of these reactions. Write down the overall effect of t his cycle (as
done for the proton-proton chain in). Assume that the positrons annihilate electrons to form
more rays.
65. (a) Calculate the energy released by the fusion of a 1.00-kg mixture of deuterium and tritium, which pr oduces helium.
There are equal numbers of deuterium and tritium nuclei i n the mixture.
(b) If this process takes place continuously over a period o f a year, what is the average power output?
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
66. What is the dose in mSv for:
(a) a 0.1-Gy X-ray?
(b) 2.5 mGy of neutron exposure to the eye?
(c) 1.5m Gy of exposure?
67. Find the radiation dose in Gy for:
(a) A 10-mSv fluoroscopic X-ray series.
(b) 50 mSv of skin exposure by an emitter.
(c) 160 mSv of and rays from the in your body.
68. Find the mass of that has an activity of.
69. In the 1980s, the term picowave was used to describe foo d irradiation in order to overcome public resistanc e by playing
on the well-known safety of microwave radiation. Find the ener gy in MeV of a photon having a wavelength of a picometer.
70. What is the dose in Sv in a cancer treatment that exposes t he patient to 200 Gy of rays?
71. One half the γγ rays from are absorbed by a 0.170-m m-thick lead shielding. Half of the rays that pass th rough the
first layer of lead are absorbed in a second layer of equal thickness. What thickness of lead will absorb a ll but one in 1000 of
these rays?
72. How many Gy of exposure is needed to give a cancerous tumor a dose of 40 Sv if it is exposed to activity?
73. A plumber at a nuclear power plant receives a whole-bo dy dose of 30 mSv in 15 minutes while repairing a cru cial valve.
Find the radiation-induced yearly risk of death from cancer and the chance of genetic defect from this maximum allowable
exposure.
74. Calculate the dose in rem/y for the lungs of a weapo ns plant employee who inhales and retains an activity o f
in an accident. The mass of affected lung tissue is 2.00 kg and the plutonium decays by emission of a 5.23-M eV
particle. Assume a RBE value of 20.

12.E.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84219Additional Problems
75. The wiki-phony site states that the atomic mass of ch lorine is 40 g/mol. Check this result. Hint: The two, most common
stable isotopes of chlorine are: and. (The abundance of Cl-35 is, and the abundance of Cl-37 is.)
76. A particle physicist discovers a neutral particle with a ma ss of 2.02733 u that he assumes is two neutrons bound tog ether.
(a) Find the binding energy.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
77. A nuclear physicist finds of in a piece of uranium o re (.
(a) Use the decay law to determine how much would had to have been on Earth when it formed ago
for 1.0μg1.0μg to be left today.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
(c) How is this unreasonable result resolved?
78. A group of scientists use carbon dating to date a piece of wood to be 3 billion years old. Why doesn’t this make se nse?
79. According to your lab partner, a 2.00-cm-thick sodiu m-iodide crystal absorbs all but of rays from a rad ioactive source
and a 4.00-cm piece of the same material absorbs all but? Is this result reasonable?
80. In the science section of the newspaper, an article r eports the efforts of a group of scientists to create a new nuclear
reactor based on the fission of iron (Fe). Is this a good id ea?
81. The ceramic glaze on a red-orange “Fiestaware” plate is and contains 50.0 grams of, but very little.
(a) What is the activity of the plate?
(b) Calculate the total energy that will be released by the decay.
(c) If energy is worth 12.0 cents per, what is the mon etary value of the energy emitted? (These brightly-c olored
ceramic plates went out of production some 30 years ago, but are still available as collectibles.)
82. Large amounts of depleted uranium () are available as a by-product of uranium processing for reactor f uel and
weapons. Uranium is very dense and makes good counter weights for aircraft. Suppose you have a 4000-kg block of.
(a) Find its activity.
(b) How many calories per day are generated by thermaliz ation of the decay energy?
(c) Do you think you could detect this as heat? Explain.
83. A piece of wood from an ancient Egyptian tomb is te sted for its carbon-14 activity. It is found to have an activity per
gram of carbon of. What is the age of the wood?
Challenge Problems
84. This problem demonstrates that the binding energy o f the electron in the ground state of a hydrogen ato m is much smaller
than the rest mass energies of the proton and electron.
(a) Calculate the mass equivalent in u of the 13.6- eV binding energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom, and compare
this with the known mass of the hydrogen atom.
(b) Subtract the known mass of the proton from the known mas s of the hydrogen atom.
(c) Take the ratio of the binding energy of the ele ctron (13.6 eV) to the energy equivalent of the elect ron’s mass (0.511
MeV). (d) Discuss how your answers confirm the stated purpose of this problem.
85. The Galileo space probe was launched on its long journey past Ve nus and Earth in 1989, with an ultimate goal of Jupi ter.
Its power source is 11.0 kg of, a by-product of nucl ear weapons plutonium production. Electrical energy is generated
thermoelectrically from the heat produced when the 5.59-MeV particles emitted in each decay crash to a halt inside the
plutonium and its shielding. The half-life of is 87.7 ye ars.

12.E.7 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84219(a) What was the original activity of the in becquerels?
(b) What power was emitted in kilowatts?
(c) What power was emitted 12.0 y after launch? You ma y neglect any extra energy from daughter nuclides an d any
losses from escaping rays.
86. Find the energy emitted in the decay of.
87. Engineers are frequently called on to inspect and, if necessary, repair equipment in nuclear power plan ts. Suppose that the
city lights go out. After inspecting the nuclear rea ctor, you find a leaky pipe that leads from the ste am generator to turbine
chamber.
(a) How do the pressure readings for the turbine chamber and steam condenser compare?
(b) Why is the nuclear reactor not generating electricity?
88. If two nuclei are to fuse in a nuclear reaction, the y must be moving fast enough so that the repulsive C oulomb force
between them does not prevent them for getting within of one another. At this distance or nearer, the att ractive
nuclear force can overcome the Coulomb force, and the nuclei are able to fuse.
(a) Find a simple formula that can be used to estimate the minimum kinetic energy the nuclei must have if they are to
fuse. To keep the calculation simple, assume the two nu clei are identical and moving toward one another with the same
speed v.
(b) Use this minimum kinetic energy to estimate the minimum temperature a gas of the nuclei must have be fore a
significant number of them will undergo fusion. Calc ulate this minimum temperature first for hydrogen an d then for
helium. (Hint: For fusion to occur, the minimum kinetic energy when the nuclei are far apart must be equal to the
Coulomb potential energy when they are a distance R apart.)
89. For the reaction,, find the amount of energy transfe rs to and (on the right side of the equation).
Assume the reactants are initially at rest. (Hint: Use conservation of momentum principle.)
90. Engineers are frequently called on to inspect and, if necessary, repair equipment in medical hospitals. Sup pose that the
PET system malfunctions. After inspecting the unit, yo u suspect that one of the PET photon detectors is misa ligned. To test
your theory you position one detector at the locatio n relative to a radioactive test sample at the cen ter of
the patient bed.
(a) If the second photon detector is properly aligned wh ere should it be located?
(b) What energy reading is expected?
This page titled 12.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

12.S.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8422012.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary)

12.S.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84220Key Terms
activity magnitude of the decay rate for radioactive nuclide s
alpha (α) raysone of the types of rays emitted from the nucleus of a n atom as
alpha particles
alpha decayradioactive nuclear decay associated with the emission of an alpha
particle
antielectrons another term for positrons
antineutrino antiparticle of an electron’s neutrino in β−β− decay
atomic mass total mass of the protons, neutrons, and electrons in a single atom
atomic mass unitunit used to express the mass of an individual nucleus, w here
atomic nucleus tightly packed group of nucleons at the center of an atom
atomic number number of protons in a nucleus
becquerel (Bq)SI unit for the decay rate of a radioactive material, equal to 1
decay/second
beta (ββ) raysone of the types of rays emitted from the nucleus of a n atom as
beta particles
beta decayradioactive nuclear decay associated with the emission of a beta
particle
binding energy (BE)energy needed to break a nucleus into its constituent protons and
neutrons
binding energy per nucleon (BEN) energy need to remove a nucleon from a nucleus
breeder reactor reactor that is designed to make plutonium
carbon-14 datingmethod to determine the age of formerly living tissue using the
ratio
chart of the nuclides graph comprising stable and unstable nuclei
critical massminimum mass required of a given nuclide in order for selfsustained fission to occur
criticality condition in which a chain reaction easily becomes sel f-sustaining
curie (Ci)unit of decay rate, or the activity of 1 g of, equ al to
daughter nucleus nucleus produced by the decay of a parent nucleus
decayprocess by which an individual atomic nucleus of an unst able atom
loses mass and energy by emitting ionizing particles
decay constantquantity that is inversely proportional to the half-l ife and that is
used in equation for number of nuclei as a function o f time
decay series series of nuclear decays ending in a stable nucleus
fission splitting of a nucleus
gamma (γγ) raysone of the types of rays emitted from the nucleus of a n atom as
gamma particles

12.S.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84220gamma decayradioactive nuclear decay associated with the emission of gamma
radiation
half-lifetime for half of the original nuclei to decay (or h alf of the original
nuclei remain)
high dose dose of radiation greater than 1 Sv (100 rem)
isotopesnuclei having the same number of protons but differen t numbers of
neutrons
lifetime average time that a nucleus exists before decaying
liquid drop modelmodel of nucleus (only to understand some of its featur es) in
which nucleons in a nucleus act like atoms in a drop
low dose dose of radiation less than 100 mSv (10 rem)
mass defectdifference between the mass of a nucleus and the total mass of its
constituent nucleons
mass number number of nucleons in a nucleus
moderate dose dose of radiation from 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv (10 to 100 rem)
neutrino subatomic elementary particle which has no net electri c charge
neutron number number of neutrons in a nucleus
nuclear fusion process of combining lighter nuclei to make heavier n uclei
nuclear fusion reactor nuclear reactor that uses the fusion chain to produce energy
nucleons protons and neutrons found inside the nucleus of an ato m
nucleosynthesisprocess of fusion by which all elements on Earth are bel ieved to
have been created
nuclide nucleus
parent nucleus original nucleus before decay
positron electron with positive charge
positron emission tomography (PET)tomography technique that uses emitters and detects th e two
annihilation rays, aiding in source localization
proton-proton chain combined reactions that fuse hydrogen nuclei to prod uce He nuclei
radiation dose unit (rad) ionizing energy deposited per kilogram of tissue
radioactive datingapplication of radioactive decay in which the age of a material is
determined by the amount of radioactivity of a part icular type that
occurs
radioactive decay lawdescribes the exponential decrease of parent nuclei in a radioactive
sample
radioactive tagsspecial drugs (radiopharmaceuticals) that allow doctor s to track
movement of other drugs in the body
radioactivity spontaneous emission of radiation from nuclei
radiopharmaceutical compound used for medical imaging

12.S.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84220radius of a nucleus radius of a nucleus is defined as
relative biological effectiveness (RBE)number that expresses the relative amount of damage th at a fixed
amount of ionizing radiation of a given type can in flict on
biological tissues
roentgen equivalent man (rem) dose unit more closely related to effects in biologica l tissue
sievert (Sv) SI equivalent of the rem
single-photon-emission computed tomography (SPECT) tomography performed with -emitting radiopharmaceut icals
strong nuclear force force that binds nucleons together in the nucleus
transuranic element element that lies beyond uranium in the periodic tab le
Key Equations
Atomic mass number
Standard format for expressing an isotope
Nuclear radius, where r is the radius of a single proton
Mass defect
Binding energy
Binding energy per nucleon
Radioactive decay rate
Radioactive decay law
Decay constant
Lifetime of a substance
Activity of a radioactive substance
Activity of a radioactive substance (linear form)
Alpha decay
Beta decay
Positron emission
Gamma decay
Summary
10.1 Properties of Nuclei
The atomic nucleus is composed of protons and neutron s.
The number of protons in the nucleus is given by the at omic number, Z. The number of neutrons in the nucleus is the
neutron number, N. The number of nucleons is mass number, A.
Atomic nuclei with the same atomic number, Z, but different neutron numbers, N, are isotopes of the same element.
The atomic mass of an element is the weighted average of the masses of its isotopes.0

12.S.5 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8422010.2 Nuclear Binding Energy
The mass defect of a nucleus is the difference between the total mass of a nucleus and the sum of the masses of all i ts
constituent nucleons.
The binding energy (BE) of a nucleus is equal to the amo unt of energy released in forming the nucleus, or the mass defect
multiplied by the speed of light squared.
A graph of binding energy per nucleon (BEN) versus atomic number A implies that nuclei divided or combined release an
enormous amount of energy.
The binding energy of a nucleon in a nucleus is analogou s to the ionization energy of an electron in an atom.
10.3 Radioactive Decay
In the decay of a radioactive substance, if the decay cons tant (λλ) is large, the half-life is small, and vice versa.
The radioactive decay law,, uses the properties of radio active substances to estimate the age of a substance.
Radioactive carbon has the same chemistry as stable carbo n, so it mixes into the ecosphere and eventually becomes part
of every living organism. By comparing the abundance o f in an artifact with the normal abundance in living ti ssue, it
is possible to determine the artifact’s age.
10.4 Nuclear Reactions
The three types of nuclear radiation are alpha () rays, beta () rays, and gamma () rays.
We represent αα decay symbolically by. There are two typ es of decay: either an electron () or a
positron () is emitted by a nucleus. decay is represen ted symbolically by.
When a heavy nucleus decays to a lighter one, the lighte r daughter nucleus can become the parent nucleus for the next
decay, and so on, producing a decay series.
10.5 Fission
Nuclear fission is a process in which the sum of the masses of t he product nuclei are less than the masses of the reacta nts.
Energy changes in a nuclear fission reaction can be un derstood in terms of the binding energy per nucleon curve.
The production of new or different isotopes by nuclear t ransformation is called breeding, and reactors designed for this
purpose are called breeder reactors.
10.6 Nuclear Fusion
Nuclear fusion is a reaction in which two nuclei are combined to form a larger nucleus; energy is released when light
nuclei are fused to form medium-mass nuclei.
The amount of energy released by a fusion reaction is k nown as the Q value.
Nuclear fusion explains the reaction between deuterium and t ritium that produces a fusion (or hydrogen) bomb; fusion
also explains the production of energy in the Sun, the process of nucleosynthesis, and the creation of the heavy elem ents.
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological Effects of Nuclear Radiation
Nuclear technology is used in medicine to locate and study diseased tissue using special drugs called
radiopharmaceuticals. Radioactive tags are used to iden tify cancer cells in the bones, brain tumors, and Alzheimer’ s
disease, and to monitor the function of body organs, such a s blood flow, heart muscle activity, and iodine uptake in the
thyroid gland.
The biological effects of ionizing radiation are due t o two effects it has on cells: interference with cell repr oduction and
destruction of cell function.
Common sources of radiation include that emitted by Eart h due to the isotopes of uranium, thorium, and potassium;
natural radiation from cosmic rays, soils, and building m aterials, and artificial sources from medical and denta l diagnostic
tests.
Biological effects of nuclear radiation are expressed by many different physical quantities and in many differen t units,
including the rad or radiation dose unit.
This page titled 12.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary) is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.S.6 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8422010.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary) by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/universityphysics-volume-3.

14.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005114: Appendix A- Units
Units Used in Physics (Fundamental units in bold)

14.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90051Quantity Common Symbol Unit Unit in Terms of Base SI Units
Acceleration m/s m/s
Amount of substance n mole mol
Angle radian (rad)
Angular acceleration rad/s s
Angular frequency rad/s s
Angular momentum kg • m/s kg • m/s
Angular velocity rad/s s
Area A m m
Atomic number Z
Capacitance C farad (F) A • s /kg • m
Charge q, Q, e coulomb (C) A • s
Charge density:
Line C/m A• s/m
Surface C/m A• s/m
V olume C/m A• s/m
Conductivity A • s /kg • m
Current I ampere A
Current density A/m A/m
Density kg/m kg/m
Dielectric constant
Electric dipole moment C• m A• s • m
Electric field N/C kg • m/A • s
Electric flux N • m /C kg • m /A • s2 2
2 -2
-1
2 2
-1
2 2
2 4 2
2 2
3 3
2 3 3
2 2
3 3
2 3 3

14.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90051Quantity Common Symbol Unit Unit in Terms of Base SI Units
Electromotive force volt (V) kg • m /A • s
Energy E, U, K joule (J) kg • m /s
Entropy S J/K kg • m /s • K
Force newton (N) kg • m/s
Frequency f hertz (Hz) s
Heat Q joule (J) kg • m /s
Inductance L henry (H) kg • m /A • s
Length:, L meter m
Displacement
Distance d, h
Position x, y, z,
Magnetic dipole moment N • J/T A • m
Magnetic field tesla (T) = Wb/m kg/A • s
Magnetic flux weber (Wb) kg • m /A • s
Mass m, M kilogram kg
Molar specific heat C J/mol • K kg • m /s • mol • K
Moment of inertia I kg • m kg • m
Momentum kg • m/s kg • m/s
Period T s s
Permeability of free space N/A = H/m kg • m/A • s
Permittivity of free space C /N • m = F/m A • s /kg • m
Potential V volt (V) = J/C kg • m /A • s
Power P watt (W) = J/s kg • m /s
Pressure p pascal (Pa) = N/m kg/m • s
Resistance R ohm () = V/A kg • m /A • s
Specific heat c J/kg • K m /s • K
Speed v m/s m/s2 3
2 2
2 2
-1
2 2
2 2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2 2
2 2 2 4 3
2 2 3
2 3
2 2
2 2 3
2 2

14.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90051Quantity Common Symbol Unit Unit in Terms of Base SI Units
Temperature T kelvin K
Time t second s
Torque N • m kg • m /s
Velocity m/s m/s
V olume V m m
Wavelength m m
Work W joule (J) = N • m kg • m /s
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).2 2
3 3
2 2

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005213.1: Appendix B- Conversion Factors
Table B1 - Length
m cm km
1 meter 1 10 10
1 centimeter 10 1 10
1 kilometer 10 10 1
1 inch 2.540 x 10 2.540 2.540 x 10
1 foot 0.3048 30.48 3.048 x 10
1 mile 1609 1.609 x 10 1.609
1 angstrom 10 10 10
1 fermi 10 10 10
1 light-year 9.460 x 10 9.460 x 10 9.460 x 10
in ft mi
1 meter 39.37 3.281 6.214 x 10
1 centimeter 0.3937 3.281 x 10 6.214 x 10
1 kilometer 3.937 x 10 3.281 x 10 0.6214
1 inch 1 8.333 x 10 1.578 x 10
1 foot 12 1 1.894 x 10
1 mile 6.336 x 10 5280 1
Area
1 cm = 0.155 in
1 m = 104 cm2 = 10.76 ft2
1 in = 6.452 cm
1 ft = 144 in = 0.0929 m
Volume
1 liter = 1000 cm = 10 m = 0.03531 ft = 61.02 in
1 ft = 0.02832 m = 28.32 liters = 7.477 gallons
1 gallon = 3.788 liters2 -3
-2 -5
3 5
-2 -5
-4
-10 -8 -13
-15 -13 -18
15 17 12
−4
−2 −6
4 −4
−2 −5
−4
2 2
2 2
2 2 2
3 −3 3 3 3
3 3

13.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90052Table B2 - Time
s min h day yr
1 second 1 1.667 x 10 2.778 x 10 1.157 x 10 3.169 x 10
1 minute 60 1 1.667 x 10 6.944 x 10 1.901 x 10
1 hour 3600 60 1 4.167 x 10 1.141 x 10
1 day 8.640 x 10 1440 24 1 2.738 x 10
1 year 3.156 x 10 5.259 x 10 8.766 x 10 365.25 1
Table B3 - Speed
m/s cm/s ft/s mi/h
1 meter/second 1 10 3.281 2.237
1 centimeter/second 10 1 3.281 x 10 2.237 x 10
1 foot/second 0.3048 30.48 1 0.6818
1 mile/hour 0.4470 44.70 1.467 1
Acceleration
1 m/s = 100 cm/s = 3.281 ft/s
1 cm/s = 0.01 m/s = 0.03281 ft/s
1 ft/s = 0.3048 m/s = 30.48 cm/s
1 mi/h • s = 1.467 ft/s
Table B4 - Mass
kg g slug u
1 kilogram 1 10 6.852 x 10 6.024 x 10
1 gram 10 1 6.852 x 10 6.024 x 10
1 slug 14.59 1.459 x 10 1 8.789 x 10
1 atomic mass unit 1.661 x 10 1.661 x 10 1.138 x 10 1
1 metric ton 1000
Table B5 - Force
N dyne lb
1 newton 1 10 0.2248
1 dyne 10 1 2.248 x 10
1 pound 4.448 4.448 x 10 1
Table B6 - Pressure
*Where the acceleration due to gravity is 9.80665 m/s a nd the temperature is 0 °C-2 -4 -5 -8
-2 -4 -6
-2 -4
4 -3
7 5 3
-2 −2 −2
2 2 2
2 2 2
2 2 2
3 -2 26
-3 -5 23
4 27
-27 -24 -28
-5 -6

13.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90052Pa dyne/cm atm cm Hg lb/in
1 pascal 1 10 9.869 x 10 7.501 x 10 1.450 x 10
1 dyne/ centimeter 0.1 1 9.869 x 10 7.501 x 10 1.450 x 1 0
1 atmosphere 1.013 x 10 1.013 x 10 1 76 14.70
1 centimeter
mercury*1.333 x 10 1.333 x 10 1.316 x 10 1 0.1934
1 pound/inch 6.895 x 10 6.895 x 10 6.805 x 10 5.171 1
1 bar 10
1 torr 1 (mm Hg)
Table B7 - Work, Energy, Heat
J erg ft • lb eV cal Btu
1 joule 1 10 0.7376 6.242 x 10 0.2389 9.481 x 10
1 erg 10 1 7.376 x 10 6.242 x 10 2.389x 10 9.481 x 10
1 foot-pound 1.356 1.356 x 10 1 8.464 x 10 0.3239 1.285 x 10
1 electron-volt 1.602 x 10 1.602 x 10 1.182 x 10 1 3.827 x 10 1.519 x 10
1 calorie 4.186 4.186 x 10 3.088 2.613 x 10 1 3.968 x 10
1 British thermal
unit1.055 x 10 1.055 x 10 7.779 x 10 6.585 x 10 2.520 x 10 1
1 kilowatt-hour 3.600 x 10
Power
1 W = 1 J/s
1 hp = 746 W = 550 ft • lb/s
1 Btu/h = 0.293 W
Angle
1 rad = 57.30° =
1° = 0.01745 rad =
1 revolution = 360° = 2 rad
1 rev/min (rpm) = 0.1047 rad/s
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).2 2
−6 −4 −4
2 −7 −5 −5
5 6
3 4 -2
2 3 4 -2
7 18 -4
-7 -8 11 -8 -11
7 18 -3
-19 -12 -19 -20 -22
7 19 -3
3 10 2 21 2

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005313.1: Appendix C- Fundamental Constants
Note: These constants are the values recommended in 2006 by CODATA, based on a least-squares adjustment of data fr om
different measurements. The numbers in parentheses for th e values represent the uncertainties of the last two digit s.
* c is the speed of light

13.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90053Quantity Symbol Value
Atomic mass unit u1.660 538 782 (83) x 10 kg
931.494 028 (23) MeV/c *
Avogadro’s number N 6.022 141 79 (30) x 10 particles/mo l
Bohr magneton 9.274 009 15 (23) x 10 J/T
Bohr radius 5.291 772 085 9 (36) x 10 m
Boltzmann’s constant 1.380 650 4 (24) x 10 J/K
Compton wavelength 2.426 310 217 5 (33) x 10 m
Coulomb constant 8.987 551 788... x 10 N • m /C (exact)
Deuteron mass m9.109 382 15 (45) x 10 kg
5.485 799 094 3(23) x 10 u
0.510 998 910 (13) MeV/c *
Electron mass m9.109 382 15 (45) x 10 kg
5.485 799 094 3(23) x 10 u
0.510 998 910 (13) MeV/c *
Electron volt eV 1.602 176 487 (40) x 10 J
Elementary charge e 1.602 176 487 (40) x 10 C
Gas constant R 8.314 472 (15) J/mol • K
Gravitational constant G 6.674 28 (67) x 10 N • m /kg
Neutron mass m1.674 927 211 (84) x 10 kg
1.008 664 915 97 (43) u
939.565 346 (23) MeV/c *
Nuclear magneton 5.050 783 24 (13) x 10 J/T
Permeability of free space 4 x 10 T • m/A (exact)
Permittivity of free space 8.854 187 817... x 10 C /N • m (exact)
Planck’s constant h 6.626 068 96 (33) x 10 J • s
Reduced Planck's constant 1.054 571 628 (53) x 10 J • s
Proton mass m 1.672 621 637 (83) x 10 kg−27
A23
−24
−11
−23
−12
9 2 2
d−31
−4
e−31
−4
−19
−19
−11 2 2
n−27
−27
−7
−12 2 2
−34
−34
p−27

13.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90053Quantity Symbol Value
1.007 276 466 77 (10) u
938.272 013 (23) MeV/c *
Rydberg constant R 1.097 373 156 852 7 (73) x 10 m
Speed of light in vacuum c 2.997 924 58 x 10 m/s (exact)
Useful combinations of constants for calculations:
hc = 12,400 eV • Å = 1240 eV • nm = 1240 MeV • fm
c = 1973 eV • Å = 197.3 eV • nm = 197.3 MeV • fm
k e = 14.40 eV • Å = 1.440 eV • nm = 1.440 MeV • fm
k T = 0.02585 eV at T = 300 K
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).2
H7 −1
e2
B

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005413.1: Appendix D- Periodic Table of the Elements
PUBCHEM PERIODIC TABLE
Periodic T able of Elements
17Atomic Number
ClSymbol
H1
He18
Li2
Be2
B13
C14
N15
O16
F17
Ne
Na3
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Ar
K4
Ca
Sc3
Ti4
V5
Cr6
Mn7
Fe8
Co9
Ni10
Cu11
Zn12
Ga
Ge
As
Se
Br
Kr
Rb5
Sr
Y
Zr
Nb
Mo
Tc
Ru
Rh
Pd
Ag
Cd
In
Sn
Sb
Te
I
Xe
Cs6
Ba
Hf
Ta
W
Re
Os
Ir
Pt
Au
Hg
Tl
Pb
Bi
Po
At
Rn

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005513.1: Appendix E - Half-Lives for Several Isotopes
Half-Lives for Several Radioactive Isotopes
Isotope Half-Life 1 Type of Emission 2 Isotope Half-Life 3 Type of Emission 4
5730 y 5.01 d
9.97 m 60.55 m
4.1 × 10 s 138.4 d
15.00 h 3 × 10 s
14.29 d 0.15 s
1.27 × 10 y 3.05 m
0.08 s 1.0 × 10 s
2.6 × 10 y 1.6 s
5.27 y 55.6 s
4.7 × 10 y 3.82 d
29 y 3.66 d
5.1 × 10 y 1600 y
8.040 d 5.75 y
5 × 10 y 6.13 h
3.07 m 1.913 y
22.3 y 1.4 × 10 y
10.6 h 22 m
26.8 m 24.10 d
6.243 d 27 d
1.59 × 10 y 162.8 d
2.45 × 10 y 4.5 h
7.03 × 10 y 20.47 d
4.47 × 10 y 3.24 h
23.54 m 20.1 h
2.3 d 76 m
2.407 × 10 y 55 s
6.54 × 10 y 0.65 s
14.4 y 1.5 s
432.2 y 0.8 s−22
−7
−4

13.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90055Footnotes
1. 1 y = years, d = days, h = hours, m = minutes, s = seconds
2. 2 E.C. = electron capture, S.F. = Spontaneous fission
3. 3 y = years, d = days, h = hours, m = minutes, s = seconds
4. 4 E.C. = electron capture, S.F. = Spontaneous fission

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005613.1: Appendix F- Mathematical Formulas
Quadratic formula
If ax + bx + c = 0, then x =
Table E1 - Geometry
Triangle of base b and height h Area = bh
Circle of radius r Circumference = 2 r Area = r
Sphere of radius r Surface Area = 2 r V olume = r
Cylinder of radius r and height h Area of curved surfa ce = 2 rh V olume = r h
Trigonometry
Trigonometric Identities
1. sin =
2. cos =
3. tan =
4. sin(90° −) = cos
5. cos(90° −) = sin
6. tan(90° −) = cot
7. sin + cos = 1
8. sec − tan = 1
9. tan =
10. sin() = sin cos ± cos sin
11. cos() = cos cos ∓ sin sin
12. tan() =
13. sin 2 = 2sin cos
14. cos 2 = cos − sin = 2 cos − 1 = 1 − 2 sin
15. sin + sin = 2 sin (+)cos (−)
16. cos + cos = 2 cos (+)cos (−)
Triangles
1. Law of sines: = =
2. Law of cosines: c = a + b − 2ab cos
3. Pythagorean theorem: a + b = c2
2 3
2 2
2 2
2 2 2 2
2 2 2
2 2 2

13.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90056
Series expansions
1. Binomial theorem: (a + b) = a + na b + + +
2. (1 ± x) = 1 ± (x < 1)
3. (1 ± x) = 1 ∓ (x < 1)
4. sin x = x 5. cos x = 1 6. tan x = x +
7. e = 1 + x +
8. ln(1 + x) = x − (|x| < 1)
Derivatives
1. [a f(x)] = a f(x)
2. [f(x) + g(x)] = f(x) + g(x)
3. [f(x)g(x)] = f(x) g(x) + g(x) f(x)
4. f(u) = [f(u)]
5. x = mx
6. sin x = cos x
7. cos x = −sin x
8. tan x = sec x
9. cot x = −csc x
10. sec x = tan x sec x
11. csc x = −cot x csc x
12. e = e
13. ln x =
14. sin x =
15. cos x =
16. tan x =
Integrals
1. a f(x)dx = a f(x)dx
2. [f(x) + g(x)]dx = f(x)dx + g(x)dx
3. x dx = for (m ≠ −1) = ln x for (m = −1)
4. sin x dx = −cos x
5. cos x dx = sin x
6. tan x dx = ln|sec x|
7. sin (ax) dx = −
8. cos (ax) dx = +
9. sin (ax) cos (ax) dx =
10. e dx = e
11. xe dx = (ax − 1)
12. ln ax dx = x ln ax − x
13. = tan
14. = lnn n n-1
n 2
-n 2
x
m m − 1
x x
−1
−1
−1
m
ax ax
ax
−1

13.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005615. = sinh
16. = sin
17. dx =
18. dx =
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).−1
−1

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005713.1: Appendix G- The Greek Alphabet
Table G1 - The Greek Alphabet
Name Captial Lowercase
Alpha A
Beta B
Gamma
Delta
Epsilon E
Zeta Z
Eta H
Theta
Iota I
Kappa K
Lambda
Mu M
Nu N
Xi
Omicron O
Pi
Rho P
Sigma
Tau T
Upsilon
Phi
Chi X
Psi
Omega
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9005813.1: Appendix H- Astronomical Data
Celestial ObjectMean Distance from
Sun (million km)Period of Revolution (d
= days) (y = years)Period of Rotation at
EquatorEccentricity of Orbit
Sun — — 27 d —
Mercury 57.9 88 d 59 d 0.206
Venus 108.2 224.7 d 243 d 0.007
Earth 149.6 365.26 d 23 h 56 min 4 s 0.017
Mars 227.9 687 d 24 h 37 min 23 s 0.093
Jupiter 778.4 11.9 y 9 h 50 min 30 s 0.048
Saturn 1426.7 29.46 y 10 h 14 min 0.054
Uranus 2871.0 84.0 y 17 h 14 min 0.047
Neptune 4498.3 164.8 y 16 h 0.009
Earth's Moon14639 (0.386 from
Earth)27.3 d 27.3 d 0.055
Celestial Object Equatorial Diameter (km) Mass (Earth = 1) Densi ty (g/cm)
Sun 1,392,000 333,000.00 1.4
Mercury 4879 0.06 5.4
Venus 12,104 0.82 5.2
Earth 12,756 1.00 5.5
Mars 6794 0.11 3.9
Jupiter 142,984 317.83 1.3
Saturn 120,536 95.16 0.7
Uranus 51,118 14.54 1.3
Neptune 48,528 17.15 1.6
Earth's Moon 3476 0.01 3.3
Other Data:
Mass of Earth: 5.97 x 10 kg
Mass of the Moon: 7.36 x 10 kg
Mass of the Sun: 1.99 x 10 kg
Contributors and Attributions
Samuel J. Ling (Truman State University), Jeff Sanny (Loyo la Marymount University), and Bill Moebs with many contr ibuting
authors. This work is licensed by OpenStax University Physics und er a Creative Commons Attribution License (by 4.0).3

13.B.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8422513.B: Appendix I- Some Equations and Constants
13.B.1 Physical Constants
Table B.1: Physical constants
Name Symbol Value
Speed of light
Elementary charge
Electron mass
Proton mass
Gravitational constant
Gravitational acceleration
Boltzmann's Constant
Planck's Constant
13.B.2 Moments of Inertia
Table B.2: Moments of inertia, all about axes of symme try through the center of mass.
Object Moment of Inertia
Thin stick (length L)
Ring of hollow cylinder (radius R)
Disk or solid cylinder (radius R)
Hollow sphere (radius R)
Solid sphere (radius R)
Rectangle (size), perpendicular axis
Rectangle (size), axis parallel to side b
13.B.3 Solar System Objects
Table B.3: Characteristics of the Sun, Earth and Moon.
Sun Earth Moon
Mass (kg)
Mean radius (m)
Orbital period (s)(200 My) (365.25 days) (27.3 days)
Mean orbital radius (m)
Mean density (kg/m)
Table B.4: Properties of a number of solar system objec ts. Equatorial radii and masses are compared to those of Earth (see Table B.3). Orbital
properties are around primary (the sun for (dwarf) pl anets, the planet for moons). Orbital radii and perio ds for planets again compared to Earth,
for moons in kilograms and days. Rotation period for a ll objects in days. Inclination and axial tilt in deg rees. Data from NASA planetary fact
sheets [31].3

13.B.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84225Name SymbolEquatorial
radiusMassMean
orbit
radiusOrbital
periodInclinatio
nOrbital
eccentricit
yRotation
periodConfirme
d moonsAxial tilt
Mercury 0.382 0.06 0.39 0.24 3.38 0.206 58.64 0 0.04
Venus 0.949 0.82 0.72 0.62 3.86 0.007 -243.02 0 177.36
Earth 1 1 1 1 7.25 0.017 1 1 23.44
Moon 0.272 0.0123 384399 27.3215818.2928.580.0549 27.32158 0 6.68
Mars 0.532 0.107 1.52 1.88 5.65 0.093 1.03 2 25.19
Ceres 0.0742 0.00016 2.766 4.599 10.59 0.08 0.3781 0 4
Jupiter 11.209 317.8 5.2 11.86 6.09 0.048 0.41 69 3.13
Io 0.285 0.015 421600 1.769 0.04 0.0041 1.769 0 0
Europa 0.246 0.008 670900 3.551 0.47 0.009 3.551 0 0
Ganymed
e0.423 0.025 1070400 7.155 1.85 0.0013 7.155 0 0
Callisto 0.378 0.018 1882700 16.689 0.2 0.0074 16.689 0 0
Saturn 9.449 95.2 9.54 29.46 5.51 0.054 0.43 62 26.73
Titan 0.404 0.023 1221870 15.945 0.33 0.0288 15.945 0 0
Uranus 4.007 14.6 19.22 84.01 6.48 0.047 -0.72 27 97.77
Oberon 0.119 0.00051 583519 13.46 0.1 0.0014 13.46 0 0
Neptune 3.883 17.2 30.06 164.8 6.43 0.009 0.67 14 28.32
Triton 0.212 0.00358 354759 5.877 157 0.00002 5.877 0 0
Pluto 0.186 0.0022 39.482 247.9 17.14 0.25 6.39 5 119.59
Charon 0.095 0.00025 17536 6.387 0.001 0.0022 6.387 0 unknow n
Haumea 0.13 0.0007 43.335 285.4 28.19 0.19 0.167 2 unknown
Makemak
e0.11 unknown 45.792 309.9 28.96 0.16 unknown 1 unknown
Eris 0.18 0.0028 67.668 557 44.19 0.44 unknown 1 unknown
13.B.4 Equations
13.B.4.1 B.4.1 Vector Derivatives
Gradient:
Divergence:

13.B.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/84225Curl:
13.B.4.2 B.4.2 Special Relativity
Lorentz transformations for the coordinates of a frame S' that moves with a spee d u in the positive x-direction of frame S:
Velocity addition in a relativistic system:
16.B: Some Equations and Constants by Timon Idema is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Original source:
https://textbooks.open.tudelft.nl/textbooks/catalog/bo ok/14.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90060TABLE OF CONTENTS
This formulary is written at advanced undergraduate/p ostgraduate level. It is intended to be a short refe rence for anyone who works
with physics and often needs to look up equations.

Index
A
aberration
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
aberrations
1.6: Optics
Absolute Value Function
2.8: Functions
Absorbed dose
1.14: Nuclear Physics
Ac circuit
8.4: RLC Series AC Circuits
AC circuits
8.4: RLC Series AC Circuits
AC current
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
AC voltage
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
accommodation
10.16: The Eye
10.25: Physics_of_the_Eye
activity
12.4: Radioactive Decay
acute otitis media
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
adiabatic
1.8: Thermodynamics
adjacent side
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
adjacent to
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
algebraic function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
alpha (α) rays
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
alpha decay
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
Alpha particles
1.14: Nuclear Physics
alternating current
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
Amepere's Law
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law
ammeter
6.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters
ampere (unit)
5.2: Current
5.3: Electrical Current
analog meter
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters
angle of depression
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
angle of elevation
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
angular magnification
10.13: The Simple Magnifier
angular momentum
1.1: Mechanics
1.10: Quantum Physics
1.13: Theory of GroupsAnnihilation operator
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
antielectrons
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
antineutrino
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
apparent depth
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction
Apparent forces
1.1: Mechanics
arc length with regards to a circle
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
associative
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
Associative ionization
1.11: Plasma physics
Associative law
1.13: Theory of Groups
astigmatism
10.26: Vision_Correction
1.6: Optics
astrophysics
1.16: Astrophysics
atomic mass
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
atomic mass unit
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
atomic nucleus
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
atomic number
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
auricle
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
Avelian
1.13: Theory of Groups
axis of a polarizing filter
11.4: Polarization
B
back EMF
8.10: Back Emf
Band structure of solids
1.12: Solid State Physics
Baryons
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Base functions
1.13: Theory of Groups
base quantities
1.4: Units and Standards
base quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
base unit
1.4: Units and Standards
Base units
1.4: Units and Standards
BCS model
1.12: Solid State Physics
BCS theory
5.11: Superconductors
becquerel (Bq)
12.4: Radioactive DecayBernoulli's equation
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Bessel function
1.5: Waves
beta (β) rays
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
beta decay
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
1.14: Nuclear Physics
binding energy
1.14: Nuclear Physics
binding energy (nuclear)
12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy
binding energy per nucleon (BEN)
12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy
Bioelectricity
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
6.7: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments
Birefringenc
1.6: Optics
birefringence
9.4: Polarization
birefringent
11.4: Polarization
black body radiation
1.10: Quantum Physics
black hole
1.3: Relativity
Blasius's equation
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Boltzmann transport equation
1.11: Plasma physics
bosons
1.10: Quantum Physics
Boundary layers
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Boussinesq's assumtion
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Boyle temperature
1.7: Statistical Physics
Bragg planes
11.15: X-Ray Diffraction
breeder reactor
12.6: Fission
Brewster’s angle
9.4: Polarization
Brewster’s law
9.4: Polarization
Brewster's angle
11.4: Polarization
Brewster's law
11.4: Polarization
bridge device
6.7.6: Null Measurements
brightness
1.16: Astrophysics
Brownian motion
1.7: Statistical Physics

C
camera
10.14: The Camera
candela
10.17: A_Vision
capacitance
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
4.9: Energy Stored in Capacitors
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
capacitive
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
capacitive reactance
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
capacitor
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
capacitors in parallel
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
capacitors in series
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
Carnot cycle
1.8: Thermodynamics
Carnot efficiency
1.8: Thermodynamics
Cassegrain design
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
Cayley table
1.13: Theory of Groups
centre of mass
1.1: Mechanics
Cepheids
1.16: Astrophysics
Cerenkov radiation
1.6: Optics
cerumen impaction
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
Character
1.13: Theory of Groups
characteristic time constant
8.2: RL Circuits
Charge transfer
1.11: Plasma physics
chart of the nuclides
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
Christoffel symbols
1.3: Relativity
chromatic aberration
1.6: Optics
circadian
10.17: A_Vision
circuit
5.3: Electrical Current
circuits
6.7: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments
circumference of a circle
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
Classes
1.13: Theory of Groups
CNO cycle
1.16: Astrophysics
coherent waves
11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference
Cold factor
1.8: ThermodynamicsCollective model
1.14: Nuclear Physics
collisions
1.1: Mechanics
1.7: Statistical Physics
color constancy
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
coma
1.6: Optics
coma (optics)
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
comets
9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
Commutative
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
1.13: Theory of Groups
commutators
1.10: Quantum Physics
Compensators
1.6: Optics
composite function
2.8: Functions
compound microscope
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
Compton effect
1.10: Quantum Physics
concave mirror
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
Conductance current
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
conductive hearing loss
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
conductor
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium
cone
10.17: A_Vision
Conjugate elements
1.13: Theory of Groups
Conjugated field
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
conjunctiva
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
conjunctivitis
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
conservation laws
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Conservative force fields
1.1: Mechanics
constructive interference
11.2: Wave Interference
Continuity equation
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Continuous groups
1.13: Theory of Groups
conventional current
5.3: Electrical Current
converging (or convex) lens
10.12: Thin Lenses
converging lens
10.12: Thin Lensesconversion factor
1.5: Unit Conversion
convex mirror
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
Cooper pairs
5.11: Superconductors
Coordinate system
1.1: Mechanics
cornea
10.17: A_Vision
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
corner reflector
10.4: The Law of Reflection
cosecant
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
cosine
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
cosmological constant
1.3: Relativity
Cosmology
1.3: Relativity
cotangent
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
Coublomb interaction
1.11: Plasma physics
Coulomb force
3.4: Coulomb's Law
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Coulomb interaction
3.7: Electric Forces in Biology
Coulomb logarithm
1.11: Plasma physics
Coulomb repulsion
1.14: Nuclear Physics
Coulomb’s Law
3.4: Coulomb's Law
Coupled conductors
1.4: Oscillations
covalent bond
1.12: Solid State Physics
CP violation
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Cramer’s rule
2.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule
Creation operator
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
critical angle
10.6: Total Internal Reflection
critical mass
12.6: Fission
critical temperature
5.11: Superconductors
1.7: Statistical Physics
criticality
12.6: Fission
Critically damped oscillator
1.4: Oscillations
Crystal structure
1.12: Solid State Physics
cubic function
2.8.1: Basic Functions

curie (Ci)
12.4: Radioactive Decay
Curie temperature
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
current
5.2: Current
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
current density
5.4: Model of Conduction in Metals
current sensitivity
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters
curved mirror
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
Cut off frequency
1.5: Waves
Cylindrical waves
1.5: Waves
D
Damping frequency (oscillator)
1.4: Oscillations
daughter nucleus
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
DC circuits
6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors
deBroglie
1.10: Quantum Physics
Debye model
1.12: Solid State Physics
decay
12.4: Radioactive Decay
1.11: Plasma physics
decay constant
12.4: Radioactive Decay
decay series
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
Deceleration parameter
1.3: Relativity
decreasing on the interval I
2.8: Functions
defibrillator
4.9: Energy Stored in Capacitors
degeneracy
1.13: Theory of Groups
degree
2.8.1: Basic Functions
degrees of freedom
1.7: Statistical Physics
Del operator
1.17.4: The Del-operator
dependent variable
2.8: Functions
Depolarizing field
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
derived quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
derived unit
1.4: Units and Standards
derived units
1.4: Units and Standards
destructive interference
11.2: Wave Interferencedestructive interference for a single slit
11.7: Single-Slit Diffraction
Detailed balancing
1.11: Plasma physics
determinants
2.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule
Dichroism
1.6: Optics
dielectric
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
dielectric material
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
dielectric strength
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
dielectrics
1.12: Solid State Physics
diffraction
11.7: Single-Slit Diffraction
11.11: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction
1.6: Optics
diffraction grating
11.9: Multiple-Slit Interference
11.10: Diffraction Gratings
diffraction limit
11.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution
diffusion
1.9: Transport Phenomena
digital meter
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters
dimensional analysis
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
dimensionally consistent
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
dimensionless
1.6: Dimensional Analysis
diode
5.7: Ohm's Law
Dioptic power
1.6: Optics
dipole
3.7: Electric Forces in Biology
Dirac equation
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Dirac fomalism
1.10: Quantum Physics
Dirac matricies
1.10: Quantum Physics
direct current
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
Direct semiconductor
1.12: Solid State Physics
direction angle
2.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
direction of magnetic field lines
7.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
direction of polarization
9.4: Polarization
11.4: Polarization
discriminant
2.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations
dispersion
10.7: Dispersion
1.6: Opticsdispersion relation
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
displacement
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
Displacement current
9.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Distance Formula
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
distortion
1.6: Optics
distributive
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
diverging (or concave) lens
10.12: Thin Lenses
diverging lens
10.12: Thin Lenses
domain
2.8: Functions
domains
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
Doppler broadening
1.11: Plasma physics
Doppler effect
1.5: Waves
dot product
2.9.6: Products of Vectors
double angle formula, trigonometric
identity
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
drift velocity
5.2: Current
5.4: Model of Conduction in Metals
Droplet model
1.14: Nuclear Physics
E
ECG
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
eddy current
8.8: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
efficiency
1.8: Thermodynamics
eigenfunctions
1.10: Quantum Physics
eigenvalues
1.10: Quantum Physics
Einstein Tensor
1.3: Relativity
electric charge
3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation o f
Charge
Electric conductance
1.12: Solid State Physics
electric current
5.2: Current
electric dipole
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
electric displacement
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Electric displacemnt
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism

electric energy
5.8: Electric Power and Energy
electric field
3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited
3.6: Electric Field Lines
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
electric field lines
3.6: Electric Field Lines
electric field strength
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
electric force
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Electric generators
8.9: Electric Generators
Electric oscillation
1.4: Oscillations
electric potential
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical
Potential Difference
4.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
4.5: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
electric potential difference
4.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
electric power
5.8: Electric Power and Energy
electrical conductivity
5.6: Resistivity and Resistance
electrical current
5.3: Electrical Current
electrocardiogram
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
electromagnet
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
electromagnetic energy
9.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
Electromagnetic force
3.1: Introduction
electromagnetic induction
8.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
Electromagnetic Momentum
9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
electromagnetic spectrum
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
electromagnetic waves
9.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves
9.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Electromagnetic waves in matter
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Electromagnetism
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
electromotive force
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage
electromotive force (emf)
6.1: Electromotive Force
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage
electron
3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation of
Charge
electron capture
1.14: Nuclear Physics
Electron diffraction
1.10: Quantum Physicselectron volt
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical
Potential Difference
electrostatic equilibrium
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium
electrostatic force
3.4: Coulomb's Law
electrostatic precipitators
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
electrostatic repulsion
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
electrostatics
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
Electroweak theory
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Elementry partics
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
EMF
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage
8.7: Motional Emf
ENDOSCOPES
10.6: Total Internal Reflection
energy
1.1: Mechanics
energy density of the electromagnetic
field
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
energy distribution
1.7: Statistical Physics
energy stored in an inductor
8.13: Inductance
English units
1.4: Units and Standards
enthalpy
1.8: Thermodynamics
entropy
1.8: Thermodynamics
equal vectors
2.9.5: Algebra of Vectors
equation in two variables
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
equation of state
1.7: Statistical Physics
equilibrium state
1.8: Thermodynamics
equipotential
4.6: Equipotential Lines
equipotential line
4.6: Equipotential Lines
Equivalence Principle
1.3: Relativity
equivalent resistance
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
Euclidean space
1.3: Relativity
Euler's angles
1.13: Theory of Groups
even function
2.8: Functions
Excitation
1.11: Plasma physicsexponent
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
extraocular muscles
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
eye
10.25: Physics_of_the_Eye
10.28: The_Human_Eye
eyepiece
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
F
far point
10.16: The Eye
10.26: Vision_Correction
farad (Units)
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
Faraday cage
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium
Faraday effect
1.6: Optics
Faraday’s Law
8.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law
Faraday's law of induction
8.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law
farsightedness
10.16: The Eye
10.26: Vision_Correction
Fermat's principle
1.6: Optics
Fermi gas
1.12: Solid State Physics
fermions
1.10: Quantum Physics
ferromagnetic
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
ferromagnetism
1.12: Solid State Physics
fiber optics
10.6: Total Internal Reflection
field
3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited
Field curvature
1.6: Optics
Field interaction
1.10: Quantum Physics
Field operator
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Field quantization
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Field quanto
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Field tensor
1.3: Relativity
Fine structure
1.10: Quantum Physics
first focus or object focus
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction
first law of thermodynamics
1.8: Thermodynamics
fission
12.6: Fission
fixed boundary condition
11.2: Wave Interference

Fixed coordinate system
1.1: Mechanics
Flow in tubes
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Flow velocity
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Flux quantixation
1.12: Solid State Physics
focal length
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
focal plane
10.12: Thin Lenses
focal point
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
force
1.1: Mechanics
Fourier number
1.9: Transport Phenomena
fovea
10.17: A_Vision
Fraunhofer diffraction
1.6: Optics
free boundary condition
11.2: Wave Interference
free charge
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium
free electron
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
free energy
1.8: Thermodynamics
fringes
11.6: Mathematics of Interference
function
2.8: Functions
Fundamental orthogonality theorem
1.13: Theory of Groups
G
galvanometer
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters
gamma (γ) rays
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
Gamma decay
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
1.14: Nuclear Physics
gamma ray
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Gamow factor
1.14: Nuclear Physics
Gauge transform
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Gauss
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving
Charge in a Magnetic Field
Gaussian lens
1.6: Optics
general relativity
1.3: Relativity
Generating functions
1.1: Mechanics
generators
8.9: Electric GeneratorsGeodesic postulate
1.3: Relativity
geometric optics
10.3: The Propagation of Light
Geometrical mass
1.3: Relativity
Geometrical optics
1.6: Optics
Gibbs free energy
1.8: Thermodynamics
graph in two variables
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
graph of a function
2.8: Functions
gravitation
1.1: Mechanics
Gravitational waves
1.3: Relativity
Green's function
1.5: Waves
grounded
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
grounded.
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
grounding
4.6: Equipotential Lines
group velocity
1.5: Waves
Groups
1.13: Theory of Groups
H
hadrons
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Hall effect
7.7: The Hall Effect
1.12: Solid State Physics
Hall emf
7.7: The Hall Effect
Hamilton mechanics
1.1: Mechanics
Hamiltonian
1.10: Quantum Physics
Hamiltonian, canonical transformation
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Harmonic oscillation
1.4: Oscillations
Harmonic oscillator (quantum)
1.10: Quantum Physics
heat capacity
1.8: Thermodynamics
Heat capacity of solids
1.12: Solid State Physics
Heat conductance
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Heisenberg
1.10: Quantum Physics
1.12: Solid State Physics
Heisenberg picture
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
henry
8.13: InductanceHermetian
1.10: Quantum Physics
Higgs mechanism
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Higgs particle
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
high dose
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
hologram
11.16: Holography
holography
11.16: Holography
Homomorfism
1.13: Theory of Groups
horizontally polarized
9.4: Polarization
11.4: Polarization
Hubble's constant
1.3: Relativity
hues
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
Huygen's principle
11.11: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction
Huygens’s principle
10.8: Huygens’s Principle
hybridization
1.10: Quantum Physics
hydrogen atom
1.10: Quantum Physics
hyperbolic functions
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
hyperopia
10.16: The Eye
10.17: A_Vision
10.26: Vision_Correction
hypotenuse
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
I
ideal gas
1.8: Thermodynamics
image distance
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
image focus
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction
Impedance, system
1.4: Oscillations
Inclination factor
1.6: Optics
incoherent
11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference
increasing on the interval I
2.8: Functions
independent variable
2.8: Functions
index of refraction
10.3: The Propagation of Light
10.5: Refraction
10.7: Dispersion
Indirect semiconductor
1.12: Solid State Physics
Induced dipole interaction
1.11: Plasma physics

induced emf
8.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
Induced voltage
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
inductance
8.13: Inductance
induction
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
Inductive
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
inductive reactance
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
inductor
8.13: Inductance
infrared radiation
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
insulator
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
Interaction picture
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
intercepts
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
interference
11.2: Wave Interference
11.6: Mathematics of Interference
interference order
11.6: Mathematics of Interference
interferometer
11.17: The Michelson Interferometer
internal resistance
6.1: Electromotive Force
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage
Inverse element
1.13: Theory of Groups
inverse hyperbolic functions
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
Inversion temperature
1.8: Thermodynamics
Ion bond
1.12: Solid State Physics
ion tail
9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
ionization
1.11: Plasma physics
ionosphere
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium
iridescence
11.10: Diffraction Gratings
Iris
10.17: A_Vision
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
irradiance
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Irreducible representation
1.13: Theory of Groups
Irreducible tensor operators
1.13: Theory of Groups
Irreversible cycle
1.8: Thermodynamics
isobaric
1.8: Thermodynamicsisochoric
1.8: Thermodynamics
Isomorfism
1.13: Theory of Groups
isothermal
1.8: Thermodynamics
isotopes
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
J
Jacobean
1.13: Theory of Groups
Jones vector
1.6: Optics
Josephson effect
5.11: Superconductors
1.12: Solid State Physics
Josephson junction
5.11: Superconductors
Joule’s law
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
junction rule
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
K
Kelvin's theorum
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Kepler’s orbital equations
1.1: Mechanics
Kerma K
1.14: Nuclear Physics
Kerr effect
1.6: Optics
kilogram
1.4: Units and Standards
Kirchhoff’s First Rule
6.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
Kirchhoff’s Second Rule
6.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
Kirchhoff's junction rule
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
6.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
Kirchhoff's loop rule
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
6.3: Kirchhoff's Rules
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules
Kirchoff's equations
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Klein Gordon equation
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Knudsen gas
1.9: Transport Phenomena
L
lacrimal duct
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
Ladder operators
1.10: Quantum Physics
Lagrange density
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle PhysicsLagrange mechanics
1.1: Mechanics
Lamour precession
1.12: Solid State Physics
Landé’ equation
1.13: Theory of Groups
Laplace equation
1.3: Relativity
Laplace, law of
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
laser printer
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
laser vision correction
10.26: Vision_Correction
Lattice
1.12: Solid State Physics
law
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
law of conservation of charge
3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation o f
Charge
law of reflection
10.4: The Law of Reflection
law of refraction
10.5: Refraction
lens
10.17: A_Vision
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
lenses
1.6: Optics
Lenz's law
8.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law
Leptons
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
lifetime
12.4: Radioactive Decay
light
10.3: The Propagation of Light
Lightspeed
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
linear function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
linear magnification
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
linearization
1.1: Mechanics
Liouville’s equations
1.1: Mechanics
liquid drop model
12.6: Fission
Logarithmic Function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
London equation
1.12: Solid State Physics
longitudinal waves
1.5: Waves
loop rule
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules

Lorentz force
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving
Charge in a Magnetic Field
7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic FieldExamples and Applications
9.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Lorentz profile
1.11: Plasma physics
Lorentz transform
1.3: Relativity
low dose
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
M
magnetic damping
8.8: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
magnetic dipole
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
magnetic field
7.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic FieldExamples and Applications
magnetic field lines
7.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
Magnetic field strength
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
magnetic field strength at the center of a
circular loop
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law
magnetic field strength inside a solenoid
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law
Magnetic field.
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
magnetic flux
8.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
Magnetic flux density
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Magnetic force
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving
Charge in a Magnetic Field
7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic FieldExamples and Applications
7.8: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor
7.11: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Conductors
Magnetic induction
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
magnetic monopoles
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
magnetic pole
7.2: Magnets
magnetic resonance imaging
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
Magnetism
7: Magnetism
magnetization
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
1.12: Solid State Physicsmagnetized
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
magnetocardiogram
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
magnetoencephalogram
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
magnification
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
1.6: Optics
magnifying glass
10.13: The Simple Magnifier
magnitude
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
magnitudes
1.16: Astrophysics
Magnus effect
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Malus law
1.6: Optics
Malus’s law
9.4: Polarization
11.4: Polarization
mass absorption coefficient
1.14: Nuclear Physics
mass defect
12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy
mass number
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
mathematical model
2.8.1: Basic Functions
Matrix methods
1.6: Optics
Maxwell relations
1.8: Thermodynamics
Maxwell's equations
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law
9.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic
Waves
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
1.3: Relativity
MCG
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
mechanical energy
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical
Potential Difference
Mechanical oscillation
1.4: Oscillations
MEG
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
Meissner effect
5.11: Superconductors
1.12: Solid State Physics
mesons
1.14: Nuclear Physics
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Metallic bond
1.12: Solid State Physics
metals
5.4: Model of Conduction in Metals
meter
1.4: Units and Standards
7.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters
metric system
1.4: Units and StandardsMetric Tensor
1.3: Relativity
Michelson interferometer
11.17: The Michelson Interferometer
Microscopes
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
microshock sensitive
5.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
microwaves
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Midpoint Formula
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
Minkowski metric
1.3: Relativity
mirrors
1.6: Optics
missing order
11.8: Double-Slit Diffraction
model
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
moderate dose
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
Molecular orbitals
1.10: Quantum Physics
molecules
1.10: Quantum Physics
moment of inertia
1.1: Mechanics
momentum
1.1: Mechanics
monochromatic
11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference
Monochromatic plane waves
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
monopoles
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
motational emf
8.7: Motional Emf
Motion around an equilibrium
1.1: Mechanics
motor
7.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters
moving charge
7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic FieldExamples and Applications
Moving coordinate system
1.1: Mechanics
MRI
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
Multipoles
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
mutual inductance
8.13: Inductance
myopia
10.16: The Eye
10.17: A_Vision
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
10.26: Vision_Correction
N
N particle system
1.10: Quantum Physics

natural exponential function
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
natural logarithm
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
near point
10.16: The Eye
10.26: Vision_Correction
nearsightedness
10.16: The Eye
10.26: Vision_Correction
Nernst's law
1.8: Thermodynamics
nerve conduction
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
net magnification
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
neutrino
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
neutron number
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
neutrons
1.14: Nuclear Physics
Newton’s rings
11.13: Interference in Thin Films
Newton's rings
11.14: Thin Film Interference
Newtonian design
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
Newtonian equations of motion
1.1: Mechanics
Newtonian limit
1.3: Relativity
Newtonian liquid
1.9: Transport Phenomena
NMR
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
Nodal points
1.6: Optics
nonohmic
5.7: Ohm's Law
north magnetic pole
7.2: Magnets
nuclear binding energy
12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy
nuclear fusion
12.7: Nuclear Fusion
nuclear fusion reactor
12.7: Nuclear Fusion
nuclear magnetic resonance
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism
nucleons
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
nucleosynthesis
12.7: Nuclear Fusion
nuclide
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
null measurements
6.7.6: Null Measurements
null vector
2.9.5: Algebra of Vectors
number e
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions
Numerical Aperture (NA)
11.12: Circular Apertures and ResolutionO
object distance
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
object focus
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction
objective
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
odd function
2.8: Functions
ohm
5.6: Resistivity and Resistance
Ohm’s law
5: Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
5.7: Ohm's Law
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
ohmic
5.7: Ohm's Law
ohmmeter
6.7.6: Null Measurements
Oliquity
1.6: Optics
One electron atom
1.10: Quantum Physics
operators
1.10: Quantum Physics
opposite
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
opposite side
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
optic nerve
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
optical axis
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
optical power
10.16: The Eye
optically active
9.4: Polarization
11.4: Polarization
Orbital equations
1.1: Mechanics
order
11.6: Mathematics of Interference
order of magnitude
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
orthogonal vectors
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
Oscar Had A Heap Of Apples
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
otitis externa
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
ototoxic medications
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
P
P violation
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
parallel
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
parallel circuit
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
parallel conductors
7.11: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Conductorsparallel lines
2.5: Finding Angle Measurements
Parallel Plate Capacitor
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
parallel postulate
2.5: Finding Angle Measurements
parallel vectors
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
paramagnetism
1.12: Solid State Physics
paraxial approximation
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
parent nucleus
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
parity
1.10: Quantum Physics
particle physics
1.13: Theory of Groups
Path integrals
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Pauli principle
1.10: Quantum Physics
Peltier effect
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Pendulums
1.4: Oscillations
Penning ionization
1.11: Plasma physics
Perihelion shift
1.3: Relativity
periodic function
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
permeability of free space
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law
Perturbation theory
1.10: Quantum Physics
phase space
1.1: Mechanics
phase transitions
1.8: Thermodynamics
phase velocity
1.5: Waves
Phonons
1.12: Solid State Physics
photoconductor
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
Photon trajectory
1.3: Relativity
physical constants
1.17.1: Physical Constants
physical quantity
1.4: Units and Standards
physics
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
Planck
1.10: Quantum Physics
plane mirror
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
plane waves
9.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves
1.5: Waves

plasma
1.11: Plasma physics
Plasma transport
1.11: Plasma physics
Plasma waves
1.11: Plasma physics
Pockels effect
1.6: Optics
point charge
3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited
4.5: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
Poisson/s equation
1.8: Thermodynamics
polar coordinates
1.1: Mechanics
polar molecule
3.7: Electric Forces in Biology
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics
polarization
3.3: Conductors and Insulators
9.4: Polarization
11.4: Polarization
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
1.6: Optics
polarized
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium
9.4: Polarization
11.4: Polarization
polynomial function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
Positron
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
positron emission tomography (PET)
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
potential difference
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical
Potential Difference
6.1: Electromotive Force
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage
potential drop
6.1: Electromotive Force
potentiometer
6.7.6: Null Measurements
power function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
Powers of 10
1.17.2: Prefixes for Powers of 10
poynting vector
9.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Prandtl number
1.9: Transport Phenomena
presbycusis
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
presbyopia
10.17: A_Vision
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
10.25: Physics_of_the_Eye
pressure
1.7: Statistical Physics
principal axes
1.1: Mechanics
principal maximum
11.9: Multiple-Slit InterferencePrincipal plane
1.6: Optics
Principle of equivalence
1.3: Relativity
prisms
1.6: Optics
proton
3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation o f
Charge
Proton proton chain
1.16: Astrophysics
protons
1.14: Nuclear Physics
pupil
10.17: A_Vision
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
pyramid
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
pythagorean identities, trigonometric
identities
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
Pythagorean Theorem
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and
Graphs
Q
Q value
12.7: Nuclear Fusion
quadratic formula
2.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations
quadratic function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
quadrupole
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Quality (mechanical oscillator)
1.4: Oscillations
Quantum chromodynamics
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Quantum fields
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
quantum gravity
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Quantum statistics
1.10: Quantum Physics
Quarks
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
R
radar
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Radians
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
Radiation dose
1.14: Nuclear Physics
radiation dose unit (rad)
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects o f
Nuclear Radiation
Radiation dosimetry
1.14: Nuclear Physics
radiation pressure
9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure
1.2: Electricity and MagnetismRadiative recombination
1.11: Plasma physics
radio tower
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
radio waves
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
radioactive dating
12.4: Radioactive Decay
radioactive decay
1.14: Nuclear Physics
radioactive decay law
12.4: Radioactive Decay
radioactive tags
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
radioactivity
12.4: Radioactive Decay
radiopharmaceutical
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
radius of a nucleus
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
Radius of curvaturs
1.6: Optics
range
2.8: Functions
rational function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
ray
10.3: The Propagation of Light
ray tracing
10.12: Thin Lenses
Rayleigh criterion
11.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution
RC circuit
6.6: RC Circuits
6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors
RC circuits
6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors
reactance
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
real image
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
Reciprical lattice vector
1.12: Solid State Physics
Red and blue shift
1.3: Relativity
Reducible representation
1.13: Theory of Groups
reflected light that is completely polarized
11.4: Polarization
reflection
1.6: Optics
Refraciton
1.6: Optics
refraction
10.5: Refraction
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction
refractive index
1.5: Waves
1.6: Optics

relative biological effectiveness (RBE)
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
relative motion
1.1: Mechanics
Renormalization
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Representations
1.13: Theory of Groups
resisitivity
5.5: Resistance and Resistivity
resistance
5.5: Resistance and Resistivity
5.6: Resistivity and Resistance
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resistivity
5.6: Resistivity and Resistance
resistor
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
Resistors in Parallel
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resistors in series
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
resolution
11.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution
1.6: Optics
Resonance curve
1.4: Oscillations
resonance frequency
1.4: Oscillations
resultant
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
resultant vector
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
Retarders
1.6: Optics
retina
10.17: A_Vision
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
retinex
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
retinex theory of color vision
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
Retroreflectors
10.4: The Law of Reflection
Reversible cycle
1.8: Thermodynamics
Reynolds number
1.9: Transport Phenomena
rhodopsin
10.17: A_Vision
Ricci tensor
1.3: Relativity
Riemann geometry
1.3: Relativity
Riemann tensor
1.3: Relativity
right hand rule
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving
Charge in a Magnetic Field
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Lawright triangle
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
right triangle trigonometry, applied
problems
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
RL circuits
8.2: RL Circuits
RLC series
8.4: RLC Series AC Circuits
rms current
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
rms voltage
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current
rod
10.17: A_Vision
rods and cones
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
roentgen equivalent man (rem)
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects o f
Nuclear Radiation
root function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
S
S matrix
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
scalar
4.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
scalar components
2.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
scalar equation
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
scalar field
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
scalar product
2.9.6: Products of Vectors
scattering
1.14: Nuclear Physics
schematic
5.3: Electrical Current
Schrödinger picture
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Schrodinger's Equation
1.10: Quantum Physics
Schur's lemma
1.13: Theory of Groups
Schwartzchild metric
1.3: Relativity
Schwartzschild
1.16: Astrophysics
sclera
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
screening
3.7: Electric Forces in Biology
secant
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
second
1.4: Units and Standards
second focus or image focus
10.11: Images Formed by Refractionsecond law of thermodynamics
1.8: Thermodynamics
secondary maximum
11.9: Multiple-Slit Interference
selection rules
1.10: Quantum Physics
Self organization
1.9: Transport Phenomena
semiconductors
1.12: Solid State Physics
semipermeable
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
sensorineural hearing loss
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
series
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
series circuit
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
shell model
1.14: Nuclear Physics
shock hazard
5.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
6.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
8.12: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices
short circuit
5.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
Shunt resistance
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters
SI inits
1.16: Astrophysics
SI units
1.4: Units and Standards
1.17: Physical Constants, Units, Del Operator
sievert (Sv)
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation
Simple Magnifer
10.13: The Simple Magnifier
simplified theory of color vision
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision
sine
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
slope
2.8.1: Basic Functions
Snell’s law of refraction
10.5: Refraction
10.8: Huygens’s Principle
Snellen chart
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
SO(3)
1.13: Theory of Groups
SohCahToa
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
solenoid
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law
south magnetic pole
7.2: Magnets
special relativity
1.3: Relativity
Spectra line broadening
1.11: Plasma physics

spectroscopic dispersion
11.10: Diffraction Gratings
Spherical aberation
1.6: Optics
spherical aberration
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
spherical harmonics
1.13: Theory of Groups
spherical waves
1.5: Waves
Spin
1.10: Quantum Physics
Spin 0 particles
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Spin 1/2 fields
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Spin 1/2 particles
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Spin waves
1.12: Solid State Physics
spinors
1.10: Quantum Physics
spontaneous fission
1.14: Nuclear Physics
spring
1.4: Oscillations
SQUID
5.11: Superconductors
Standard Model
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
Stark broadening
1.11: Plasma physics
stars
1.16: Astrophysics
state function
1.8: Thermodynamics
static electricity
3.1: Introduction
Stationary phase method
1.5: Waves
statistical mechanics
1.8: Thermodynamics
Steiner’s theorem
1.1: Mechanics
stellar atmospheres
1.16: Astrophysics
Stiffness (oscillator)
1.4: Oscillations
stimulated emission
1.11: Plasma physics
Stirling cycle
1.8: Thermodynamics
Stokes parameters
1.6: Optics
strong nuclear force
12.2: Properties of Nuclei
Strouhal number
1.9: Transport Phenomena
Subgroups
1.13: Theory of Groups
Superconductivity
1.12: Solid State Physicssuperconductors
5.11: Superconductors
superior colliculus
10.17: A_Vision
superposition
11.2: Wave Interference
suprachiasmatic nucleus
10.17: A_Vision
symmetry about the origin
2.8: Functions
Symmetry breaking
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
T
table of values
2.8: Functions
tangent
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
TE
1.5: Waves
telescopes
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
TEM
1.5: Waves
terminal voltage
6.1: Electromotive Force
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage
tesla
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving
Charge in a Magnetic Field
test charge
3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited
Thales
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
the component form of a vector
2.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
The Dot Product
2.9.6: Products of Vectors
The Scalar Product
2.9.6: Products of Vectors
Theory
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics
thermal agitation
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
thermal hazard
5.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body
6.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety
8.12: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices
Thermodynamic potential
1.8: Thermodynamics
thermodynamics
1.8: Thermodynamics
Thermoionic voltage
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism
thin film interference
11.14: Thin Film Interference
Throttle coefficient
1.8: Thermodynamics
Time dependent perturbation theory
1.10: Quantum Physics
Time independent perturbation theory
1.10: Quantum Physicstinnitus
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
TM
1.5: Waves
tonic activity
10.17: A_Vision
torque
7.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters
Total Internal Reflection
10.6: Total Internal Reflection
transcendental function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
transformation of a function
2.8.1: Basic Functions
Transformer
8.11: Transformers
transformer equation
8.11: Transformers
Transformers, couples
1.4: Oscillations
transmission
1.6: Optics
transmission hologram
11.16: Holography
Transport Phenomena
1.9: Transport Phenomena
transuranic element
12.5: Nuclear Reactions
transversal
2.5: Finding Angle Measurements
transverse wave
9.4: Polarization
transverse waves
1.5: Waves
tree, how tall
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
trigonometric functions
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
trigonometric identity
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
tube length
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes
Tunnel effect
1.10: Quantum Physics
Turblence
1.9: Transport Phenomena
tympanic membrane
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
type I superconductor
1.12: Solid State Physics
type II superconductor
1.12: Solid State Physics
U
ultraviolet radiation
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Uncertainty princpal
1.10: Quantum Physics
Unification
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics

Uniform Electric Field
4.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
unit circle
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry
Unit element
1.13: Theory of Groups
Unit vector
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
Units
1.4: Units and Standards
unpolarized
9.4: Polarization
11.4: Polarization
V
Van de Graaff generator
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
Van der Pol equation
1.5: Waves
Van der Walls bond
1.12: Solid State Physics
Van der Walls equation of state
1.7: Statistical Physics
Variational Calculus
1.1: Mechanics
vector
3.6: Electric Field Lines
4.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
Vector Addition
3.6: Electric Field Lines
vector components
2.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector
vector equation
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors
vectors
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectorsvertex
10.10: Spherical Mirrors
vertical line test
2.8: Functions
vertically polarized
9.4: Polarization
11.4: Polarization
vertigo
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
vestibulocochlear nerve
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts
virial theorem
1.1: Mechanics
virtual image
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors
visible light
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum
vision
10.17: A_Vision
V oigt profile
1.11: Plasma physics
voltage
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical
Potential Difference
4.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference
voltage drop
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel
voltmeter
6.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters
V on Karman
1.9: Transport Phenomena
V ortex
1.9: Transport Phenomena
V ortex state
1.12: Solid State Physics
V orticity
1.9: Transport PhenomenaW
wave equation
1.5: Waves
Wave functions
1.10: Quantum Physics
wave optics
10.8: Huygens’s Principle
waveguide
1.5: Waves
Waveplates
1.6: Optics
Waves in long conductors
1.4: Oscillations
Wheatstone bridge
6.7.6: Null Measurements
Wigner coefficients
1.13: Theory of Groups
X
xerography
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics
Y
Young double slit
11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference
Yukawa potential
1.14: Nuclear Physics
Z
Zeeman effect
1.10: Quantum Physics
zeros of a function
2.8: Functions
zeroth law of thermodynamics
1.8: Thermodynamics

Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

13.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8422413.1: Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: GSU-TM-Introductory Physics II (1112)
Webpages: 253
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial
All licenses found:
CC BY 4.0: 73.9% (187 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0: 12.6% (32 pages)
Undeclared: 9.9% (25 pages)
CC BY-SA 4.0: 2% (5 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 3.0: 0.8% (2 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 2.5: 0.4% (1 page)
CC BY 3.0: 0.4% (1 page)
By Page
GSU-TM-Introductory Physics II (1112) - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Introductory Physics II Book - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
Libre Texts - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: Introduction to Physics and Measurements - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.3: Measurements Uncertainty and Significant
Figures - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.4: Units and Standards - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.5: Unit Conversion - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.6: Dimensional Analysis - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
1.E: Practice - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2: Math Review - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.1: Introduction - CC BY-NC-SA 2.5
2.2: Geometrical Shapes - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.3: Triangles - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
- CC BY 4.02.5: Finding Angle Measurements - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.6: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines - CC BY-NC-SA
3.0
2.7: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.7.1: Solving Linera Equations - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.7.2: Solving Inequalities - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations - CC BY 4.0
2.7.4: Solving a System of Linear Equations - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule - CC BY 4.0
2.8: Functions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.8.1: Basic Functions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.8.4: Properties_of_Logarithms - CC BY 4.0
2.8.5: Exponential and Logarithmic Models - CC
BY-SA 4.0
2.9: Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

13.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/842242.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.5: Algebra of Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.6: Products of Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.7: Further Topics - Undeclared
2.9.E: Practice - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.10: Vectors - Undeclared
3: Electric Charge and Electric Field - CC BY 4.0
3.1: Introduction - CC BY 4.0
3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation of
Charge - CC BY 4.0
3.3: Conductors and Insulators - CC BY 4.0
3.4: Coulomb's Law - CC BY 4.0
3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited - CC
BY 4.0
3.6: Electric Field Lines - CC BY 4.0
3.7: Electric Forces in Biology - CC BY 4.0
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium - CC BY 4.0
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics - CC BY 4.0
3.10: Practice - CC BY 4.0
4: Electric Potential Energy, Electrical Potential or
V oltage, and Capacitance - CC BY 4.0
4.1: Introduction to Electric Potential and Electric
Energy - CC BY 4.0
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical Potential
Difference - CC BY 4.0
4.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field CC BY 4.0
4.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference - CC
BY 4.0
4.5: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge - CC
BY 4.0
4.6: Equipotential Lines - CC BY 4.0
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics - CC BY 4.0
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel - CC BY 4.0
4.9: Energy Stored in Capacitors - CC BY 4.0
4.E: Exercises - CC BY 4.0
5: Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law - CC BY
4.0
5.1: Introduction - CC BY 4.0
5.2: Current - CC BY 4.0
5.3: Electrical Current - CC BY 4.0
5.4: Model of Conduction in Metals - CC BY 4.0
5.5: Resistance and Resistivity - CC BY 4.0
5.6: Resistivity and Resistance - CC BY 4.0
5.7: Ohm's Law - CC BY 4.0
5.8: Electric Power and Energy - CC BY 4.05.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body - CC BY
4.0
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms - CC BY
4.0
5.11: Superconductors - CC BY 4.0
5.12: Practice - CC BY 4.0
5.A: Current and Resistance (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
5.E: Heat and Heat Transfer Methods (Exercise) - CC
BY 4.0
5.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
6: Resistive Networks - CC BY 4.0
6.1: Electromotive Force - CC BY 4.0
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel - CC BY 4.0
6.3: Kirchhoff's Rules - CC BY 4.0
6.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety - CC BY
4.0
6.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments - CC BY 4.0
6.6: RC Circuits - CC BY 4.0
6.7: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments - CC
BY 4.0
6.7.1: Prelude to Circuits and DC Instruments CC BY 4.0
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel - CC BY 4.0
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage CC BY 4.0
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules - CC BY 4.0
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters - CC BY 4.0
6.7.6: Null Measurements - CC BY 4.0
6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors - CC BY 4.0
6.7.E: Circuits and DC Instruments (Exercise) CC BY 4.0
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current - CC
BY 4.0
6.9: Practice - CC BY 4.0
6.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
7: Magnetism - CC BY 4.0
7.1: Introduction - CC BY 4.0
7.2: Magnets - CC BY 4.0
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets - CC BY 4.0
7.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines - CC
BY 4.0
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving
Charge in a Magnetic Field - CC BY 4.0
7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic FieldExamples and Applications - CC BY 4.0
7.7: The Hall Effect - CC BY 4.0
7.8: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor - CC BY 4.0

13.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/842247.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters CC BY 4.0
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law - CC BY 4.0
7.11: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Conductors - CC BY 4.0
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism - CC BY 4.0
7.E: Magnetism (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
8: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrica l
Technologies - CC BY 4.0
8.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Induction, AC
Circuits and Electrical Technologies - CC BY 4.0
8.2: RL Circuits - CC BY 4.0
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive - CC BY 4.0
8.4: RLC Series AC Circuits - CC BY 4.0
8.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux - CC BY 4.0
8.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law - CC
BY 4.0
8.7: Motional Emf - CC BY 4.0
8.8: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping - CC BY
4.0
8.9: Electric Generators - CC BY 4.0
8.10: Back Emf - CC BY 4.0
8.11: Transformers - CC BY 4.0
8.12: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices - CC
BY 4.0
8.13: Inductance - CC BY 4.0
8.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and
Electrical Technologies (Exercise) - CC BY 4.0
9: Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
9.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
9.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
- CC BY 4.0
9.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
9.4: Polarization - CC BY 4.0
9.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves - CC
BY 4.0
9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure - CC BY 4.0
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum - CC BY 4.0
9.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer) - CC BY 4.0
9.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
9.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
10: Geometrical Optics - CC BY 4.0
10.1: Prelude to The Nature of Light - CC BY 4.0
10.2: Prelude to Geometric Optics and Image
Formation - CC BY 4.0
10.3: The Propagation of Light - CC BY 4.0
10.4: The Law of Reflection - CC BY 4.0
10.5: Refraction - CC BY 4.010.6: Total Internal Reflection - CC BY 4.0
10.7: Dispersion - CC BY 4.0
10.8: Huygens’s Principle - CC BY 4.0
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors - CC BY 4.0
10.10: Spherical Mirrors - CC BY 4.0
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction - CC BY 4.0
10.12: Thin Lenses - CC BY 4.0
10.13: The Simple Magnifier - CC BY 4.0
10.14: The Camera - CC BY 4.0
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes - CC BY 4.0
10.16: The Eye - CC BY 4.0
10.17: A_Vision - CC BY 4.0
10.18: Processing_Visual_Information - CC BY 3.0
10.19: Chemistry_of_Vision - Undeclared
10.20: Vision_-_Anatomy_of_the_Eye - CC BY-SA
4.0
10.21: Vision_-_Transduction_of_Light - CC BY-SA
4.0
10.22: Visual_Processing - CC BY-SA 4.0
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts - CC BY-SA 4.0
10.24: Vision - CC BY 4.0
10.25: Physics_of_the_Eye - CC BY 4.0
10.26: Vision_Correction - CC BY 4.0
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision - CC BY 4.0
10.28: The_Human_Eye - Undeclared
10.29: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light Undeclared
10.A: The Nature of Light (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Answers) - CC BY 4.0
10.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
10.S: The Nature of Light (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Summary) - CC BY 4.0
11: Physical Optics - CC BY 4.0
11.1: Introduction to Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.2: Wave Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.3: The Wave Aspect of Light- Interference - CC
BY 4.0
11.4: Polarization - CC BY 4.0
11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.6: Mathematics of Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.7: Single-Slit Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
11.8: Double-Slit Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
11.9: Multiple-Slit Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.10: Diffraction Gratings - CC BY 4.0
11.11: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction - CC BY 4.0

13.1.4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/8422411.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution - CC BY 4.0
11.13: Interference in Thin Films - CC BY 4.0
11.14: Thin Film Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.15: X-Ray Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
11.16: Holography - CC BY 4.0
11.17: The Michelson Interferometer - CC BY 4.0
11.18: Interference (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
11.18.A: Diffraction (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
11.E: Interference (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
1.E: Diffraction (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
11.S: Interference (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
1.S: Diffraction (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
12: Nuclear Physics - CC BY 4.0
12.1: Introduction to Nuclear Physics - CC BY 4.0
12.2: Properties of Nuclei - CC BY 4.0
12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy - CC BY 4.0
12.4: Radioactive Decay - CC BY 4.0
12.5: Nuclear Reactions - CC BY 4.0
12.6: Fission - CC BY 4.0
12.7: Nuclear Fusion - CC BY 4.0
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation - CC BY 4.0
12.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
12.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
12.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
Back Matter - Undeclared
14: Appendix A- Units - Undeclared
13.1: Appendix B- Conversion Factors - Undeclared
13.1: Appendix C- Fundamental Constants Undeclared
13.1: Appendix D- Periodic Table of the Elements CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
13.1: Appendix E - Half-Lives for Several Isotopes CC BY-NC-SA 4.013.1: Appendix F- Mathematical Formulas Undeclared
13.1: Appendix G- The Greek Alphabet - Undeclared
13.1: Appendix H- Astronomical Data - Undeclared
13.B: Appendix I- Some Equations and Constants CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
13.1: Appendix J- Physics Formulas (Wevers) - CC
BY 4.0
1.1: Mechanics - CC BY 4.0
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism - CC BY 4.0
1.3: Relativity - CC BY 4.0
1.4: Oscillations - CC BY 4.0
1.5: Waves - CC BY 4.0
1.6: Optics - CC BY 4.0
1.7: Statistical Physics - CC BY 4.0
1.8: Thermodynamics - CC BY 4.0
1.9: Transport Phenomena - CC BY 4.0
1.10: Quantum Physics - CC BY 4.0
1.11: Plasma physics - CC BY 4.0
1.12: Solid State Physics - CC BY 4.0
1.13: Theory of Groups - CC BY 4.0
1.14: Nuclear Physics - CC BY 4.0
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
- CC BY 4.0
1.16: Astrophysics - CC BY 4.0
1.17: Physical Constants, Units, Del Operator CC BY 4.0
1.17.1: Physical Constants - CC BY 4.0
1.17.2: Prefixes for Powers of 10 - CC BY 4.0
1.17.3: SI Units - CC BY 4.0
1.17.4: The Del-operator - CC BY 4.0
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
13.1: Detailed Licensing - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/90355Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: GSU-TM-Introductory Physics II (1112)
Webpages: 253
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial
All licenses found:
CC BY 4.0: 73.9% (187 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0: 12.6% (32 pages)
Undeclared: 9.9% (25 pages)
CC BY-SA 4.0: 2% (5 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 3.0: 0.8% (2 pages)
CC BY-NC-SA 2.5: 0.4% (1 page)
CC BY 3.0: 0.4% (1 page)
By Page
GSU-TM-Introductory Physics II (1112) - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Introductory Physics II Book - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
Libre Texts - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: Introduction to Physics and Measurements - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
1.1: The Scientific Method and Physics - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
1.2: Thinking Like a Scientist - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.3: Measurements Uncertainty and Significant
Figures - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.4: Units and Standards - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.5: Unit Conversion - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.6: Dimensional Analysis - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.7: How to Solve Problems in this Course - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
1.E: Practice - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2: Math Review - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.1: Introduction - CC BY-NC-SA 2.5
2.2: Geometrical Shapes - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.3: Triangles - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
2.4: The Rectangular Coordinate Systems and Graphs
- CC BY 4.02.5: Finding Angle Measurements - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.6: Parallel and Perpendicular Lines - CC BY-NC-SA
3.0
2.7: Solving Linear Equations and Inequalities - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.7.1: Solving Linera Equations - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.7.2: Solving Inequalities - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.7.3: Solving Quadratic Equations - CC BY 4.0
2.7.4: Solving a System of Linear Equations - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.7.5: Solving a System of Linear Equations with
Cramer's Rule - CC BY 4.0
2.8: Functions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.8.1: Basic Functions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.8.2: Trigonometric Functions - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.8.3: Exponential_and_Logarithmic_Functions CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.8.4: Properties_of_Logarithms - CC BY 4.0
2.8.5: Exponential and Logarithmic Models - CC
BY-SA 4.0
2.9: Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.1: Review of Trigonometry - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.9.2: Right Angle Triangle Trigonometry - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.3: Scalars and Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/903552.9.4: Coordinate Systems and Components of a
Vector - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.5: Algebra of Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.6: Products of Vectors - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.9.7: Further Topics - Undeclared
2.9.E: Practice - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.10: Vectors - Undeclared
3: Electric Charge and Electric Field - CC BY 4.0
3.1: Introduction - CC BY 4.0
3.2: Static Electricity and Charge - Conservation of
Charge - CC BY 4.0
3.3: Conductors and Insulators - CC BY 4.0
3.4: Coulomb's Law - CC BY 4.0
3.5: Electric Field- Concept of a Field Revisited - CC
BY 4.0
3.6: Electric Field Lines - CC BY 4.0
3.7: Electric Forces in Biology - CC BY 4.0
3.8: Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium - CC BY 4.0
3.9: Applications of Electrostatics - CC BY 4.0
3.10: Practice - CC BY 4.0
4: Electric Potential Energy, Electrical Potential or
V oltage, and Capacitance - CC BY 4.0
4.1: Introduction to Electric Potential and Electric
Energy - CC BY 4.0
4.2: Electric Potential Energy and Electrical Potential
Difference - CC BY 4.0
4.3: Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field CC BY 4.0
4.4: Electric Potential and Potential Difference - CC
BY 4.0
4.5: Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge - CC
BY 4.0
4.6: Equipotential Lines - CC BY 4.0
4.7: Capacitors and Dielectrics - CC BY 4.0
4.8: Capacitors in Series and Parallel - CC BY 4.0
4.9: Energy Stored in Capacitors - CC BY 4.0
4.E: Exercises - CC BY 4.0
5: Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law - CC BY
4.0
5.1: Introduction - CC BY 4.0
5.2: Current - CC BY 4.0
5.3: Electrical Current - CC BY 4.0
5.4: Model of Conduction in Metals - CC BY 4.0
5.5: Resistance and Resistivity - CC BY 4.0
5.6: Resistivity and Resistance - CC BY 4.0
5.7: Ohm's Law - CC BY 4.0
5.8: Electric Power and Energy - CC BY 4.05.9: Electric Hazards and the Human Body - CC BY
4.0
5.10: Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms - CC BY
4.0
5.11: Superconductors - CC BY 4.0
5.12: Practice - CC BY 4.0
5.A: Current and Resistance (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
5.E: Heat and Heat Transfer Methods (Exercise) - CC
BY 4.0
5.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
6: Resistive Networks - CC BY 4.0
6.1: Electromotive Force - CC BY 4.0
6.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel - CC BY 4.0
6.3: Kirchhoff's Rules - CC BY 4.0
6.4: Household Wiring and Electrical Safety - CC BY
4.0
6.5: Electrical Measuring Instruments - CC BY 4.0
6.6: RC Circuits - CC BY 4.0
6.7: Circuits, Bioelectricity, and DC Instruments - CC
BY 4.0
6.7.1: Prelude to Circuits and DC Instruments CC BY 4.0
6.7.2: Resistors in Series and Parallel - CC BY 4.0
6.7.3: Electromotive Force - Terminal V oltage CC BY 4.0
6.7.4: Kirchhoff’s Rules - CC BY 4.0
6.7.5: DC V oltmeters and Ammeters - CC BY 4.0
6.7.6: Null Measurements - CC BY 4.0
6.7.7: DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors - CC BY 4.0
6.7.E: Circuits and DC Instruments (Exercise) CC BY 4.0
6.8: Alternating Current versus Direct Current - CC
BY 4.0
6.9: Practice - CC BY 4.0
6.S: Summary - CC BY 4.0
7: Magnetism - CC BY 4.0
7.1: Introduction - CC BY 4.0
7.2: Magnets - CC BY 4.0
7.3: Ferromagnets and Electromagnets - CC BY 4.0
7.4: Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines - CC
BY 4.0
7.5: Magnetic Field Strength- Force on a Moving
Charge in a Magnetic Field - CC BY 4.0
7.6: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic FieldExamples and Applications - CC BY 4.0
7.7: The Hall Effect - CC BY 4.0
7.8: Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor - CC BY 4.0

3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/903557.9: Torque on a Current Loop - Motors and Meters CC BY 4.0
7.10: Magnetic Fields Produced by CurrentsAmpere’s Law - CC BY 4.0
7.11: Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Conductors - CC BY 4.0
7.12: More Applications of Magnetism - CC BY 4.0
7.E: Magnetism (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
8: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrica l
Technologies - CC BY 4.0
8.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Induction, AC
Circuits and Electrical Technologies - CC BY 4.0
8.2: RL Circuits - CC BY 4.0
8.3: Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive - CC BY 4.0
8.4: RLC Series AC Circuits - CC BY 4.0
8.5: Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux - CC BY 4.0
8.6: Faraday’s Law of Induction- Lenz’s Law - CC
BY 4.0
8.7: Motional Emf - CC BY 4.0
8.8: Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping - CC BY
4.0
8.9: Electric Generators - CC BY 4.0
8.10: Back Emf - CC BY 4.0
8.11: Transformers - CC BY 4.0
8.12: Electrical Safety - Systems and Devices - CC
BY 4.0
8.13: Inductance - CC BY 4.0
8.E: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and
Electrical Technologies (Exercise) - CC BY 4.0
9: Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
9.1: Prelude to Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
9.2: Maxwell’s Equations and Electromagnetic Waves
- CC BY 4.0
9.3: Plane Electromagnetic Waves - CC BY 4.0
9.4: Polarization - CC BY 4.0
9.5: Energy Carried by Electromagnetic Waves - CC
BY 4.0
9.6: Momentum and Radiation Pressure - CC BY 4.0
9.7: The Electromagnetic Spectrum - CC BY 4.0
9.A: Electromagnetic Waves (Answer) - CC BY 4.0
9.E: Electromagnetic Waves (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
9.S: Electromagnetic Waves (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
10: Geometrical Optics - CC BY 4.0
10.1: Prelude to The Nature of Light - CC BY 4.0
10.2: Prelude to Geometric Optics and Image
Formation - CC BY 4.0
10.3: The Propagation of Light - CC BY 4.0
10.4: The Law of Reflection - CC BY 4.0
10.5: Refraction - CC BY 4.010.6: Total Internal Reflection - CC BY 4.0
10.7: Dispersion - CC BY 4.0
10.8: Huygens’s Principle - CC BY 4.0
10.9: Images Formed by Plane Mirrors - CC BY 4.0
10.10: Spherical Mirrors - CC BY 4.0
10.11: Images Formed by Refraction - CC BY 4.0
10.12: Thin Lenses - CC BY 4.0
10.13: The Simple Magnifier - CC BY 4.0
10.14: The Camera - CC BY 4.0
10.15: Microscopes and Telescopes - CC BY 4.0
10.16: The Eye - CC BY 4.0
10.17: A_Vision - CC BY 4.0
10.18: Processing_Visual_Information - CC BY 3.0
10.19: Chemistry_of_Vision - Undeclared
10.20: Vision_-_Anatomy_of_the_Eye - CC BY-SA
4.0
10.21: Vision_-_Transduction_of_Light - CC BY-SA
4.0
10.22: Visual_Processing - CC BY-SA 4.0
10.23: Eye_and_Ear_Basic_Concepts - CC BY-SA 4.0
10.24: Vision - CC BY 4.0
10.25: Physics_of_the_Eye - CC BY 4.0
10.26: Vision_Correction - CC BY 4.0
10.27: Color_and_Color_Vision - CC BY 4.0
10.28: The_Human_Eye - Undeclared
10.29: Photoreceptors/Vision_and_Light Undeclared
10.A: The Nature of Light (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
1.A: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Answers) - CC BY 4.0
10.E: The Nature of Light (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
1.E: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
10.S: The Nature of Light (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
1.S: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
(Summary) - CC BY 4.0
11: Physical Optics - CC BY 4.0
11.1: Introduction to Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.2: Wave Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.3: The Wave Aspect of Light- Interference - CC
BY 4.0
11.4: Polarization - CC BY 4.0
11.5: Young's Double-Slit Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.6: Mathematics of Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.7: Single-Slit Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
11.8: Double-Slit Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
11.9: Multiple-Slit Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.10: Diffraction Gratings - CC BY 4.0
11.11: Huygens's Principle - Diffraction - CC BY 4.0

4 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/9035511.12: Circular Apertures and Resolution - CC BY 4.0
11.13: Interference in Thin Films - CC BY 4.0
11.14: Thin Film Interference - CC BY 4.0
11.15: X-Ray Diffraction - CC BY 4.0
11.16: Holography - CC BY 4.0
11.17: The Michelson Interferometer - CC BY 4.0
11.18: Interference (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
11.18.A: Diffraction (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
11.E: Interference (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
1.E: Diffraction (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
11.S: Interference (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
1.S: Diffraction (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
12: Nuclear Physics - CC BY 4.0
12.1: Introduction to Nuclear Physics - CC BY 4.0
12.2: Properties of Nuclei - CC BY 4.0
12.3: Nuclear Binding Energy - CC BY 4.0
12.4: Radioactive Decay - CC BY 4.0
12.5: Nuclear Reactions - CC BY 4.0
12.6: Fission - CC BY 4.0
12.7: Nuclear Fusion - CC BY 4.0
12.8: Medical Applications and Biological Effects of
Nuclear Radiation - CC BY 4.0
12.A: Nuclear Physics (Answers) - CC BY 4.0
12.E: Nuclear Physics (Exercises) - CC BY 4.0
12.S: Nuclear Physics (Summary) - CC BY 4.0
Back Matter - Undeclared
14: Appendix A- Units - Undeclared
13.1: Appendix B- Conversion Factors - Undeclared
13.1: Appendix C- Fundamental Constants Undeclared
13.1: Appendix D- Periodic Table of the Elements CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
13.1: Appendix E - Half-Lives for Several Isotopes CC BY-NC-SA 4.013.1: Appendix F- Mathematical Formulas Undeclared
13.1: Appendix G- The Greek Alphabet - Undeclared
13.1: Appendix H- Astronomical Data - Undeclared
13.B: Appendix I- Some Equations and Constants CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
13.1: Appendix J- Physics Formulas (Wevers) - CC
BY 4.0
1.1: Mechanics - CC BY 4.0
1.2: Electricity and Magnetism - CC BY 4.0
1.3: Relativity - CC BY 4.0
1.4: Oscillations - CC BY 4.0
1.5: Waves - CC BY 4.0
1.6: Optics - CC BY 4.0
1.7: Statistical Physics - CC BY 4.0
1.8: Thermodynamics - CC BY 4.0
1.9: Transport Phenomena - CC BY 4.0
1.10: Quantum Physics - CC BY 4.0
1.11: Plasma physics - CC BY 4.0
1.12: Solid State Physics - CC BY 4.0
1.13: Theory of Groups - CC BY 4.0
1.14: Nuclear Physics - CC BY 4.0
1.15: Quantum Field Theory and Particle Physics
- CC BY 4.0
1.16: Astrophysics - CC BY 4.0
1.17: Physical Constants, Units, Del Operator CC BY 4.0
1.17.1: Physical Constants - CC BY 4.0
1.17.2: Prefixes for Powers of 10 - CC BY 4.0
1.17.3: SI Units - CC BY 4.0
1.17.4: The Del-operator - CC BY 4.0
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
13.1: Detailed Licensing - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared