PHYSICS 9C LAB
MANUAL
Tom Weideman
University of California, Davis

UCD: Physics 9C Lab

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 02/11/2026

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23093TABLE OF CONTENTS
Licensing
Read Me: About Labs in Physics 9
Lab 1: Static Electric Charge
1.1: Background Material
1.2: Activities
Lab 2: Electrostatic Potential
2.1: Background Material
2.2: Activities
Lab 3: Capacitors
3.1: Background Material
3.2: Activities
Lab 4: DC Circuits
4.1: Background Material
4.2: Activities
Lab 5: RC Circuits
5.1: Background Material
5.2: Activities
Lab 6: Engineering with Magnetism
6.1: Background Material
6.2: Activities
Lab 7: Electromagnetic Induction
7.1: Background Material
7.2: Activities
Lab 8: Inductance
8.1: Background Material
8.2: Activities
Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/65509Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Lab 1: Static Electric Charge
1.1: Background Material
1.2: Activities
This page titled Lab 1: Static Electric Charge is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

1.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/593461.1: Background Material
Text References
electric charge and force
dipoles
conductors
Producing Static Charge
For this lab, you will need a means for producing larg e amounts of static charge. All of the most effective methods with common
household items consist of cloth-rubbing insulating materials such as plastic, acrylic, rubber, and latex. Various materials can also
be used as the rubbing cloth, including natural fibe rs like wool or cotton, as well as synthetic materials like polyester and nylon, or
blends between both. Different rubbing materials may work better with certain insulating materials, and you may want to
experiment to determine what works best.
Removing Static Charge
In order to keep controls on your experiments, you may wish to remove charge from something you have already charged. Th ere
are a couple of useful methods for this. The first i nvolves humidity. It turns out that water molecules i n the air are quite effective at
picking up static charge off surfaces, and carrying them away. This explains why, in colder northern clima tes, static discharges, like
shocks to fingers when touching doorknobs, are more c ommon in the winter, when the humidity is significantl y lower. If you are
doing this lab in a humid climate, you may find it c hallenging to keep an object charged for any signifi cant period of time. Anyway,
this does provide a means for removing charge – breathing hot breath on the object a few times often does the trick. Touch ing the
object on a grounded metal like a water faucet can a lso help, though since the object is an insulator, you will want to make contact
with as many places on the rod as possible, as the charge will no t flow across the insulator to a single point of contact.
This page titled 1.1: Background Material is shared under a CC BY-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman.

1.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/593471.2: Activities
Equipment
scotch tape
drinking straws and cups
balloons
foam pads
aluminum foil balls on thread
plastic tubes
pvc pipe segments
plastic bottles
aluminum cans
The General Idea
This lab is all about static electric charge. We are going to explore three elements of this phenomenon, t hough this exploration will
be observational, and not quantitative like most of our experiments are. These three elements are:
1. Cataloging the signs of charge accumulated on variou s objects.
2. Recording the importance of the specific action on the sign of charge accumulated (can one object be made to hol d different
signs of charge if different actions are taken?).
3. Examining the difference between how insulators (non-m etals) and conductors (metals) behave with static charge present.
Atoms are neutrally-charged, but we can separate a fe w of the electrons from their atoms, making the objec t where the electrons
accumulate negatively-charged, and the object from which they were taken positively-charged. We will do this with "surface
interactions" – namely, friction and adhesion (pulli ng sticky tape from a surface). We won't know specifi cally when we charge
something positive or negative, but if we define one case as "positive," we can use attractive or repulsiv e static electric force to
determine the signs of all the other charge accumulatio ns we manage to create.
Some Things to Think About
You will need to create what is essentially a "detector. " This is just something that you can use to observe the
attraction/repulsion of the charges you are cataloging. This detector should have the following properties:
It should be sensitive. That is, it should move easily and unambiguously under t he influence of a static electric attraction or
repulsion.
The sign of charge held on this detector needs to be con sistent and repeatable. It is a disaster for consistent resu lts if your
detector has a positive sign at the start of your experime nt and a negative charge at the end. Note that this means th at if you
need to "recharge" it, you better do it exactly as you did the first time.
Always remain aware of your procedures. Electric charge c an be carried on your hands, for example. One good rule of thumb
is to always "discharge" objects and your hands before em barking on a new measurement. Probably the best way to do th is is
with humidity – hot breath provides water vapor that picks up spare charge and carries it into the air. Another is to tou ch a
"grounded conductor" such as a chalk tray, or doorknob, but keep in mind that this will tend to only discharge t he part of your
insulator that comes in contact with it, and charge can be left elsewhere on it.
The scotch tape is particularly interesting. Sticking it to a surface and pulling it off suddenly will charge it, and different signs
of charge can be produced for different surfaces. You h ave lots of surfaces to work with to see this in action (a nd you can even
pull two pieces of tape apart!).
Aluminum cans don't require a lot of force to get them rol ling, so laying them on their sides may produce some i nteresting
results. In particular, try attracting/repelling a can that you have not charged at all. Try it with both signs of c harge. Can you
explain the result? Ask your TA if you have the explanat ion right.
Your lab report should include a catalog (perhaps in tabul ar form?) of objects that you charged, the specifics of how
you charged them, and the sign of the charge (relative t o your detector, which you can define as "positive") in eac h case. It

1.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/59347should also give an account of what you observed with a co nductor like the aluminum can, along with some specula tion about
what might be happening in that case.
Lab Report
Craft a lab report for these activities and analysis, making sure to include every contributing group m ember's name on the front
page. You are strongly encouraged to refer back to the Read Me as you do this, to make sure that you are not leaving out anything
important. You should also feel free to get feedback from your lab TA whenever you find that your group is at an impa sse.
Every member of the group must upload a separate digi tal copy of the report to their lab assignment in Ca nvas prior to leaving the
lab classroom. These reports are not to be written outside the lab settin g.
Controls
There are only a few things to keep in mind in order to keep your experiment under control. Remembering to neutralize charge
between tests, as mentioned above is one of them. Anot her has to do with when the experiment turns to condu ctors. As these
materials will allow charge to flow through them, a sin gle point of contact is enough to discharge the ent ire object, so if you wish to
keep a conductor charged, you will want to insulate it from its surroundings. Also, don't forget that your own body can collect and
distribute charge. It is not a great conductor, but i f in one part of the experiment you collected charg e on your fingertips, this charge
could have an adverse effect on a later part of the expe riment.
Also keep in mind that after a cloth is used to rub the insulator, the cloth is charged (charge is conserved, so if there is net charge
on the insulator, there is the opposite net charge o n the cloth). If that cloth is reused, it may deposi t charge and have the opposite of
the desired effect. Humidity should help with this as well.
This page titled 1.2: Activities is shared under a CC BY-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Lab 2: Electrostatic Potential
2.1: Background Material
2.2: Activities
This page titled Lab 2: Electrostatic Potential is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

2.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/593492.1: Background Material
Text References
force and potential energy
electric fields at conducting surfaces
relationship between electric potential and field, equip otential surfaces
using graphs to determine functional dependence
Potentials in General
It's quite possible that you are taking on this week 's lab without having seen the topic of electric pote ntial in lecture (or perhaps you
have seen it only briefly). Given that this is a lab about electric potential, this might seem to pose a problem, but a brief review of
the concept of potential energy from Physics 9A (see the first text reference above) should be sufficie nt to get you where you need
to be for this lab.
In Physics 9A, we linked the ideas of potential energy and force. We found that the force vector at a poin t in space is determined
from the gradient of the potential energy function at that point. In conceptual terms, it works like this: Place yourself at a point in
space, and note the potential energy at that positi on. Then turn around and around, noting the nearby potential energies that you see
in every direction. Whichever direction points to the nearby potential energy that is the biggest drop from where you are
positioned, that is the direction that the force is exe rted.
If you turn to look in a direction in which the pote ntial energy doesn't change at all, then there is no component of the force in that
direction. If you start traveling around in the sp ace, always moving in directions where the potential remains the same, then your
motion is confined to something called an equipotential surface. With no component of the force acting parallel t o the
equipotential surface, the total force vector must be p erpendicular to it.
Now in Physics 9C, we are using language we did not use in Physics 9A. What we called a "potential energy functi on" we now
refer to as a "scalar field." Note that it means the very same thing – every point in space has associate d with it a scalar number. The
force vectors we derived from gradients of this field are different at every point in space, so with a vect or defined at every point in
space, we refer to that as a "vector field." The on ly other leap we take in Physics 9C is that we use a sc alar field that is not
potential energy, and a vector field that is not fo rce. Instead, they are electrostatic potential and el ectric field, respectively. They
have different physical meanings and are measured with different units than their 9A counterparts, but the basic ideas are exactly
the same: There are equipotential surfaces – surfaces of equal electrostatic potential (voltage) – and a vector (electric) field that
is perpendicular to those surfaces everywhere.
Measuring Device for Potential Differences
This week's lab involves a voltage supply connected to a pair of conductors that can come in different sha pes. One conductor will
be held at a lower potential, and the other at a hig her potential. This potential difference will produce an electric field between the
two conductors, which is manifested as a continuously-vary ing electric potential in the space separating them.
We will use a device called a multimeter to measure the potential difference between two poin ts in our apparatus. We will be
measuring AC voltages (we will not worry about what "AC" m eans, or why we use it for this lab) in the 0-20 volt r ange, so the
setting to use on the multimeter is, unsurprisingly, AC 2 0V (in the "V~" section).
Figure 2.1.1 – Multimeter

2.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/59349
The two ports where you plug the probe wires are the b lack "COM", and the red " ". In order to measure a pot ential difference
between two points in the apparatus, the leads (probe wires) o f the multimeter need to touch those two points.
Apparatus
In order to create a potential field that we can mea sure with this device, we will connect two conductors to sources of positive and
negative charge, and probe the region between them t o map surfaces of equal potential. The multimeter c an't measure the
potentials in the air between the conductors, but it can do it in water, so the two conductors are positioned i nside a tray with a thin
layer of water in it.
We obviously cannot mark the points in the water tha t we have probed, so we have a piece of graph paper p ositioned beneath the
transparent tray that we can use to note the location we have probed, and an identical piece of graph pap er where we can record the
positions of our measurements.
Figure 2.1.2 – The Apparatus

2.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/59349Equipotential Surfaces
At least part of this lab will consist of determining the equipotential surfaces. As with all potentials, we need to set a zero reference
point. We know that conductors are equipotentials (i. e. every point on and in a piece of metal is at the same potential), so we will
declare one of the two conductors in the apparatus t o be at potential. It is standard practice to call such a place the "ground"
and it is labeled with a symbol resembling this:
. You will find just such a label on the Pasco box. If you connect the "COM"
probe of the multimeter (with an alligator clip) to the conductor connected to this ground, then the oth er probe will measure the
potential of other positions relative to that groun d. Note that in the picture above, both probes are t ouching the same conductor, so
the potential difference shown on the multimeter display is zero.
To find surfaces of equal potential (well, as we are co nfined to measuring in two dimensions, these are actua lly curved lines rather
than surfaces), we only need to choose a potential (say 1 volt), and probe different positions in the wate r until the multimeter reads
1 volt, and record that position on the transcripti on paper. With several points recorded, we can "connect -the-dots" with a smooth
curve to trace the equipotential. Then we can move o n to 2 volts, 3 volts, and so on. With each of the c onductors itself being an
equipotential, we should expect the equipotential surfac es to gradually "morph" from one conductor to the other.
This page titled 2.1: Background Material is shared under a CC BY-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman.

2.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/593502.2: Activities
Equipment
clear plastic tray containing a thin layer of water
aluminum electrodes (one flat, one small cylinder, one large cylinder)
multimeter with probe wire
Pasco box and laptop
graph paper template
data sheet
wires
alligator clips
The General Idea
There are two parts to this lab. In the first part, your goal is simply to map the equipotential surface s of integer voltages (,
, etc.) that exist between two conductors (electrodes) – one flat, and one a small cylinder – across which a total potential
difference of approximately has been created. You s hould show that this map is consistent with the fact t hat the electrodes
are themselves equipotentials, and use the map to ap proximate the electric field lines that pass between the t wo electrodes.
The second part of the lab is more quantitative, and seeks to experimentally settle the following dispute: If we arrange two
cylindrical electrodes coaxially, then we find that the equipotential surfaces are (unsurprisingly) cir cular, centered at the common
axis of the electrodes. But we also notice that unlike equipotentials between parallel flat electrodes, the se circular equipotentials
are not equally-spaced. Both parties in the dispute agree that this reflects the fact that the electric field gets weaker as the position
gets farther from the axis (measured by the radial d istance from that axis), but one group claims that the field gets weaker in
proportion to, while the other group claims it gets weaker in proportion to. By making measurements of v oltage at many
distances from the axis, you will use graphical techniques to determine which of these assertions is correct.
Some Things to Think About
Warnings
No, you don't have to worry about being electrocuted in th is lab, though your instincts about mixing electricity a nd water are
good ones!
Don't let the electrodes touch each other when the power is on, as this will short the Pasco output.
Setup – You should be familiar with most of this from the Background Material:
Connect one wire to the flat electrode and one to the s mall circular electrode using the alligator clips, and th e plug the other
ends of the wires into the
and
ports of the Pasco box.
Place the appropriate template face-up under the transpar ent tray, add a thin (no more than a quarter-inch) layer of water to
the tray, and place the two electrodes into the tray direc tly above their template positions.
Connect the wire from the black "COM" port of the multimeter to one of the electrodes using an alligator clip, and conn ect
the probe wire to the red " " port of the multimeter.
Put the multimeter into the setting in the "~V" sector of the dial.
Make sure the laptop is connected to the Pasco box through th e USB cable, start it up, and in the 9C folder on the desktop,
run the "Electrostatic_Potential" application. You sh ould not change any of the default settings. Turn the power on when
you are ready to take data.
The data sheet provided has one side for transcribing points of the equipotentials in part 1, and a handy table avai lable for
recording data for part 2.
Part 1
You should confirm that the minimum and maximum potent ials are where you think they are.
Note that while you will stick the point of the probe into the plastic below the surface of the water, it is the water where the
potential is being measured, which means you will want to make sure that the probe tip is vertical when taking a measurement

2.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/59350(you will note that in regions where the potential is ch anging very fast, slanting the tip of the probe can account f or a substantial
potential difference compared to the vertical).
Mark several points at each integer voltage, though you will f ind that there are weird effects that occur near the edge s of the
water (edges of regions always cause issues with electric fiel ds), so you may not want to record points too close to the edges.
In your lab report, you should include:
a picture of your logged data points, along with the sket ched equipotential lines they create, and a sketch of t he electric field
lines derived from these equipotentials
analysis of how the equipotentials and field lines "make se nse"
Part 2
The most important thing to keep in mind here is that the two prospective theories are about the electric field, bu t what you will
be measuring is electric potentials – these are not the same thing, and you will need to "translate" between the two before you
can even decide which graphs you need to generate! [Reminder:, so given the functions you are testing for
, what are you testing for?]
This is the quantitative portion of the lab – you are not restricted to integer potentials, nor are you looking to sketch
equipotentials. This should make the acquisition of data easier than in part 1. Nevertheless, it would be a good ide a to
informally confirm that the equipotentials are roughly wh at you expect them to be.
As you are only looking for a functional dependence, you c an use whatever units of length measurement you wish. You mig ht
find "grid squares" easier to work with than (say) centimete rs.
Use the usual online graphing calculator for the best-fit lines. Here is a reminder of how to use this tool:
click the "+" button in the upper-left corner and select "table"
enter the values you wish to graph (those that reflect the f unctional dependence you are testing, not the raw values you
recorded!)
include a formula in the next box that looks like:, and a best-fit line will be drawn through the points (the
subscripts are added by inserting an underscore: " " is " _1 ")
In your lab report, you should include at least:
your table of recorded values
best fit line graphs for the two proposed "theories", alon g with a conclusion of which one fits better
analysis/discussion of the result
As an extra "bonus," you can explore what is going-on inside the center ring. Do you expect there to be an electric field in
there? From your answer to this question, what would you expect to find the potential to look like in there? Go ahead a nd test
it! If you think you have it figured out, this is your chan ce to show-off to your TA – see if they confirm your brill iant
conclusions.
Lab Report
Craft a lab report for these activities and analysis, making sure to include every contributing group m ember's name on the front
page. You are strongly encouraged to refer back to the Read Me as you do this, to make sure that you are not leaving out anything
important. You should also feel free to get feedback from your lab TA whenever you find that your group is at an impa sse.
Every member of the group must upload a separate digi tal copy of the report to their lab assignment in Ca nvas prior to leaving the
lab classroom. These reports are not to be written outside the lab settin g.
This page titled 2.2: Activities is shared under a CC BY-SA license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Lab 3: Capacitors
3.1: Background Material
3.2: Activities
This page titled Lab 3: Capacitors is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

3.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/578173.1: Background Material
Text References
networks of capacitors
The Equipment
There are a number of things one needs to know about the equ ipment in order to navigate this lab without mishaps.
Safety and Good Habits
The first thing to remember is that the main purpose of a capacitor electrical component is to store elect rical energy, often so that it
can be discharged quickly. While the capacitors you are using do not boast of large capacitances, nor wil l we charge them using a
high voltage, it is a good idea to get in the habit of never (intentionally or accidentally) completin g a circuit involving yourself and
the two leads of a capacitor. (This includes when you think it is uncharged.) When you are done using a capaci tor (i.e. between
experiments) it is good practice to discharge it com pletely by connecting a wire across is. This not onl y removes any possible
shock danger, but also gives you a capacitor whose state of charge you know about for the next experiment.
Polarity of Capacitors
The capacitors you will be using in this lab contain an electrolyte. This particular design of capacito r has a "polarity", which means
that it only charges properly in one direction – yo u need to connect a specific lead of the capacitor to the (+) side of a charging
battery, and the other lead to the (–) side. Connect ing them backward not only causes them to function imp roperly, but in extreme
cases can ruin the component. You will use capacitors connected to a plastic component board, and their l eads are colored red
(positive) and black (negative). When connected to a battery, the signs of the capacitor leads need t o be matched to those of the
battery (positive-to-positive, negative-to-negative). You will also use some loose capacitors, and the pol arity of those is determined
by the length of the wires protruding from them – the longer of the two leads is the positive one.
Figure 3.1.1 – Component Board
Figure 3.1.2 – Loose Capacitors

3.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/57817
The "Battery"
The device you will be using for a battery doesn't lo ok like any battery you have seen before (the wire c oming from it that plugs
into an outlet is a dead giveaway). While it is clea rly drawing electrical energy from the outlet, this nevertheless behaves exactly
like a battery – it provides a fixed voltage for cir cuits. And it has the added bonus that it doesn't r un down and end up in a landfill.
While the voltage is supposed to be 9 volts, it will no t be precisely this, and as usual, you will want to d o a pre-experiment
calibration check by measuring the true voltage directly with the multimeter.
The Multimeter
We will be measuring DC voltages in the 0-20 volt rang e, so the setting to use on the multimeter is, unsurp risingly, DC 20V. The
two ports where you plug the probe wires are the black "COM", and the red " ".
Figure 3.1.3 – Multimeter
Measuring Capacitance
This lab involves testing what we have learned about c apacitance, and using this knowledge to compute unknown capacitance. The
"obvious" way to measure the capacitance of a compon ent is to put a known voltage across it, then measure t he charge that
accumulates, and compute the ratio. The problem with this plan is that while we have a multimeter to measu re voltage, we
don't have a device to measure charge on a capacito r plate. So instead what we will do is use what we know to

3.1.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/57817measure relative capacitance, and then is this to compare an unknown capacitance with a known one. For example, if we know t hat
two capacitors possess equal charge (how do we assure t his?), and we happen to know the voltages across each o f them (measured
by a multimeter), then we can compute the ratio of their capacitances:
So if we know one of the capacitances, we also know the other.
This page titled 3.1: Background Material is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

3.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/578183.2: Activities
Equipment
component board
9V DC power supply ("battery")
multimeter
loose capacitors
wires
alligator clips
The General Idea
There are two parts to this lab. In the first part, you are given two different capacitors from a manufactu rer who asks that you
check that they have capacitances in approximately t he correct ratio. In part 2, you are given a known capacitor and must use it to
find the approximate capacitance of another unknown capacitor. For confirmation purposes, you are asked to do this latter
measurement two different ways. One of these ways must involve charging one capacitor with another (rather than charging both
with the battery). In both cases, all you have at your dis posal to work with is a battery and a voltmeter.
Some Things to Think About
Part 1
In the Background Material, a way of comparing capacitance ratios is discussed. How can we be assured of charging both
capacitors equally?
You are told that the ratio of the two capacitances of t he capacitors on the component board is supposed to be 0.47.
The percentage uncertainty in capacitances acceptable to the manufacturer that has hired you is fairly large – abo ut 15%.
Discuss whether the ratio you find is "correct" to within t his tolerance
Indicate which capacitor is the one with the larger of the two capacitances.
Part 2
You now are told that the larger of the two capacitances o n the component board is.
Choose one of the three varieties of loose capacitors to m easure.
Use the alligator clips to make connections with the loos e capacitor, and be sure to observe proper polarity!
Naturally one method you can use is the same as part 1. Bu t you will have to give some thought about how to perform t he
second measurement. Obviously to charge one capacitor with another, the first capacitor needs to already be charg ed, and this
you will do with the battery. Again, when connecting the ch arged capacitor with the uncharged one, make sure they ar e
connected positive-to-positive, negative-to-negative.
When you charge one capacitor with the battery, does it matt er which one you choose to charge?
Your capacitor-charges-capacitor calculation will depe nd upon starting with one capacitor uncharged, so you need to make sure
that this is true by shorting it beforehand.
Lab Report
Craft a lab report for these activities and analysis, making sure to include every contributing group m ember's name on the front
page. You are strongly encouraged to refer back to the Read Me as you do this, to make sure that you are not leaving out anything
important. You should also feel free to get feedback from your lab TA whenever you find that your group is at an impa sse.
Every member of the group must upload a separate digi tal copy of the report to their lab assignment in Ca nvas prior to leaving the
lab classroom. These reports are not to be written outside the lab settin g.

This page titled 3.2: Activities is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Lab 4: DC Circuits
4.1: Background Material
4.2: Activities
This page titled Lab 4: DC Circuits is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

4.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/230414.1: Background Material
Text References
resistance
measuring devices and systems of resistors
Kirchhoff's rules
Measuring Resistance
The first part of this lab requires that we measure the resistance through a piece of conducting paper. There are a couple ways we
can measure a resistance. The first that comes to m ind is to use Ohm's law: Measure the voltage across the "resistor" with a
voltmeter, and the current that passes through it with an ammeter, and the ratio of these gives the resista nce. But our multimeter
does both of these jobs at once – just turn the dial into the ohmmeter region (labeled with an " "), and connect the leads (one in the
black COM port and the other in the red V Hz port) to t he opposite ends of the resistor, and the display rea ds the resistance. You
will likely have to adjust the dial to find the righ t range of values – you can select maximum values f rom 200 to 200M ("M"
stands for "mega" = "million").
Resistivity
While resistance is a property of a specific object, resistivity is a property of a material that can have any shape or size. The shape
and size combined with the resistivity is what determ ines an object's resistance. The simplest model to d iscuss the relationship is a
rectangular prism:
Figure 4.1.1 – Resistor Model
The ohmmeter in this figure is measuring the resistanc e along the direction joining the two leads – down th e length of the prism.
If current were to flow along this direction, it would pass through a cross-sectional area equal to the pr oduct of the width and
thickness:. The resistance of this object is related t o the resistivity of the material from which it is constr ucted according to:
In our lab, we will measure the dimensions of such an object, and use an ohmmeter to measure its resistanc e, thereby allowing us to
compute the resistivity of the material.
Confirmation of Kirchhoff's Rules
The second part of this lab consists of connecting a s mall network of batteries and resistors in order to confirm Kirchhoff's rules. In
order to make this confirmation, one needs to measur e both voltage drops with a voltmeter and currents wit h an ammeter. Both
these meters can be selected in the multimeter. The voltmeter you already know from a previous lab. The ammeter section of the
dial is labeled with an "A" with dots and dashes after it (not the wavy line). Just as in the case of the vo ltmeter from the previous
lab, this meter is for direct current circuits like we are working with here.

4.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23041There is one critical piece of information about con necting these two types of meters to measure quantitie s in a circuit. Not
following this can damage (or at least temporarily d isable) the ammeter. While voltmeters can be used i n a "probing manner"
connect each lead to opposite ends of a resistor to measure the voltage drop, ammeters must be connected into the circuit. That is,
if you want to measure current with an ammeter, you mu st disconnect your circuit and connect the ammeter into the branch through
which you wish to measure the current. If you are not taking your circuit apart to put your ammeter into it, then you are using the
ammeter incorrectly, and are likely to disable your multimeter and aggravate your TA. If you have any q uestions about your
connection, ask your TA for confirmation that your set up is okay before powering it up.
In order to create this network, you will need two batt eries and several resistors. The batteries are the pl ug-in DC power supplies
like you used in the previous lab. The resistors you wi ll find on one side of the component board – they ar e the objects with two
black jacks:
Figure 4.1.2 – Component Board
This page titled 4.1: Background Material is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

4.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/230424.2: Activities
Equipment
metal board with conducting paper strips
magnetic electrode plates
component board
15V & 9V DC power supplies
multimeters
wires
ruler
The General Idea
This lab consists of two very distinct parts. In Part 1, you will be measuring the resistivity of some con ducting paper, confirming
your answer with two separate sets of data. In Part 2, y ou will set up a DC network (subject to certain require ments) and use it to
test/confirm Kirchhoff's rules.
Some Things to Think About
Part 1
The formula that relates the resistance to the resisti vity includes the dimensions of the resistor (see Figur e 4.1.1 in the
Background Material). In our case, the "rectangular prisms" are strips of pa per. It's difficult to measure their thicknesses, so it
is provided for you:.
Note that the magnetic electrodes have holes into which the banana leads of the wires fit nicely. They also stick to t he board
and make it easy to define endpoints of the strip "resistor. " The electrodes and wires are also very good conductors, so
since they are in series with the strips, they contribu te a negligible amount to the resistance measurement.
We are able to vary the length of the strip resistor by si mply moving the electrodes, and we can vary the width of th e resistor by
using different paper strips.
You are expected to treat each of the dimension variabl es separately (i.e. hold one fixed while varying the othe r), generating for
your lab report a data table and a best-fit linear grap h for each one. (Use the usual desmos online graphing calculator.)
The resistivity can then be extracted from the two best-f it lines, and compared.
Comment on what conditions might affect the outcome. Thi s can be speculation or actual weird fluctuations in r esults whose
cause you were able to deduce. You should feel free to do a ncillary quick tests to check your ideas.
Part 2
Here are the required elements of your network:
It must include at least four resistors and two batteries.
It must include at least two loops (i.e. there must be branc h points).
The batteries must appear in different branches.
Each branch with a battery in it must also include at le ast one resistor (this is to avoid any nasty short-circui ting).
Your lab report needs to include a large circuit diagram that matches the network that you wired in the real world. It needs to be
large enough that you can label everything that you mea sure, including:
the resistances (use the ohmmeter, as you did in Part 1, and do n't do these measurements while they are connected to
anything else!)
the emfs of the batteries
the currents through each branch
the voltage drops across the resistors (you need to in dicate a loop direction to do this)
When measuring the battery emfs and voltage drops around loop s, you need to be especially careful to record the prope r signs,
which means you have to remain consistent with the directi on of the voltmeter.
Before you measure the currents, check with your TA to make sure y ou are doing it right, because connecting an ammeter
incorrectly can result in a nuclear detonation and the exti nction of all life within a 5-mile radius. Okay, it isn't th at bad, but we

4.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23042don't want to damage/disable the multimeters. When you get t he green light from the TA, be sure to make a note of
the directions of the currents you measure.
With all the data gathered in one place on the schematic, do the arithmetic to show that the loop rule holds for at least two loops,
and that the junction rule holds for at least one juncti on.
Lab Report
Craft a lab report for these activities and analysis, making sure to include every contributing group m ember's name on the front
page. You are strongly encouraged to refer back to the Read Me as you do this, to make sure that you are not leaving out anything
important. You should also feel free to get feedback from your lab TA whenever you find that your group is at an impa sse.
Every member of the group must upload a separate digi tal copy of the report to their lab assignment in Ca nvas prior to leaving the
lab classroom. These reports are not to be written outside the lab settin g.
This page titled 4.2: Activities is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Lab 5: RC Circuits
5.1: Background Material
5.2: Activities
This page titled Lab 5: RC Circuits is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

5.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/230445.1: Background Material
Text References
discharging capacitor
charging capacitor
Component Board Again
We'll be using the component board again for various parts of this lab. See the diagram below for the comp onents you will be
using in this lab:
Reading an Oscilloscope
At first glance, an oscilloscope is an intimidating de vice, with a daunting number of knobs and switches. We will not concern
ourselves with the various nuances of this device, and will instead focus on taking away some of the mystery, so that we can use
it. First and foremost, this device is a voltmeter. Two leads come out of each "channel," and the o-scope me asures the difference in
voltage between these two leads.
Where an oscilloscope differs from a standard voltm eter is that it also reflects the time dependence of that voltage difference. If we
connect a regular voltmeter across a component for wh ich the voltage is varying with time, the needle of t he voltmeter would jump
around in response to the changing voltage drop. An o scilloscope graphs the time dependence of that changing voltage – the
vertical axis of the output is the voltage drop, and the h orizontal axis is time.
The scope does not graph the voltage between fixed s tarting and ending times – it graphs continually. It's easiest to think of it as
"wrapping around" – when the plot gets to the right s ide of the screen, it continues plotting from the left side. For this reason, this
device is most effective for studying periodic time dependence (thus the prefix "oscillo-"). Thes e plots repeat themselves, leaving a
static pattern on the screen that can easily be studied.
Let's look at what some of the important knobs do (again, we will not take the time to learn every nuance of this d evice here):
Figure 7.1.1 – Oscilloscope

5.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23044
The simplest of the knobs to understand are the positio n knobs – these move the whole graph up/down and right /left. This
adjustment is available to make it easier to read val ues off the graph. At the bottom of the vertical part of the front panel are the
ports where the probes connect to the device. For our lab, we will only be measuring a single voltage diffe rence, so there is only a
cable attached to channel 1.
The important knobs to understand are those labeled "VOLTS/DIV" and "SEC/DIV" (for our experiment, only the knob setting for
channel 1 matters). We'll look at each knob in turn, but first you should note that the o-scope screen is divided into a grid of large
squares, which are each subdivided horizontally and v ertically with 5 tick marks. It is the lattice of gr id lines (the blocks) that are
calibrated to the knob settings – the smaller tick marks re present one fifth of these measurements.
1. VOLTS/DIV – The number found within the bracket equals the val ue of each vertical division of a block. You'll note that there
are two brackets – so which one gives the proper number? Both, beca use they measure in different units. The multiplier n ext to
each bracket indicates how much the actual value is amplif ied by the oscilloscope before graphing it note that in both cases, a
difference of one vertical block represents a voltage d ifference of 0.02 volts:
Reading the left bracket: The signal is multiplied by 1, an d a block measures 20 millivolts.
Reading the right bracket: The signal is multiplied by 1 0, and a block measures 0.2 volts.
2. SEC/DIV – In this case, there is only one place to read the time intervals for blocks – between the two lines that rad iate from
the center of the knob. This particular knob is set at 2 milliseconds.
It should be clear that turning the vertical knob cl ockwise will make a graph shorter (each block's vertica l value is increased), and
turning the horizontal knob clockwise will squeeze togeth er the wave peaks (each block's horizontal value is incre ased).
This page titled 5.1: Background Material is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

5.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/230455.2: Activities
Equipment
component board
15V DC power supply
variable capacitor
Pasco box and laptop
oscilloscope
wires
The General Idea
The experiment portion of this lab is straightforwar d. You are given a variable capacitor, and are asked to compute its capacitance
based on what you know about its geometric structure. Then you are tasked with checking this computation by connecting it into an
RC circuit with a known resistance, and viewing the tim e dependence of its voltage on an oscilloscope. Th ere is, however, an
exploratory preamble to the experiment, in which you will write up only a brief summary of your findings i n the lab report.
The first part of this preamble consists of spending a little time exploring the properties of an LED li ght bulb (in the context of an
RC circuit, of course). The second involves tinkering with an oscilloscope until you become familiar with its mo st basic functions.
Some Things to Think About
Part 1: Exploration – LED
Just about everyone has heard of LED lights. Far fewer k now what "LED" stands for (light emitting diode). Fewer still know what
the properties of such a component are in a circuit. Your task here is to find out, and to use it in an R C circuit to observe that
circuit's time-dependent behavior. Like any other li ght, its brightness indicates the amount of current ru nning through it. Besides
the LED light on the component board, you will need t he capacitor next to it (see the Background Material for a picture),
and of course the DC power supply. Feel free to conne ct the LED with one or more of the other two component s in any way
you see fit, subject only to the following restriction:
Like capacitors we have used in past labs, this one has a s pecific polarity. When connected to the power supply, the pos itive
(red) lead of the capacitor must be connected to the positive l ead of the battery.
Make a mention of whatever you discover about any spec ial properties of the LED in your lab report. You m ay want to ask your
TA if what you have discovered "is really a thing."
Part 2: Exploration – Oscilloscope
reference – You may want to refer back to the Background Material during this activity, to help you keep track of how the
oscilloscope knobs affect what you see.
practice – Throughout this exploration, you should not be satisf ied with seeing how knobs affect the pattern on the screen ("Oh,
this knob makes the wave taller!") – you should become comf ortable with reading the numerical values that the device
measures, and how to read the new numbers shown when the knob settings ar e changed.
settings – to check and then never change once they are correct a re:
In the TRIGGER section set the slide switches to...
MODE: P-P AUTO
SOURCE: CH 1 and LINE
All the smaller dials labeled "CAL" within the three larg est dials (for voltage and time) should be turned fully c lockwise.
In the HORIZONTAL section, set the slide switch to X1.
In the CH 1 part of the VERTICAL section set the slide switche s to...
upper slide switch: CH 1
lower slide switch: DC
The CH 2 part of the VERTICAL section can be ignored (the pr obe wires should be connected into the CH 1 connector).

5.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23045calibration – Turn on the oscilloscope, and once you see its “trace” (t he blue-green luminescent line), set the voltage in the
CH1 part of the VERTICAL section to 5 volts per division (we us e 1x, so ignore the 10x), and set the time scale in the
HORIZONTAL section around the middle of its settings. Then plac e the oscilloscope leads across your 15V “battery,” black to
black and red to red. While watching carefully, temporar ily move the bottom slide switch in the CH1 part of the VERT ICAL
section to GND (essentially making the input zero) then ba ck to DC. This should tell you something about the position ing of the
beam.
play time! – Open the laptop computer file “RC_Circuits,” and click the ON button in the Signal Generator window. Place the
scope leads across the Output 1 signal generator outputs of the Pasco box, black to
, and red to
. Play around with the
onscreen Waveform, Frequency and Amplitude settings (in the i nterest of efficiency, 2 or 3 waveforms should be plenty), an d
scope V olts/Div, Sec/Div, and Position controls. Note: The defaults obscured under "Offset and Limits" in the laptop
software are chosen to protect our equipment – don’t change them! As noted earlier, be sure that you can read numbers off
the screen properly, and that they confirm what signal y ou know is being sent from the Pasco box. Consult your TA to confirm
that you are getting things right, or if you have any pr oblems with the equipment.
Part 3: Experiment – Confirming Capacitance
variable capacitor – The device in the plastic box with a know that turns some interleaving metal plates is a variable capacitor.
Turning the dial can move the plates into parallel posit ions, or remove them from those positions, thereby chan ging it total
capacitance. The plates that rotate are charged with one sign, and the stationary plates are charged with the oppo site sign, giving
something (when the plates are meshed) that looks like the diagram below, up-close. The important thing to note is that each
gap represents an individual capacitor, and since all of the positive plates are at the same potential as each othe r, as are all the
negative plates, these individual capacitors are connec ted in parallel.
safety – For your own safety, and to protect this quite delicate instrument (did we mention that the plates are separated by a
quarter of a millimeter?!), please:
Never touch the plates!
Be careful not to drop the device or try to "repair" it. If you suspect that it is shorted because it doesn't seem to be
functioning properly, and/or you can feel/hear the pla tes rubbing each other when you turn the dial, just let you r TA know,
and they will check it and get you a replacement if needed.
Be sure to connect a conductor (short the capacitor) bet ween tasks or when you are done with it, so that there is no l ingering
charge within it.
specifications – The semicircular plates of this capacitor have a diam eter of about and the spacings (when interleaved)
are about.
compute capacitance – The main thrust of the experiment is to compare the capacitance found using the oscilloscope readings
for an RC circuit to the computed capacitance. The inf ormation above should be sufficient to compute an appro ximate
capacitance from its geometrical structure.
RC circuit – The RC circuit you will be building consists of the va riable capacitor, the resistor (see the Background
Material for a reminder of which component this is), and the Pasco sign al generator. (Question to ponder: Why can't we just
use the DC power supply?) Here are a few suggestions for the settings of the signal generator:
waveform: square
frequency:
amplitude: (since amplitude is half the total maximum fluctuat ion, this is a variation in the voltage)

5.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23045oscilloscope connection – Remember that the oscilloscope is a voltmeter, which m eans we can use it to indirectly measure the
time dependence of either the current (if we measure the vo ltage across the resistor) or the charge (measuring the voltage across
the capacitance). Important additional note: The oscilloscope won’t read vo ltage properly unless its black lead is effectively
attached to the signal generator’ s
jack, i.e., either to that jack or to a wire going there. So p ay attention to the order in which
you wire the resistor and capacitor in series; if you want to “look” at the capacitor voltage, make sure it has one lead going to
the signal generator’ s
jack, and if you want to “look” at the resistor, make sur e it has one lead going there. Of course, in this
series circuit, they can’t both go there.
observe the effect of changing capacitance – When everything is set up and your oscilloscope is rea ding values properly, turn
the dial of your variable capacitor to see what effect i t has on the output. Explain this effect in your lab repo rt.
oscilloscope readings and math – You will be computing the maximum capacitance of this variable capacitor (the same thing
you computed earlier, when all the plates are interlea ved). To compute the capacitance from the data you tak e, you will need to
properly read the numbers from the oscilloscope, and appl y them to the mathematical relation for either or for a
charging or discharging RC circuit. You know the resistan ce of the circuit, and the time dependence, and that is all you need.
sources of error – Be sure to make a brief approximate accounting of where errors can creep into this experiment. Mentioning
error sources is useful, making reasoned approximations o f percentage error, when possible, is better.
things to include in lab report – Besides the items explicitly mentioned above and detail s of the computations you make, it's
always a good idea to have some record of your raw data in the r eport, so you should include a photo of the oscilloscope
reading + dial settings.
Lab Report
Craft a lab report for these activities and analysis, making sure to include every contributing group m ember's name on the front
page. You are strongly encouraged to refer back to the Read Me as you do this, to make sure that you are not leaving out anything
important. You should also feel free to get feedback from your lab TA whenever you find that your group is at an impa sse.
Every member of the group must upload a separate digi tal copy of the report to their lab assignment in Ca nvas prior to leaving the
lab classroom. These reports are not to be written outside the lab settin g.
This page titled 5.2: Activities is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Lab 6: Engineering with Magnetism
6.1: Background Material
6.2: Activities
This page titled Lab 6: Engineering with Magnetism is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

6.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/589126.1: Background Material
Text References
a direct-current motor
Building a Commutator for a DC Motor
From the standpoint of designing a dc motor, the tric kiest part is designing the commutator (see the text reference given above for
an explanation of what this is). In this lab, we will st ick to the simplest design for a commutator possible. Unl ike the diagram of
the motor in the text reference, our commutator will not reverse the direction of the current with every 180 degree rotation. Rather,
it will simply cut off the current for 180 degrees o ut of every full revolution. So for half of every re volution there will be a torque
driving the rotation, and for the other half, the mo tor's angular momentum will carry it around until it can get it's next "kick" of
torque.
To accomplish this, we will exploit the fact that the wire we will be using for our coil is insulated. In our simple design, the wire
used for our coil also serves the purpose of the moto r's axle. The wire is wound several times until a coil h as been fashioned, with
the ends of the wire sticking out both ends. Then t hose loose ends are wound around the opposite sides of the coil, so that the coil
is held tightly together, and the loose ends provide an ax le for the coil's rotation.
Figure 6.1.1 – Single Wire Makes Both Coil and Axle
Now if the insulation is stripped from the two loose en ds, this can be rested on leads that are at a potentia l difference – with gravity
assuring a good connection, but nothing to impede th e coil's rotation – and current will flow through the coil. But as stated above,
we don't want the current to flow through the coil at all times, but only half of every rotation, so for o ne side of the axle, we should
only strip off the insulation on 180 degrees of the wire. You will have to determine where that stripping begins and ends, based on
what orientation you want the coil to have in the mag netic field when the current begins and ends (hint: se e the diagram in the text
reference!).
Building a Speaker
We know that the force on a wire in a magnetic field depends upon the current flowing through that wire. So if, in some fixed
magnetic field, we vary the current in a wire in some periodic fashion (let's say harmonically), then the force on that wire varies
with the same period. This varying force leads to mech anical vibration of that wire with the same period, and this mechanical
vibration can produce sound with – you guessed it – the sa me frequency. This is how a speaker works.
Like the motor, we will need a coil to concentrate a lot of current into a small space in order to get a decent amount of magnetic
force. Unlike the motor, we will not need to use wire heavy enough to work as an axle. Thinner wire is also pre ferred in part
because it has less inertia, which means it is accele rated more by a magnetic force. This allows it to vibr ate more effectively,
especially at higher frequencies.
Also, the coil itself does not move a lot of air when it vibrates, so it is best to attach it to a sort of "bladder" (in our case, the bottom
of a lightweight cup) which will move a lot of air when it vi brates with the coil.
This page titled 6.1: Background Material is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

6.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/589146.2: Activities
Equipment
wire (2 or 3 different gauges)
magnets
dc power supply
paper clips
tape
assorted cups
sandpaper
Pasco box and laptop
banana-tip connecting wires
alligator clips
The General Idea
This lab involves no experimentation. Rather, it is a n opportunity to use some of our knowledge about magn etic forces and torques
on current-carrying wires to design and construct two basic devices: a direct-current electric motor, and a sound speaker. The main
goal is to get these working, but if you do this relat ively quickly and have some spare time, then you can feel free to improve your
design – have some fun with this!
Some Things to Think About
Part 1: DC Motor
safety – The power supply you use for the motor in this lab has the potential to hurt you, so be careful with it. If you wa nt to
see how your motor functions at higher voltage (which resul ts in a faster speed), ask your TA to assist you. Otherwise the
setting at which you find the voltage will be plenty to dem onstrate your motor's operation.
axle – The parts of the wire that serve as an axle need to r est on the conducting leads connected to the battery, and must be free
to turn while not falling off the leads. Using paper clips wit h small loops in them (into which the axle goes) work well fo r these
conducting leads. Also note that you want the axle as straig ht as possible – if the coil "dips", then the weight imbalanc e
provides torque that the magnetic torque may not overcome.
commutator – The Background Material describes how to create a working commutator for your motor. You need to figure out
what orientation the coil needs to have when the current f lips from 'on' to 'off', and then use the sandpaper to take off the
insulation such that this is actualized. Be sure that you a re correct (maybe check with your TA?) before actually sa nding, or you
may end up wasting wire.
magnets – This motor works best when the magnetic field at the coil i s as strong as possible. These fields weaken with
distance, so getting the magnets as close as possible to th e coil (without the coil rubbing on it) is key.
starting it up – You will need a small "kick" to get it going, but the n it should keep going (and even speed up!). You'll find th at
it only maintains it rotation in one direction (why?), but typically a kick in either direction will do the trick (if you kick it the
wrong way, it will reverse direction and keep going).
Part 2: Speaker
bladder – As mentioned in the Background Material, the vibration of the coil can best be heard when it cau ses a bladder to
vibrate that compresses/rarefacts larger volumes of air than the coil would by itself. You don't need to be fanc y about this
attachment – just taping the coil to the bottom of a cup wo rks fine.
function generator – The Pasco application "Engineering_with_Magnetism" is used here to provide the periodic time-varying
voltage (and therefore current) needed to get the coil to v ibrate. Just connect the two jacks from the Pasco box to the two leads
of your coil. You may need to increase the amplitude somewh at from the default in order raise the decibel level of th e sound to
the audible range. You should check several frequencie s to see that the pitch of the sound changes as you would expe ct.
magnets – There is no need to attach the magnets to your speaker. Once the current is flowing, just bring the magnets close to
the coil, and listen for the sound (and note that when you take them away, the sound goes away!).

6.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/58914Clean Up
When you are finished, you need to disassemble your devices, so that future lab participants can work from scratch like you did.
We would like to re-use most of the seemingly-disposa ble materials (certainly the cups, and possibly even the paper clips). Your
wire coils you can take home, or give to your TA for recycli ng.
Lab Report
The lab report you upload in this case will consist o f a short video of your two working prototypes (obviou sly sound will be
necessary for the speaker video). The videos should inc lude a piece of paper in the frame with the names of your group members.
This page titled 6.2: Activities is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Lab 7: Electromagnetic Induction
7.1: Background Material
7.2: Activities
This page titled Lab 7: Electromagnetic Induction is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

7.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/230507.1: Background Material
Text References
Faraday's Law
Magnetic Field of a Loop
Faraday's Law with a Coil and a Magnet
In the first part of the lab, we slide a coil of wire past a permanent magnet (whose field is oriented perpe ndicular to the surface of
the coil). The magnetic field is not uniform, which means that the strength of the flux of the field th rough the coil changes as the
coil gets closer to or more distant from the magnet. Thus moving the coil in such a situation should ind uce an emf in the coil. This
coil can then act like a battery, "pushing" current out from whichever coil lead becomes the higher pote ntial (determined by
Lenz's law).
Figure 7.1.1 – Experimental Apparatus, Part 1
Faraday's Law with Two Coils
If we arrange two conducting coils coaxially, and run a current through one of them, it will produce a magn etic field that passes
through the other. If we vary this current over time, then the magnetic flux through the second coil will change with time, inducing
an emf in the second coil according to Faraday's law. This lab explores this very scenario. A computer ge nerates a
sinusoidal current through one coil, and the second coil is connected to an oscilloscope that measures th e emf induced. With the
current varying periodically, the flux (and therefo re the emf) varies periodically as well, making the osci lloscope the perfect device
to measure the time dependence of the emf.
Here is the experimental setup:
Figure 7.1.2 – Experimental Apparatus, Part 2

7.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23050
The analysis of this experiment (i.e. "solving the phys ics problem") consists of three steps:
1. Determine the magnetic field in the region of space where the detector coil is located, in terms of the curren t flowing
through the field coil. In this case the "region of space " is the center of the field coil, and the radius of the detector coil is
sufficiently small that the field is reasonably unifor m across its area, simplifying the next step...
2. Compute the flux of magnetic field through the detect or coil.
3. Derive the induced emf in the detector coil from Fara day's law.

This page titled 7.1: Background Material is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

7.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/592047.2: Activities
Equipment
coil with magnet-on-pedestal
compass
large wire coil
solenoid
oscilloscope
Pasco box with voltmeter connection wires
laptop
wires
The General Idea
The goal of this lab is to look at Faraday's law of in duction and Lenz's law, qualitatively in the first pa rt, and quantitatively in the
second. In each case the source of the magnetic field is different – a permanent magnet is used in the f irst part, and a currentcarrying coil in the second.
Part 1 – Moving a Coil Near a Permanent Magnet
You have at your disposal a small dowel pedestal (on top of which rests a magnet), and a plastic loop that contains two coils of wire
(one red, one black). The magnetic field of the mag net is not uniform, so moving a coil near it should c hange the flux and induce
an emf across the leads of the coil. The only restric tion we have on "moving the coil near it" is to keep the coil threaded onto the
plexiglass tube. Other than that, you should explore c hanges with as much variation as possible. At a minimum, you should try
different speeds, different directions of motion, dif ferent wire connections, and both orientations of th e coil. Here are some details
you need to know to get this to work:
The Pasco software on the laptop you will use is "Electromagne tic_Induction_1."
The voltage sensor cable needs to be connected into p ort A of the Pasco box. These are the leads across which the i nduced emf
is measured.
The red and black wires are wound around the coil in th e same direction, each with 25 turns. It is possible to exper iment with
only one color of wire (giving you a result with 25 turns), a nd then repeat it with both coils involved together in ser ies (giving
you a result with 50 turns).
The voltage sensor wires are colored red and black. Whe n the red lead is at higher potential than the black lead, then this shows
up on the graph in the laptop above the axis.
You have a compass at your disposal to determine which magnetic pole is facing up at the top of the pedestal (it 's easiest to test
by removing the plexiglass and turning the pedestal side ways). For reference, the Earth's northern pole is actually a south
magnetic pole (field lines go into it).
Part 2 – Varying the Magnetic Field by Varying the Source Current
We couldn't do a lot of quantitative study in part 1, because we don't have a good way of determining the numerical value of the
magnetic field flux as a function of time. In this p art, we create a varying magnetic field ourselves th rough the use of a varying
current in a loop. Here is some information about the equi pment at your disposal:
The Pasco software on the laptop you will use is "Electromagne tic_Induction_2."
The large coil of wire has 100 turns in it, and has a radiu s of.
The cylindrical "probe" is a coil with 1000 turns, and i t has a radius of.
After you click the "On" button, the software provides a per iodic signal to the large coil from the
, and
jacks in the Pasco
box. You can change the frequency from the default to what ever you want (within reason!). You should not make any chan ges
to the default amplitude.
The software displays (when you click the "Monitor" but ton) the output current in the graph on the right. You can use the
coordinate tool
to get greater precision for values on this graph.
The oscilloscope is connected to the cylindrical probe, a nd measures the induced emf in that coil.
Ch k k h h ill i h d f l h h l i d i

7.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/59204Check to make sure that the oscilloscope settings are on the proper defaults, as they were the last time you used it:In the TRIGGER section set the slide switches to...
MODE: P-P AUTO
SOURCE: CH 1 and LINE
All the smaller dials labeled "CAL" within the three larg est dials (for voltage and time) should be turned fully c lockwise.
In the HORIZONTAL section, set the slide switch to X1.
In the CH 1 part of the VERTICAL section set the slide switche s to...
upper slide switch: CH 1
lower slide switch: DC
Some Things to Think About
Part 1
Here are some questions for you to consider when expla ining how (or if) the behavior you observe is consist ent with Faraday's and
Lenz's laws.
What seems to affect the peak emf that is measured?
If you want to compare the results of one coil (say just red) to two coils (both red and black)...
... how you will need to connect the leads?
... how will you keep the speed variable unchanged between these two tests?
How does the result of moving the loop upward compare to movin g it down?
What effect is there (if any) when you turn the loop over and repeat the procedure?
If you move the coil at different speeds, the rate of flux change is different, but what about the total flux change, added up over
the whole time of the drop? Does this depend upon the speed of coil movement? [Note: There is an "area-under-curve" to ol
in the software, and. To use this, select the part of the gr aph that you which to integrate using the
tool.]
Do the polarity of the magnet and the sign of the induced e mf agree with Lenz's law?
You can take screen shots of what is displayed on th e laptop for your lab report to help you make clear er descriptions of the
behavior of the induced emf under various conditions.
Part 2
The point to this experiment is to confirm Faraday's la w with a known magnetic field. Clearly the signal gen erator is providing the
measurable current that makes this field, but we only have a limited knowledge of field strength in the vi cinity of a loop of current.
We need to exploit this knowledge to be able to cla im that we know the (approximate) field strength. Some questions to consider
as you work your way through this:
Are the frequencies of the oscillating current and induce d emf equal? Should they be?
Is the orientation of the probe (e.g. standing upright vs. laying on its side) important to the experiment?
We know that the current varies sinusoidally, and we know the frequency of that oscillation. How do we go from this to induc ed
emf?
What do you think are the biggest sources of error in the experiment, and approximately what is the weakest link per centage
error? Do your results confirm Faraday's law within this margin?
You can take screen shots of what is displayed on the l aptop and pictures of the oscilloscope output (and k nob settings) for your lab
report.
Lab Report
Craft a lab report for these activities and analysis, making sure to include every contributing group m ember's name on the front
page. You are strongly encouraged to refer back to the Read Me as you do this, to make sure that you are not leaving out anything
important. You should also feel free to get feedback from your lab TA whenever you find that your group is at an impa sse.
Every member of the group must upload a separate digi tal copy of the report to their lab assignment in Ca nvas prior to leaving the
lab classroom. These reports are not to be written outside the lab settin g.

7.2.3 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/59204This page titled 7.2: Activities is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Lab 8: Inductance
8.1: Background Material
8.2: Activities
This page titled Lab 8: Inductance is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly
on the LibreTexts platform.

8.1.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/230538.1: Background Material
Text References
LR Circuits
A Decaying Circuit
To study the effect of inductance, we will create a c ircuit in which an initial current that flows steadil y through the inductor, decays
down to zero. To set up this scenario, we employ the followi ng circuit:
Figure 8.1.1 – Decaying LR Circuit
The circuit includes a battery, a resistor, an induc tor, and a switch. A voltmeter is used to measure the voltage drop across the
inductor at all times. Note that the circuit diagram inclu des the internal resistances present in the battery and indu ctor.
The process begins with a closed switch, such that cu rrents are flowing through both the resistor and the inductor. It is left closed a
long time, so that the inductor has no potential drop resulting from a varying current – it only comes fr om its internal resistance.
The graph of the voltage measured by the voltmeter a s a function of time is a flat horizontal line while the switch remains closed.
We will make direct measurements of the resistances of the resistor and the inductor with an ohmmeter, but this doesn't work for
the battery. To get a measurement of the battery's i nternal resistance, we will measure its terminal volta ge with no current (i.e. with
a voltmeter), and compare it to the current that flo ws from the battery in the "before" setting, which we ca n get from the voltmeter
reading and the load resistances.
Very suddenly the switch is then opened, taking the ba ttery out of the circuit. One question we will seek to answer is, "What
should the voltmeter measure at the moment when the s witch is closed, and as a function of time thereafter?" Then from the timedependence of the voltmeter reading after the switch is opened, we'll use our usual graphical approach of converting the data into
what we expect to be a straight line in order to find the time constant of this circuit, and from that the value of the inductance of our
inductor.
Where to Find Things
We will be using the component board one last time i n this experiment. Here is where you will find the co mponents we will be
using:
Figure 8.1.1 – Component Board

8.1.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23053
This page titled 8.1: Background Material is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman
directly on the LibreTexts platform.

8.2.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/592608.2: Activities
Equipment
component board
multimeter
power supply
Pasco Box, voltage probe leads, and laptop
wires
The General Idea
We are looking to study the exponential decay of th e current in an LR circuit. To accomplish this, we nee d to design a circuit that
gets current flowing through an inductor connected to a resistor, and then allow it to run down. This is tr icky, because to get the
current flowing we need a battery (power supply), but when t he decay begins, the battery can no longer be present.
The circuit diagram in the Background Material shows us exactly how we can accomplish this: We crea te two parallel branches
from the battery, one where current is flowing through the inductor, and one where current is flowing throug h a resistor. If we then
suddenly open the switch to the battery, taking it ou t of the circuit (in our case, this requires unceremo niously yanking a lead out of
the power supply), then there is current present in the induc tor when it is alone with a resistor in a circuit.
What we will be measuring is the time-dependent volta ge drop across the inductor, the exponential behavior of which will
mimic that of the current flowing through it. The u ltimate "problem" we are asked to solve is to determ ine the inductance of the
inductor from voltage-vs-time data. Given that we kn ow (or can look-up) the role that inductance and resi stance play in the time
evolution of the decaying current, an appropriate be st-fit line for the data (as well as a direct measur ement of the resistance with an
ohmmeter) will give us what we seek.
Here are some of the details you will need to know for the p rocedure:
See the Background Material page for a picture of where the inductor and resistor ar e located on the component board.
You have a multimeter with which you can measure the resis tance of the inductor, and check the indicated resistan ce for
the resistor.
The voltage sensors should be connected to the Pasco box in port A, and the software on the laptop that should be runni ng is
"Inductance."
After you get the circuit connected and start the curren t flowing for a short time, you can assume that there is a steady current
through the inductor. All you need to do then is:
start the recording of data in the software
quickly pull one of the leads out of the power supply (Note: The software is written to automatically stop recor ding after one
second, so you need to disconnect the power supply prett y soon after you start recording.)
check to see if the data is fairly "clean" (you will have to blow-up the graph to look at its features better), an d if it is not, go
ahead and run it again
If you have trouble getting a graph to come out without wil d jumps (especially during the exponential decay), ask your TA for
assistance.
The graph is created from data points that are plotted, a nd while it should certainly look like an exponentially decaying
function, you will need to use the actual data to create a b est-fit line and extract the information you need.
Some Things to Think About
There are a few details that need to be incorporated into and some things to look out for in what is otherwi se a very straightforward
procedure.
The inductor has an internal resistance that needs to be a ccounted for – you have a multimeter at your disposal fo r this.
You should check to see if the minimum and maximum vol tages encountered are what you would expect them to be. The flat
line before the switch is opened is easy enough to check, but t he sharp peak poses a little physics puzzle for you to solve.

8.2.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/59260The simplest approach for analyzing the data from the de caying voltage is something you have done many times in past labs
(with the exception of the first two steps):
magnify the screen until you can distinguish the data poin ts
use the
tool to extract the voltage values of 8 to 10 data points (It's probably a good idea to just choose the data points a t
regular intervals)
construct a table of raw data, adding a column for some ca lculated values that you expect to demonstrate a linear
relationship
plot the expected linear function in the usual graphing calculator
run the linear regression to get the slope
extract the value you are looking for from the result
Be sure to include (at a minimum) a screen capture of your Pasco data, the data table you constructed, the best fi t line and their
results, and of course your analysis discussion, in your la b report.
Lab Report
Craft a lab report for these activities and analysis, making sure to include every contributing group m ember's name on the front
page. You are strongly encouraged to refer back to the Read Me as you do this, to make sure that you are not leaving out anything
important. You should also feel free to get feedbac k from your lab TA whenever you find that your group requires clarification or
is at an impasse.
Every member of the group must upload a separate digi tal copy of the report to their lab assignment in Ca nvas prior to leaving the
lab classroom. These reports are not to be written outside the lab settin g.
This page titled 8.2: Activities is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom Weideman directly on
the LibreTexts platform.

Read Me.1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/45417Read Me: About Labs in Physics 9
The Purpose of Labs
There are many reasons to include a mandatory lab co mponent to the Physics 9-series. Among the benefits to a STEM education
are:
experiencing physical phenomena first-hand, to supplemen t the mathematically-abstract experience of lectures and p roblemsolving
learning very broadly how one can go beyond what just intuit ively seems right and actually test an idea by devising an
experiment
learning experimental skills, like minimizing errors a nd controlling for irrelevant factors
learning data analysis skills, like using graphs and statistica l examination
learning to use uncertainty analysis to determine when a pr oposition is confirmed or refuted by the data
Some of the earliest labs in Physics 9A are somewhat less about physics, and more about developing some of the se skills. At that
point not a lot of physics has been learned yet, and these skills are needed throughout the 9-series.
Experiment Types
There are four basic varieties of experiments that will occur in these labs. Occasionally an experiment may have elements of more
than one of these types.
Simple, repeatable, observations – These are the most informal sorts of experiments. T hey typically do not involve a lot of
mathematical modeling, and instead are focused on more g eneral features. The most challenging aspect of these k inds of
experiments is objectivity – the experimenter must come into them with an open mind, simply documenting what is ob served
without constructing elaborate explanations for what th ey are witnessing. One of the worst mistakes that can occur in these is to
inadvertently "put your thumb on the scale" (introduce hum an error) because a certain result is expected. You shoul d go to great
lengths to avoid this critical error.
Confirmation of a Single Hypothesis – A prediction is made regarding the outcome of a speci fic scenario. The result is
never exactly what is predicted, but the amount of uncertainty measure d and computed is used to determine if the experimental
result is "close enough" to the predicted to result to be considered a confirmation.
Independent Confirmations – Armed with the theoretical background to compute a phy sical quantity, the experimenter
devises two separate, completely independent experiments to measure that value. Each experiment gives its own result and its
own uncertainty range, and the goal is to check if the two e xperiments confirm the same number within these uncerta inties.
Choose the Better Theory – Two mathematical models are proposed to explain a sing le observed phenomenon. The
experiment seeks to determine which of the two theories be st describes the relationship between the variables present.
Typical Elements of Lab Meetings and Reports
Below is a list of common tasks performed in laboratory meetings, and items included in submitted lab reports:
Short test runs of an apparatus are performed to "get a feel " for what is going to happen, and to assist in designing t he setup in
an optimal manner. These do not include actual data ac quisition, and also should not be overused – some variatio n in results is
expected, and variation is not an indication that the d esign needs to be tweaked indefinitely.
Careful runs of the apparatus are performed, with multip le experimenters observing or playing a role in maint aining a smooth
operation.
Multiple runs are taken for each data point, to reduce sta tistical uncertainty. Sometimes the statistical uncert ainty is computed
and included in the analysis, other times just an average result of a few runs is used (because the statistical unc ertainty only
contributes a very small amount to the overall uncertainty). Doing this also helps weed-out weird anomalous runs where
something unexpected and unnoticed happens (i.e. the remo val of rogue data).
Data tables are created (and included in the lab report). These include both raw data and values computed from th at data, and
are organized in a fashion that's easy for someone reading the lab report to review.

Read Me.2 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/45417Graphs (virtually always linearized – see here for more details) are produced, and best-fit curves (i.e. lines) are used to draw
conclusions about the mathematical model used to explain the phenomenon tested in the experiment.
Uncertainties of two types are computed:
statistical – standard deviations of measurements with random errors introduced by the imperfect apparatus or b y human
involvement
estimated – educated guesses about how accurately one can expect a measuring device to function.
Lab reports are written with contributions from all group members. The text does not need to be verbose or over ly-details, but
should get to the point and include most or all of the follo wing points:
what you set out to test (explain the problem)
how you set up your apparatus to accomplish the test
what you expect to see (hypothesis)
your results (data tables, graphs, computations, general discussion, etc.)
checking to see if your results confirm the hypothesis to wit hin the uncertainties (it is okay if this is not confirmed – s taying
agnostic about the final result is an important quality)
an accounting of the weaknesses in your apparatus or proce dure, and suggestions for how these can be improved in futur e
attempts
Organization of Reports
You are not required to follow a specific template fo r the format of your lab reports. However, it might be helpful to keep things
organized in your head to follow something resembling th is:
Goal – Give a description of what you hope to accomplish or lear n in this particular lab.
Hypothesis – If the lab is one in which an hypothesis is tested, then e xpressing it explicitly is a good idea.
Procedure – Give a details description of what you did in your experi ment, from the preparation.calibration of the equipment,
to the method of taking data. It is tempting here to some times give some numbers you recorded, but for the sake of
organization it's a good idea to resist this. Also, while it is appropriate at times to give a short explanation of why you did
something a certain way, this should be kept very brief, or this section will start treading heavily on the later s ection on analysis.
Data – Display all the data you recorded, without including any d iscussion of what it means. This includes one-time
measurements as well as tables. It's okay to include com puted values (if, for example, every recorded number n eeds to be
squared to be put into a graph), but save the main calculati ons toward a result for the next section.
Analysis and Conclusions – This includes everything else:
physics that needs to be explained to get to your answer (free- body diagrams, algebra, etc.)
graphs and calculations of final results or uncertainti es
a description of likely sources of error, and ways to impro ve the experiment (i.e. reducing errors/uncertainties)
final narrative that ties together the results of the ex periment vis-a-vis the goal and/or hypothesis
A Final Word
These labs are intentionally not set up to be "cookbo ok" exercises. There will be some guiding questions to answer in the lab
report, and some hints for how to proceed, but for th e most part, the design of the experiment and the la yout of the lab reports are
up to you (your time is limited, so don't get too fa ncy with this). Keep in mind that you have two goals: The first is to convince
yourself of the conclusion (i.e. perform a detail-or iented experiment), and the second is to write a clear lab report that conveys a
convincing argument to the reader. Pro-tip for succes sful experimenters: Try to be more skeptical of your own work than the
audience you seek to convince.
This page titled Read Me: About Labs in Physics 9 is shared under a CC BY-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Tom
Weideman directly on the LibreTexts platform.

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/23091Index

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/29063Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://phys.libretexts.org/@go/page/65510Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: UCD: Physics 9C Lab
Webpages: 49
All licenses found:
CC BY-SA 4.0: 81.6% (40 pages)
Undeclared: 18.4% (9 pages)
By Page
UCD: Physics 9C Lab - CC BY-SA 4.0
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
Lab 1: Static Electric Charge - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.1: Background Material - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.1: Background Material (remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.2: Activities - CC BY-SA 4.0
1.2: Activities (remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
Lab 2: Electrostatic Potential - CC BY-SA 4.0
2.1: Background Material - CC BY-SA 4.0
2.1: Background Material (remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
2.2: Activities - CC BY-SA 4.0
2.2: Activities (remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
Lab 3: Capacitors - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.1: Background Material - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.1: Background Material (Remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.2: Activities - CC BY-SA 4.0
3.2: Activities (remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
Lab 4: DC Circuits - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.1: Background Material - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.1: Background Material (remote) - CC BY-SA 4.04.2: Activities - CC BY-SA 4.0
4.2: Activities (remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
Lab 5: RC Circuits - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.1: Background Material - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.1: Background Material (Remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.2: Activities - CC BY-SA 4.0
5.2: Activities (Remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
Lab 6: Engineering with Magnetism - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.1: Background Material - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.1: Background Material (Remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.2: Activities - CC BY-SA 4.0
6.2: Activities (Remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
Lab 7: Electromagnetic Induction - CC BY-SA 4.0
7.1: Background Material - CC BY-SA 4.0
7.2: Activities - CC BY-SA 4.0
7.2: Activities (Remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
Lab 8: Inductance - CC BY-SA 4.0
8.1: Background Material - CC BY-SA 4.0
8.2: Activities - CC BY-SA 4.0
8.2: Activities (remote) - CC BY-SA 4.0
Read Me: About Labs in Physics 9 - CC BY-SA 4.0
Back Matter - Undeclared
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared