CHEMISTRY OF THE
MAIN GROUP
ELEMENTS
Andrew R. Barron
Rice University

Book: Chemistry of the Main Group Elements
(Barron)

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 03/09/2026

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212832Preface
The main group (s- and p-block) elements are among the most diverse in the Pe riodic Table. Ranging from non-metallic gases (e.g.,
hydrogen and fluorine), through semi-metals (e.g., meta lloids such as silicon) to highly reactive metals (e.g., sodium and
potassium). The study of the main group elements is i mportant for a number of reasons. On an academic level they exemplify the
trends and predictions in structure and reactivity th at are the key to the Periodic Table. They represent the diversity of inorganic
chemistry, and the fundamental aspects of structure and bonding that are also present for the transition metal, lanthanide and
actinide elements.
The main group elements represent the most prevalent elements in the Earth’s crust, as well as most of the ke y elements of life, and
have enormous industrial, economic, and environmenta l importance. In this regard an understanding of th e chemistry of the main
group elements is vital for students within science, en gineering, and medicine; however, it is hoped that th ose who make political
and economic decisions would make better ones (or at least more responsible ones) if they had a fraction of the knowledge of the
world around them.
Since the position of the main group elements within the Periodic Table defines their properties (and visa versa) this represents a
logical organization of the topics. Prior to introduci ng the elements, a series of general and background topics are covered to
provide the basis for further discussion. The subsequ ent organization is based upon a Chapter for each Gro up of the s- and p-block
elements; however, hydrogen is given its own chapter d ue to its importance as an element. Although the Group 12 elements are
often omitted from a discussion of main group elements they have been included herein.
Some chapters are organized with regard to individual elements (e.g., carbon, silicon, etc.) and others are ar ranged with regard the
types of compounds (e.g., oxides, halides, etc.). This i s based upon particular interest or importance of an element. An effort has
been made to ensure that topics are not covered twic e (unless necessary) and so in general a particular s ubject is covered in the
Group chapter associated with the lower Group number. Fo r example, the halides of boron are described in the Chapter on the
Group 13 elements rather than Group 17 elements.
In addition to the basic synthesis, structure, proper ties, and reactivity of the elements and their compo unds, sections describing
some industrial use, as well as historical or social p erspective have been added. These sections were as a re sult of attempts within
class to put the chemistry into a context outside of the classroom. It is important that the discovery an d use of elements be
understood to be a human endeavor rather than a ser ies of abstract concepts or facts. It is only by an app reciation of the past that we
can advance the future.
Although this book was developed from the Rice Univers ity course Chem 360 (Inorganic Chemistry), and is no t intended to be
either encyclopedic or overly detailed. Thus, some topi cs will be covered at a greater or lesser depth depend ing on the relevance or
interest. Given the continued expansion in the chemis try of the main group elements it is intended that appropriate modules will be
added as they are developed.
Andrew R. Barron
Rice University, Houston, TX 77005. E-mail: arb@rice.edu.

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/278421TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
Licensing
1: General Concepts and Trends
1.1: Fundamental Properties - Oxidation State
1.2: Fundamental Properties - Ionization Energy
1.3: Fundamental Properties - Electron Affinity
1.4: Fundamental Properties - Electronegativity
1.5: Structure and Bonding - Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory
1.6: Structure and Bonding - Crystal Structure
1.7: Structure and Bonding - Stereochemistry
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
1.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of Combustion
1.10: Periodic Trends for the Main Group Elements
2: Hydrogen
2.1: Discovery of Hydrogen
2.2: The Physical Properties of Hydrogen
2.3: Synthesis of Molecular Hydrogen
2.4: Atomic Hydrogen
2.5: The Proton
2.6: Hydrides
2.7: The Hydrogen Bond
2.8: Isotopes of Hydrogen
2.9: Nuclear Fusion
2.10: Storage of Hydrogen for Use as a Fuel
3: Group 1 - The Alkali Metals
3.1: The Alkali Metal Elements
3.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metals
3.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium
3.4: Organolithium Compounds
4: Group 2 - The Alkaline Earth Metals
4.1: The Alkaline Earth Elements
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
4.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium
4.4: Organometallic Compounds of Magnesium
5: Group 12
5.1: The Group 12 Elements
5.2: Cadmium Chalcogenide Nanoparticles
5.3: Organometallic Chemistry of Zinc

2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2784215.4: Organomercury Compounds
5.5: The Myth, Reality, and History of Mercury Toxicity
6: Group 13
6.1: The Group 13 Elements
6.2: Trends for the Group 13 Compounds
6.3: Borides
6.4: Boron Hydrides
6.5: Wade’s Rules
6.6: Trends for the Oxides of the Group 13 Elements
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
6.8: Aluminum Oxides, Hydroxides, and Hydrated Oxides
6.9: Ceramic Processing of Alumina
6.10: Boron Compounds with Nitrogen Donors
6.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide
6.12: Electronic Grade Gallium Arsenide
6.13: Chalcogenides of Aluminum, Gallium, and Indium
6.14: Group 13 Halides
7: Group 14
7.1: The Group 14 Elements
7.2: Carbon Black- From Copying to Communication
7.3: Carbon Nanomaterials
7.4: Nitrogen Compounds of Carbon
7.5: Carbon Monoxide
7.6: Carbon Dioxide
7.7: Suboxides of Carbon
7.8: Carbon Halides
7.9: Comparison Between Silicon and Carbon
7.10: Semiconductor Grade Silicon
7.11: Oxidation of Silicon
7.12: Applications for Silica Thin Films
8: Group 15 - The Pnictogens
8.1: The Group 15 Elements- The Pnictogens
8.2: Reaction Chemistry of Nitrogen
8.3: Hydrides
8.4: Oxides and Oxoacids
8.5: Halides of Phosphorous
9: Group 16
9.1: The Group 16 Elements- The Chalcogens
9.2: Ozone
9.3: Water - The Fuel for the Medieval Industrial Revolution
9.4: Hydrogen Peroxide
9.5: Hydrogen Peroxide Providing a Lift for 007
9.6: Comparison of Sulfur to Oxygen
9.7: Chalconide Hydrides

3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2784219.8: Oxides and Oxyacids of Sulfur
9.9: Sulfur Halides
10: The Halogens
10.1: The Group 17 Elements- The Halogens
10.2: Compounds of Fluorine
10.3: Compounds of Chlorine
10.4: Oxyacids of Chlorine
10.5: Bromine Trifluoride as a Solvent
11: Group 18 - The Noble Gases
11.1: The Group 18 Elements- The Noble Gases
Index
Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/417161Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: General Concepts and Trends
1.1: Fundamental Properties - Oxidation State
1.2: Fundamental Properties - Ionization Energy
1.3: Fundamental Properties - Electron Affinity
1.4: Fundamental Properties - Electronegativity
1.5: Structure and Bonding - Valence Shell Electron Pair R epulsion (VSEPR) Theory
1.6: Structure and Bonding - Crystal Structure
1.7: Structure and Bonding - Stereochemistry
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
1.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of Combustion
1.10: Periodic Trends for the Main Group Elements
This page titled 1: General Concepts and Trends is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126091.1: Fundamental Properties - Oxidation State
The oxidation state of an element is defined as the formal charge on the atom if all bonds were assumed to be fully ionic.
In an ionic compound the oxidation state is equal t o the charge on the ion, e.g., in NaCl the charge on t he sodium is +1 and the
oxidation state is also +1. In contrast, the charge on an atom in a covalent compound never approaches the charge implied from the
oxidation number, e.g., in CCl4, the oxidation state of ca rbon is +4 but the charge on the carbon atom is signicant ly less.
Thus, while oxidation state is a simple formulism it is ve ry useful in a number of ways:
1. Classication of compounds of elements, especially thos e of the transition metals.
2. Enables the balance of reduction-oxidation (redox) rea ctions.
To determine the oxidation state of an element within a p articular compound the following steps act as a guideline:
1. The oxidation state of any atom of any element in it s elemental form is zero.
2. The oxidation state of a monatomic ion is equal to its charge.
3. Any homoleptic X-X bonds (e.g., the C-C bond in H3C-CH3) are a ssumed to be non-ionic and do not contribute to the
oxidation state of X.
4. Fluorine always has oxidation state of 1
5. Elements of Group 1 (IA) (except hydrogen) have an oxida tion state of +1 in compounds.
6. Elements of Group 2 (IIA) have an oxidation state of +2 in co mpounds.
7. Elements of Group 17 (VIIA) have an oxidation state of - 1 when they combine with elements below or to the left of thei r
position in the periodic table
8. Oxygen is usually assigned the oxidation state of 2, e xcept in compounds with uorine, oxygen has a positive oxi dation number.
9. Hydrogen is assigned the oxidation state of +1 with no n-metals and 1 with metals.
10. In any compound the sum of the oxidation states (oxid ation numbers) is equal to the overall charge.
Exercise
What is the oxidation state of sulfur in Na SO?
Solution
The two sodium atoms each have an oxidation state of +1, while the oxygen atoms have an oxidation state of 2, and the
overall charge is 0.
1. overall charge = sum of oxidation states
2. 0 = (2 x oxidation state of Na) + (oxidation state of S) + (4 x oxidation state of O)
3. 0 = (2 x +1) + (oxidation state of S) + (4 x -2)
4. oxidation state of S = 0 (2 x +1) - (4 x 2)
5. oxidation state of S = +6
Exercise
What is the oxidation state of sulfur in Na SO?
Solution
The two sodium atoms each have an oxidation state of +1, while the oxygen atoms have an oxidation state of 2, and the
overall charge is 0.
1. overall charge = sum of oxidation states
2. 0 = (2 x oxidation state of Na) + (oxidation state of S) + (3 x oxidation state of O)
3. 0 = (2 x +1) + (oxidation state of S) + (3 x -2)
4. oxidation state of S = 0 (2 x +1) - (3 x 2)
5. oxidation state of S = +4Exercises
2 4
2 3

1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212609Exercise
What is the oxidation state of sulfur in H S?
Solution
The two hydrogen atoms each have an oxidation state of +1 a nd the overall charge is 0.
overall charge = sum of oxidation states
0 = (2 x oxidation state of H) + (oxidation state of S)
0 = (2 x +1) + (oxidation state of S)
oxidation state of S = 0 (2 x +1)
oxidation state of S = -2
In writing the oxidation state of an element within a compound it is common to use a Roman numeral, rathe r than the charge, i.e.,
Al(III) rather than Al.
This page titled 1.1: Fundamental Properties - Oxidation State is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2
3+

1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126131.2: Fundamental Properties - Ionization Energy
The ionization energy (IE), or more properly the io nization enthalpy, is defined as the energy required to loose an electron from a
gaseous atom or ion.
Each subsequent ionization energy is greater than t he previous one because of the increase in charge o n the ion. For example, for
any given atom or ion the 1st ionization energy is less tha n the 2nd ionization energy, and so on. This is shown in Tab le.1.
Table.1: The first three ionization energies for alu minum.
Ionization Ionization energy (kJ/mol)
How does the ionization energy vary with elements in t he periodic table? If we consider the 1 ionization p otential of the elements
in a particular group of the periodic table we note that there is a decrease in ionization potential as you go down the Group. The
reason for this trend is due to the increased shieldi ng of the outer shell electrons (ns) by the complete d (filled) inner shells. The ns
electron thus exhibits a lower effective nuclear cha rge and makes it easier to remove. For example, Table. 2 shows the 1
ionization potential for the Group 1 alkali metals.
Table.2: Variation of the first ionization potentia l (M0 → M+) for the Group 1 (IA) elements.
Element Ionization energy (kJ/mol)
Li 526
Na 502
K 425
Rb 409
Cs 382
In contrast, to individual Groups, moving across a part icular Period results in a general increase in the ion ization potential as is
shown in Figure.1. The lack of additional screening o f filled shells across the Period means that the ioniz ation energy for the
outer shell electrons is dominated by the increase in nuc lear charge (number of protons) with increased atomic n umber.st
1 1
st

1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212613
Figure: Plot of the first ionization potential for th e elements Li to Ne.
From Figure.1 it can be seen that the Periodic trend is not linear, there are significant steps in the plo t. Boron, for example, has
a lower first ionization potential than beryllium, wh y? A consideration of the electron configuration for the elements provides in
answer (Figure.2). Beryllium has a 2s outer shell conf iguration, while boron has a 2s 2p configuration. The 2p electron is
easy to remove because it exhibits increased shielding fro m the nucleus due to the filled 2s orbital.
Figure: Outer shell electron configuration of beryll ium through oxygen.
As we move from, boron to nitrogen, the 2p shell is fill ed (Figure.2) without additional shielding and the ef fect of the
increased nuclear charge dominates. Finally, the 2p configuration for oxygen (Figure.2) results in an ele ctron pair, which
repel each other, thus making it easier to remove an electron (lower ionization potential) that expected from the increased nuclear
charge. From Figure we can see that the effect of electron pairing is less than that of a filled shell.
The trend for the 2 ionization potential is similar, but different, to that of the 1 ionization potent ial. As may be seen in Figure
.3 the steps observed for the 1 ionization energy plo t (i.e., between Be/B and N/O have moved one element to the right. A
view of the electron conguration for the E ions (Figu re.4) shows that the rational for the trend in the 1 ionization potential
trends still applies but to the ion of the element to the right in the Periodic table. Now B+ has a 2s outer shell conguration, while
C has a 2s 2p configuration. A similar plot for the 3 ionization energy would move the steps another element t o the right.2 2 1 1
nd st
st
+ st
+ 2 1 rd

1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212613
Figure: A plot of 2 ionization energy (enthalpy) fo r elements Li to Na (blue with square data points) show ing the relative
trend to the 1 ionization potential (red line not t o scale).
Figure: Outer shell electron conguration of E+ for b eryllium through oxygen.
The other observation to be made from Figure.3 is t he very large 2 ionization potential for lithium as sociated with the
ionization of Li to Li. The large increase is due to th e removal of an electron from the filled 1s shell.
This page titled 1.2: Fundamental Properties - Ionization Energy is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.nd
st
nd
+ 2+ 2

1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126141.3: Fundamental Properties - Electron Affinity
The electron affinity (EA) of an element is defined as the energy given of when a neutral atom in the ga s phase gains an extra
electron to form a negatively charged ion.
Electron anities are more difficult to measure than ionization energies and are usually less accurately kn own. Electron affinities are
large and negative for elements such as fluorine and oxy gen, and small and positive for metals.
Electron affinities generally become smaller as you go down a Group of the periodic table (Table.3). This is because the
electron being added to the atom is placed in a lar ger orbital, where it spends less time near the nucl eus of the atom, and also the
number of electrons on an atom increases as we go do wn a column, so the force of repulsion between the elec tron being added and
the electrons already present on a neutral atom beco mes larger. Electron anities are further complicated since the repulsion between
the electron being added to the atom and the electr ons already present on the atom depends on the volum e of the atom. Thus, for
the nonmetals in Groups 6 (VIA) and 7 (VIIA), this force o f repulsion is largest for the very smallest atoms in these columns:
oxygen and uorine. As a result, these elements have a smaller electron anity than the elements below them in these columns as
shown in Table.3.
Table.3: The electron anity for the non-metallic h alogens.
Element Electron affinity (kJ/mol)
F -322
Cl -349
Br -325
I -295
Although there is a general trend that for Group 1 (I A) to Group 17 (VIIA) elements the electron affinity inc reases across the
Periodic table from left to right, the details of the trend are more complex. As may be seen from Figure.5, there is a cyclic
trend. The explanation of this is a consequence of th e unusually stable electron configurations exhibited by atoms with filled or half
filled shells, i.e., helium, beryllium, nitrogen and n eon (see Table.4). These configurations are so stable t hat it actually takes
energy to force one of these elements to pick up an extr a electron to form a negative ion.
Figure: Plot of the electron affinity for the eleme nts hydrogen to fluorine. N.B. Values for helium, ber yllium, nitrogen, and
neon are not known with any accuracy but are all po sitive.
Table.4: Electron affinities of the elements hydroge n to neon. N.B. Values for helium, beryllium, nitrog en, and neon are not known with any

1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212614accuracy but are all positive.
Element Electron affinity (kJ/mol) Electron configuration
H -72.8 1s
He +ve 1s
Li -59.8 [He] 2s
Be +ve [He] 2s
B -27 [He] 2s 2p
C -122.3 [He] 2s 2p
N +ve [He] 2s 2p
O -141.1 [He] 2s 2p
F -328.0 [He] 2s 2p
Ne +ve [He] 2s 2p
This page titled 1.3: Fundamental Properties - Electron Affinity is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.1
2 1
2 2
2 3
2 4
2 5
2 6

1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128371.4: Fundamental Properties - Electronegativity
An issue with ionization potential and electron affin ity is that they are defined and measured as reactio ns in the gas phase. Although
values have been determined for molecular fragments it is still difficult to correlate with reaction tre nds in solution. To overcome
this issue the concept of electronegativity was developed.
Electronegativity is defined as the tendency of an atom in a molecule to attract ele ctrons to itself. Although several
electronegativity scales have been developed, that b y Linus Pauling (Figure.6) is the most often used. Tab le.5 provides
selected Pauling electronegativity values (unit less).
Figure: American chemist Linus Carl Pauling (1901 1994).
Table.5: Selected Pauling electronegativity values.
Element Pauling Scale
F 4.0
O 3.5
Cl 3.0
N 3.0
S 2.5
C 2.5
H 2.1
B 2.0
Na 0.9
The advantage of the Pauling electronegativity scale is that it allows the prediction of general behavior. For example, the larger the
dierence in electronegativity between two elements th e more ionic character or more polar the bonding int eraction. Thus, a H-O
bond (3.5 - 2.1 = 1.4) is more polar than a H-S bond (2.5 2.1 = 0.4).
This page titled 1.4: Fundamental Properties - Electronegativity is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126101.5: Structure and Bonding - Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory
The idea of a correlation between molecular geometry and the number of valence electrons was first presen ted in 1940 by Sidgwick
and Powell; however, in 1957, Ronald Gillespie (Figure.7) an d Sir Ronald Nyholm (Figure.8) refined this concept to
build a more detailed theory. It is their work that p rovides the basis of the valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory, and
as such it is also known as the Gillespie-Nyholm theory.
Figure: Chemist Ronald J. Gillespie (1924 -).
Figure: Australian chemist Sir Ronald Sydney Nyholm (1917 -).
One attribute of VSEPR is that with the ability to predic t the shape of a molecule for a compound comes the a bility to predict some
of the physical and chemical properties of that compoun d.
The formal definition that is the basis for VSEPR is as f ollows: Pairs of electrons in the valence shell of a central atom of a
molecule repel each other and take up positions as far apar t as possible.
Within this definition it is implicitly assumed that the core shells are not polarized and therefore ta ke no part in bonding, and
therefore can be ignored. Since the maximum repulsio n of the electron pairs (be they associated with a bo nding interaction or a
lone pair) control the shape of a molecule, for each number of electron pairs we can dene the geometric o ptimum position that
maximizes the distance between the electron pairs (T able.6). The number of electron pairs surrounding an atom, both bonding
and nonbonding, is called its steric number.

1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212610Table.6: Shapes of molecules and ions
Number of central
atom electron pairsBonding pairs Non-bonding pairs Shape Example
2 2 0 Linear BeCl
3 3 0 Triangular BF
3 2 1 Bent SnCl
4 4 0 Tetrahedral CCl
4 3 1 Pyramidal NH
4 2 2 Bent H O
5 5 0Trigonal bipyramidal
(tbp)PF
5 4 1 Pseudo-tdp BrF
5 3 2 T-Shaped BrF
5 2 3 Linear XeF
6 6 0 Octahedral SF,PF
6 5 1 Square pyramidal IF
6 4 2 Square planar XeF,IF
The steps for dening the molecular shape are as follows:
1. Draw a simple Lewis structure including single, double, a nd triple bonds where appropriate.
2. Count the number of electrons on the central atom ass uming it is neutral.
3. Add one electron for each σ-bond.
4. Subtract one electron for each π-bond.
5. Subtract one electron for each positive (+) charge.
6. Add one electron for each negative (-) charge.
7. Divide the number of electrons by two to give the numb er of electron pairs.
8. Use the list in Table.6 to predict the structure of the molecule.
What is the shape of NH
Solution
1. Nitrogen has 5 valence electrons
2. Add 4 electrons for the four σ-bonds: 5 + 4 = 9
3. Subtract one electron for the positive (+) charge: 9 1 = 8
4. Divide the number of electrons by two to give the numb er of electron pairs: 8/2 = 4
5. Four bonding pairs and no lone pairs = tetrahedral ge ometry
Exercise
What is the shape of HgCl?
Answer2
6 65
4 4Example
4+
Exercises

1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126101. Mercury has 2 valence electrons
2. Add 2 electrons for the two σ-bonds: 2 + 2 = 4
3. Divide the number of electrons by two to give the numb er of electron pairs: 4/2 = 2
4. Two bonding pairs and no lone pairs = linear geometry
Exercise
What is the shape of H CO?
Answer
1. Carbon has 4 valence electrons
2. Add 3 electrons for the three σ-bonds: 4 + 3 = 7
3. Subtract one electron for each π-bond: 7 1 = 6
4. Divide the number of electrons by two to give the numb er of electron pairs: 6/2 = 3
5. Two bonding pairs and no lone pairs = triangular geometry
Lone pairs versus bonding pairs
The prediction of the detailed molecular structure (including bond angles) is not as simple as shown in Table.6. In molecules
with either lone pair electrons or multiple (double or triple) bonds the angles about the central atom ar e distorted due to the
increased electron repulsion (Figure.9). The differen ces in repulsion caused by a lone pair or a bonding pair may be
rationalized in a simple manner by a lone pair taking up more space than a bonding pair (Figure.10).
Figure: The order of decreasing repulsion between non -bonding (unshared) and bonding electron pairs.
Figure: Representation of the relative space taken up by (a) a lone pair of electrons and (b) a bonding p air of electrons.
Water is one of the classic cases in considering the issue o f non-bonding (unshared) electron pairs.
1. Oxygen has 6 valence electrons
2. Add 2 electrons for the two σ-bonds: 6 + 2 = 8
3. Divide the number of electrons by two to give the numb er of electron pairs: 8/2 = 4
4. Two bonding pairs and two lone pairs = tetrahedral geometr y
From this an idealized tetrahedral geometry would giv e the H-O-H angle as 109.5, however, from Figure.9 we know that the
lone pair...lone pair repulsion is greater than the lone pair...bonding pair repulsion which is greater t han the bonding pair...bonding
pair repulsion, and thus, the H-O-H angle should be de creased from the ideal tetrahedral. The experimental ly determined H-O-H
angle in water is in fact 104.5.
Ethylene is a good case in considering the issue of mu ltiple bonds. Ethylene contains both σ-bond and π-bon d between the carbon
atoms. This combination can be thought of as a super b ond, and as such its effect is similar to a lone pair.
Carbon has 4 valence electrons
Add 3 electrons for the two σ-bonds: 4 + 3 = 72

1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212610Subtract one electron for each π-bond: 7 1 = 6
Divide the number of electrons by two to give the number of electron pairs: 6/2 = 3
Three bonding pairs and no lone pairs = triangular geomet ry
From this an idealized tetrahedral geometry would give the H-C-H angle as 120, however, the π-bond repulsion is greater than the
σ-bond repulsion, and thus, the H-C-H angle should be decreased from the ideal tetrahedral. The experimen tally determined H-O-H
angle in water is in fact 118.3.
Resonance structures
If a molecule or ion has two or more resonance forms it is necessary to consider each form before angles are predicted. For
example, the carbonate anion, CO, can be drawn as a single structure from which it would be predicted that two groups of O-C-O
angles would result (Figure.11).
Figure: VSEPR predicted structure of a single resonance form of CO.
However, CO should actually be drawn in each of its resonanc e forms as in Figure.12.
Figure: Resonance forms of CO.
From Figure.12 it is clear that the real structure wil l be an average of the three resonance forms, and he nce there will be a
single O-C-O angle = 120 (Figure.13).
Figure: Structure of CO.
Atom electronegativities
In an A-X bond where the atom electronegativities are very different the bonding pair is assumed to occup y less space than in bond
between two atoms of similar electronegativities. As the bonding pair occupies less space it will repel neig hboring electron pairs
less.
For example, based on the above, a comparison of the t etrahedral compounds H O and F O would suggest that the F-O- F angle be
smaller than the H-O-H angle since fluorine has a highe r electronegativity than hydrogen (4.0 and 2.1, resp ectively). This is indeed
observed (Figure.14).
Figure: Structures of H O and F O.
In many cases, inter-ligand steric interactions can a lso be used to explain the dffierence in angle. For e xample, while fluorine is
more electronegative than chlorine (4.0 versus 3.0, respectively) it is also significantly smaller (Tabl e.7). Thus, a larger Cl-XCl angle than a F-X-F angle in the homologous compound, can be attributed to a greater steric interactions, r ather than difference in
electronegativities.◦
332332◦
322 2
2 2

1.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212610Table.7: Comparison of size between fluoride and chl oride ligands.
Ligand Covalent Radius (Å) Van der Waal radius (Å)
F 0.57 1.35
Cl 1.02 1.80
Bent's rule
There is the potential for more than one isomer for molecules that adopt structures in which there is a sym metry difference between
at least two of the ligand positions. For example a tr igional bipyramidal compound of the formula PXY has two possible
structures. One where the X occupies an axial position (Figure.15a) and the other where it occupies an equ atorial position
(Figure.15b).
Figure: The two possible structures of PXY.
Through the consideration of structures Henry Bent su ggested a rule: More electronegative substituents prefer hybrid orbita ls with
less s character, and conversely, more electropositive substitu ents prefer hybrid orbitals with greater s character.
For example, in PFCl the fluorine is the most electroneg ative substituent and will therefore occupy the axial (p-character only)
position.
Bibliography
H. A. Bent, J. Chem. Educ. 1960, 37, 616.
H. A. Bent, Chem. Rev., 1961, 61, 275.
R. J. Gillespie, J. Chem. Educ., 1970, 47, 18.
R. J. Gillespie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1992, 21, 59.
R. J. Gillespie and R. S. Nyholm, Quart. Rev., 1957, 11, 339.
This page titled 1.5: Structure and Bonding - Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and
was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts
platform.4

1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128391.6: Structure and Bonding - Crystal Structure
Introduction
In any sort of discussion of crystalline materials, it is useful to begin with a discussion of crystallography: the study of the
formation, structure, and properties of crystals. A cry stal structure is defined as the particular repeatin g arrangement of atoms
(molecules or ions) throughout a crystal. Structure r efers to the internal arrangement of particles and n ot the external appearance of
the crystal. However, these are not entirely independent since the external appearance of a crystal is often related to the internal
arrangement. For example, crystals of cubic rock salt (Na Cl) are physically cubic in appearance. Only a few of the possible crystal
structures are of concern with respect to simple inor ganic salts and these will be discussed in detail, howeve r, it is important to
understand the nomenclature of crystallography.
Crystallography
Bravais lattice
The Bravais lattice is the basic building block from which all crystals can be constructed. The concept o riginated as a topological
problem of finding the number of different ways to a rrange points in space where each point would have an identical atmosphere.
That is each point would be surrounded by an identic al set of points as any other point, so that all poin ts would be indistinguishable
from each other. Mathematician Auguste Bravais discover ed that there were 14 different collections of the g roups of points, which
are known as Bravais lattices. These lattices fall i nto seven different "crystal systems, as differentia ted by the relationship between
the angles between sides of the unit cell and the dis tance between points in the unit cell. The unit cell i s the smallest group of
atoms, ions or molecules that, when repeated at regul ar intervals in three dimensions, will produce the l attice of a crystal system.
The lattice parameter is the length between two points on the corners of a unit cell. Each of the various lattice parameters are
designated by the letters a, b, and c. If two sides are equal, such as in a tetragonal latt ice, then the lengths of the two lattice
parameters are designated a and c, with b omitted. The angles are designated by the Greek lett ers α, β, and γ, such that an angle
with a specific Greek letter is not subtended by the a xis with its Roman equivalent. For example, α is the included angle between
the b and c axis.
Table.8 shows the various crystal systems, while Figure. 16 shows the 14 Bravais lattices. It is important to d istinguish
the characteristics of each of the individual syste ms. An example of a material that takes on each of the Bravais lattices is shown in
Table.9.

1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839Table.8: Geometrical characteristics of the seven cry stal systems.
System Axial lengths and angles Unit cell geometry
cubic a = b = c, α = β = γ= 90
tetragonal a = b ≠ c, α = β = γ= 90
orthorhombic a ≠ b ≠ c, α = β = γ= 90
rhombohedral a = b = c, α = β = γ ≠ 90
hexagonal a = b ≠ c, α = β = 90, γ = 120
monoclinic a ≠ b ≠ c, α = γ = 90, β ≠ 90

1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839triclinic a ≠ b ≠ c, α ≠ β ≠ γ
Figure: Bravais lattices.
Table.9: Examples of elements and compounds that adop t each of the crystal systems.
Crystal system Example
triclinic K S O
monoclinic As S, KNO
rhombohedral Hg, Sb
hexagonal Zn, Co, NiAs
orthorhombic Ga, Fe C
tetragonal In, TiO
cubic Au, Si, NaCl
The cubic lattice is the most symmetrical of the sys tems. All the angles are equal to 90, and all the side s are of the same length (a =
b = c). Only the length of one of the sides (a) is required to describe this system completely. In add ition to simple cubic, the cubic
lattice also includes body-centered cubic and face-c entered cubic (Figure.16). Body-centered cubic result s from the presence2 2 8
4 4 2

1.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839of an atom (or ion) in the center of a cube, in addi tion to the atoms (ions) positioned at the vertices o f the cube. In a similar manner,
a face-centered cubic requires, in addition to the at oms (ions) positioned at the vertices of the cube, t he presence of atoms (ions) in
the center of each of the cubes face.
The tetragonal lattice has all of its angles equal to 90, and has two out of the three sides of equal leng th (a = b). The system also
includes body-centered tetragonal (Figure.16).
In an orthorhombic lattice all of the angles are equ al to 90, while all of its sides are of unequal length. The system needs only to be
described by three lattice parameters. This system a lso includes body-centered orthorhombic, base-centere d orthorhombic, and
face-centered orthorhombic (Figure.16). A base-center ed lattice has, in addition to the atoms (ions) posit ioned at the vertices
of the orthorhombic lattice, atoms (ions) positioned on ju st two opposing faces.
The rhombohedral lattice is also known as trigonal, a nd has no angles equal to 90, but all sides are of equal length (a = b = c), thus
requiring only by one lattice parameter, and all three ang les are equal (α = β = γ).
A hexagonal crystal structure has two angles equal to 90, with the other angle (γ) equal to 120. For this to happen, the two sides
surrounding the 120 angle must be equal (a = b), while the third side (c) is at 90 to the other sides and can be of any length.
The monoclinic lattice has no sides of equal length, but two of the angles are equal to 90, with the othe r angle (usually defined as
β) being something other than 90. It is a tilted para llelogram prism with rectangular bases. This system a lso includes base-centered
monoclinic (Figure.16).
In the triclinic lattice none of the sides of the un it cell are equal, and none of the angles within the unit cell are equal to 90. The
triclinic lattice is chosen such that all the intern al angles are either acute or obtuse. This crystal s ystem has the lowest symmetry
and must be described by 3 lattice parameters (a, b, and c) and the 3 angles (α, β, and γ).
Atom positions, crystal directions and Miller indicies
Atom positions and crystal axes
The structure of a crystal is defined with respect t o a unit cell. As the entire crystal consists of repe ating unit cells, this definition is
sufficient to represent the entire crystal. Within the unit cell, the atomic arrangement is expressed u sing coordinates. There are two
systems of coordinates commonly in use, which can cau se some confusion. Both use a corner of the unit cell as their origin. The
first, less-commonly seen system is that of Cartesian or orthogonal coordinates (X, Y, Z). These usually hav e the units of
Angstroms and relate to the distance in each directio n between the origin of the cell and the atom. These coordinates may be
manipulated in the same fashion are used with two- or three-dimensional graphs. It is very simple, therefore, to calculate interatomic distances and angles given the Cartesian coo rdinates of the atoms. Unfortunately, the repeating natu re of a crystal cannot be
expressed easily using such coordinates. For example, consider a cubic cell of dimension 3.52 Å. Pretend that this cell contains an
atom that has the coordinates (1.5, 2.1, 2.4). That is, the atom is 1.5 Å away from the origin in the x dir ection (which coincides with
the a cell axis), 2.1 Å in the y (which coincides with t he b cell axis) and 2.4 Å in the z (which coincides wi th the c cell axis). There
will be an equivalent atom in the next unit cell alo ng the x-direction, which will have the coordinates (1.5 + 3.52, 2.1, 2.4) or (5.02,
2.1, 2.4). This was a rather simple calculation, as the ce ll has very high symmetry and so the cell axes, a, b a nd c, coincide with the
Cartesian axes, X, Y and Z. However, consider lower symmetr y cells such as triclinic or monoclinic in which the c ell axes are not
mutually orthogonal. In such cases, expressing the repeat ing nature of the crystal is much more difficult to acco mplish.
Accordingly, atomic coordinates are usually expressed i n terms of fractional coordinates, (x, y, z). This coo rdinate system is
coincident with the cell axes (a, b, c) and relates to the position of the atom in terms of the fractio n along each axis. Consider the
atom in the cubic cell discussion above. The atom wa s 1.5 Å in the a direction away from the origin. As the a axis is 3.52 Å long,
the atom is (/) or 0.43 of the axis away from the orig in. Similarly, it is (/) or 0.60 of the b axis and (/) o r 0.68 of the
c axis. The fractional coordinates of this atom are, therefore, (0.43, 0.60, 0.68). The coordinates of the eq uivalent atom in the next
cell over in the a direction, however, are easily calc ulated as this atom is simply 1 unit cell away in a. Thus, all one has to do is add
1 to the x coordinate: (1.43, 0.60, 0.68). Such transform ations can be performed regardless of the shape of th e unit cell. Fractional
coordinates, therefore, are used to retain and manipula te crystal information.◦
1.53.522.13.522.43.5

1.6.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839Crystal directions
The designation of the individual vectors within any given crystal lattice is accomplished by the use of wh ole number multipliers of
the lattice parameter of the point at which the vect or exits the unit cell. The vector is indicated by th e notation [hkl], where h, k, and
l are reciprocals of the point at which the vector exit s the unit cell. The origination of all vectors is assu med defined as [000]. For
example, the direction along the a-axis according to this scheme would be [100] because this has a component only in the adirection and no component along either the b or c axial direction. A vector diagonally along the face defined by the a and b axis
would be [110], while going from one corner of the uni t cell to the opposite corner would be in the [111] direction. Figure.17
shows some examples of the various directions in the unit cell. The crystal direction notation is made up o f the lowest combination
of integers and represents unit distances rather th an actual distances. A [222] direction is identical to a [111], so [111] is used.
Fractions are not used. For example, a vector that int ercepts the center of the top face of the unit cell has the coordinates x = 1/2, y
= 1/2, z = 1. All have to be inversed to convert to th e lowest combination of integers (whole numbers); i.e., [221] in Figure.17.
Finally, all parallel vectors have the same crystal di rection, e.g., the four vertical edges of the cell sh own in Figure.17 all have
the crystal direction [hkl] = [001].
Figure: Some common directions in a cubic unit cell.
Crystal directions may be grouped in families. To a void confusion there exists a convention in the cho ice of brackets surrounding
the three numbers to differentiate a crystal directi on from a family of direction. For a direction, square brackets [hkl] are used to
indicate an individual direction. Angle brackets < hkl> indicate a family of directions. A family of dire ctions includes any directions
that are equivalent in length and types of atoms enco untered. For example, in a cubic lattice, the [100], [01 0], and [001] directions
all belong to the <100> family of planes because th ey are equivalent. If the cubic lattice were rotated 90, the a, b, and c directions
would remain indistinguishable, and there would be no wa y of telling on which crystallographic positions the atoms are situated, so
the family of directions is the same. In a hexagona l crystal, however, this is not the case, so the [100] a nd [010] would both be
<100> directions, but the [001] direction would be dis tinct. Finally, negative directions are identified wit h a bar over the negative
number instead of a minus sign.
Crystal planes
Planes in a crystal can be specified using a notation c alled Miller indices. The Miller index is indicated by the notation [hkl] where
h, k, and l are reciprocals of the plane with the x, y, and z axes. To obtain the Miller indices of a given plane r equires the following
steps:
1. The plane in question is placed on a unit cell.
2. Its intercepts with each of the crystal axes are then found.
3. The reciprocal of the intercepts are taken.
4. These are multiplied by a scalar to insure that is in th e simple ratio of whole numbers.
For example, the face of a lattice that does not int ersect the y or z axis would be (100), while a plane a long the body diagonal
would be the (111) plane. An illustration of this along wi th the (111) and (110) planes is given in Figure.18.◦

1.6.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839
Figure: Examples of Miller indices notation for crysta l planes.
As with crystal directions, Miller indices directions ma y be grouped in families. Individual Miller indices ar e given in parentheses
(hkl), while braces { hkl} are placed around the indices of a family of plane s. For example, (001), (100), and (010) are all in the
{100} family of planes, for a cubic lattice.
Description of crystal structures
Crystal structures may be described in a number of way s. The most common manner is to refer to the size an d shape of the unit cell
and the positions of the atoms (or ions) within the cel l. However, this information is sometimes insufficient to allow for an
understanding of the true structure in three dimensio ns. Consideration of several unit cells, the arrangem ent of the atoms with
respect to each other, the number of other atoms the y in contact with, and the distances to neighboring atoms, often will provide a
better understanding. A number of methods are availab le to describe extended solid-state structures. The most applicable with
regard to elemental and compound semiconductor, meta ls and the majority of insulators is the close packing app roach.
Close packed structures: hexagonal close packing and cubic close packing
Many crystal structures can be described using the co ncept of close packing. This concept requires that t he atoms (ions) are
arranged so as to have the maximum density. In order to understand close packing in three dimensions, the most efficient way for
equal sized spheres to be packed in two dimensions must be c onsidered.
The most efficient way for equal sized spheres to be pa cked in two dimensions is shown in Figure.19, in which it can be seen
that each sphere (the dark gray shaded sphere) is su rrounded by, and is in contact with, six other sphere s (the light gray spheres in
Figure.19). It should be noted that contact with six ot her spheres the maximum possible is the spheres are th e same size,
although lower density packing is possible. Close packe d layers are formed by repetition to an infinite sh eet. Within these close
packed layers, three close packed rows are present, shown by t he dashed lines in Figure.19.

1.6.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839
Figure: Schematic representation of a close packed la yer of equal sized spheres. The close packed rows (direc tions) are
shown by the dashed lines.
The most efficient way for equal sized spheres to be p acked in three dimensions is to stack close packed la yers on top of each other
to give a close packed structure. There are two simple ways in which this can be done, resulting in either a hexagonal or cubic close
packed structures.
Hexagonal close packed
If two close packed layers A and B are placed in con tact with each other so as to maximize the density, th en the spheres of layer B
will rest in the hollow (vacancy) between three of the spheres in layer A. This is demonstrated in Figure.2 0. Atoms in the
second layer, B (shaded light gray), may occupy one of two possible positions (Figure.20a or b) but not b oth together or a
mixture of each. If a third layer is placed on top of layer B such that it exactly covers layer A, subsequ ent placement of layers will
result in the following sequence...ABABAB.... This is known as hexagonal close packing or hcp.
Figure: Schematic representation of two close packed layers arranged in A (dark grey) and B (light grey) positions. The
alternative stacking of the B layer is shown in (a) an d (b).
The hexagonal close packed cell is a derivative of th e hexagonal Bravais lattice system (Figure.16) with th e addition of an
atom inside the unit cell at the coordinates (/, /, /). The basal plane of the unit cell coincides with the close packed layers
(Figure.21). In other words the close packed layer make s-up the {001} family of crystal planes.
Figure: A schematic projection of the basal plane of the hcp unit cell on the close packed layers.
The packing fraction in a hexagonal close packed ce ll is 74.05%; that is 74.05% of the total volume is occupied. The packing
fraction or density is derived by assuming that each atom is a hard sphere in contact with its nearest n eighbors. Determination of
the packing fraction is accomplished by calculating the number of whole spheres per unit cell (2 in hcp), the volume occupied by
these spheres, and a comparison with the total volume of a unit cell. The number gives an idea of how open or filled a structure is.
By comparison, the packing fraction for body-centered cubic (Figure.16) is 68% and for diamond cubic (an important
semiconductor structure to be described later) is it 34%.1

1.6.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839Cupic close packed: face-centered cubic
In a similar manner to the generation of the hexago nal close packed structure, two close packed layers ar e stacked (Figure.19)
however, the third layer (C) is placed such that it doe s not exactly cover layer A, while sitting in a set of troughs in layer B (Figure
.22), then upon repetition the packing sequence will be...AB CABCABC.... This is known as cubic close packing or ccp.
Figure: Schematic representation of the three close pa cked layers in a cubic close packed arrangement: A (d ark grey), B
(medium grey), and C (light grey).
The unit cell of cubic close packed structure is actu ally that of a face-centered cubic (fcc) Bravais lattice. In the fcc lattice the close
packed layers constitute the {111} planes. As with the hcp lattice packing fraction in a cubic close packed (fcc) cell is 74.05%.
Since face centered cubic or fcc is more commonly used in preference to cubic close pa cked (ccp) in describing the structures, the
former will be used throughout this text.
Coordination number
The coordination number of an atom or ion within an extended structure is defined as the number of neare st neighbor atoms (ions
of opposite charge) that are in contact with it. A s lightly different definition is often used for atom s within individual molecules: the
number of donor atoms associated with the central atom or ion. However, this distinction is rather artificial, and both can be
employed.
The coordination numbers for metal atoms in a molecu le or complex are commonly 4, 5, and 6, but all valu es from 2 to 9 are
known and a few examples of higher coordination numbe rs have been reported. In contrast, common coordinat ion numbers in the
solid state are 3, 4, 6, 8, and 12. For example, the at om in the center of body-centered cubic lattice has a coordination number of 8,
because it touches the eight atoms at the corners of the unit cell, while an atom in a simple cubic stru cture would have a
coordination number of 6. In both fcc and hcp lattice s each of the atoms have a coordination number of 12.
Octahedral and tetrahedral vacancies
As was mentioned above, the packing fraction in both fc c and hcp cells is 74.05%, leaving 25.95% of the volu me unfilled. The
unfilled lattice sites (interstices) between the atoms in a cell are called interstitial sites or vacancies. The shape and relative size of
these sites is important in controlling the position o f additional atoms. In both fcc and hcp cells most of the space within these
atoms lies within two different sites known as octahedra l sites and tetrahedral sites. The difference between t he two lies in their
coordination number, or the number of atoms surroun ding each site. Tetrahedral sites (vacancies) are su rrounded by four atoms
arranged at the corners of a tetrahedron. Similarly, octahedral sites are surrounded by six atoms which m ake-up the apices of an
octahedron. For a given close packed lattice an octahedr al vacancy will be larger than a tetrahedral vacancy.
Within a face centered cubic lattice, the eight tet rahedral sites are positioned within the cell, at th e general fractional coordinate of
(/, /, /) where n = 1 or 3, e.g., (/, /, /), (/, /, /), etc. Th e octahedral sites are located at the center of the unit cell
(/, /, /), as well as at each of the edges of the cell, e.g., (/,0,0). In the hexagonal close packed system, the tetrahedral sites are
at (0,0, /) and (/, /, /), and the octahedral sites are at (/, /, /) and all symmetry equivalent positions.
Important structure types
The majority of crystalline materials do not have a structure that ts into the one atom per site simple Bravais lattice. A number of
other important crystal structures are found, however, only a few of these crystal structures are those of which occur for the
elemental and compound semiconductors and the majori ty of these are derived from fcc or hcp lattices. Eac h structural type is
generally defined by an archetype, a material (ofte n a naturally occurring mineral) which has the struct ure in question and to which
all the similar materials are related. With regard to commonly used elemental and compound semiconduct ors the important
structures are diamond, zinc blende, Wurtzite, and to a lesser extent chalcopyrite. However, rock salt, β-tin, cinnabar and cesiumn
4n
4n

1.6.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839chloride are observed as high pressure or high tempe rature phases and are therefore also discussed. The fol lowing provides a
summary of these structures. Details of the full range o f solid-state structures are given elsewhere.
Diamond Cubic
The diamond cubic structure consists of two interpen etrating face-centered cubic lattices, with one offse t / of a cube along the
cube diagonal. It may also be described as face cent ered cubic lattice in which half of the tetrahedral sites are filled while all the
octahedral sites remain vacant. The diamond cubic un it cell is shown in Figure.23. Each of the atoms (e.g., C) is four
coordinate, and the shortest interatomic distance (C-C) ma y be determined from the unit cell parameter (a).
\[C-C = a\dfrac{\sqrt{3}}{4} \approx 0.442a \]
Figure: Unit cell structure of a diamond cubic latti ce showing the two interpenetrating face-centered cu bic lattices.
Zinc blende
This is a binary phase (ME) and is named after its arche type, a common mineral form of zinc sulfide (ZnS). As wit h the diamond
lattice, zinc blende consists of the two interpenetra ting fcc lattices. However, in zinc blende one lattic e consists of one of the types
of atoms (Zn in ZnS), and the other lattice is of the second type of atom (S in ZnS). It may also be describe d as face centered cubic
lattice of S atoms in which half of the tetrahedral si tes are filled with Zn atoms. All the atoms in a zinc blende structure are 4coordinate. The zinc blende unit cell is shown in Figur e.24. A number of inter-atomic distances may be cal culated for any
material with a zinc blende unit cell using the lattice para meter (a).
\[Zn-S = a\dfrac{\sqrt{3}}{4} \approx 0.442a \]
Figure: Unit cell structure of a zinc blende (ZnS) l attice. Zinc atoms are shown in green (small), sulfur a toms shown in red
(large), and the dashed lines show the unit cell.
Chalcopyrite
The mineral chalcopyrite CuFeS is the archetype of thi s structure. The structure is tetragonal (a = b ≠ c, α = β = γ = 90, and is
essentially a superlattice on that of zinc blende. Thus, is easiest to imagine that the chalcopyrite latti ce is made-up of a lattice of
sulfur atoms in which the tetrahedral sites are filled in layers,...FeCuCuFe..., etc. (Figure.25). In such an ideal ized structure c
= 2a, however, this is not true of all materials with chalcopyrit e structures.14
2◦

1.6.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839
Figure: Unit cell structure of a chalcopyrite lattic e. Copper atoms are shown in blue, iron atoms are shown in green and
sulfur atoms are shown in yellow. The dashed lines show t he unit cell.
Rock salt
As its name implies the archetypal rock salt structure is NaCl (table salt). In common with the zinc blende s tructure, rock salt
consists of two interpenetrating face-centered cubic lattices. However, the second lattice is offset 1/2 a along the unit cell axis. It
may also be described as face centered cubic lattice in which all of the octahedral sites are filled, while all the tetrahedral sites
remain vacant, and thus each of the atoms in the ro ck salt structure are 6-coordinate. The rock salt un it cell is shown in Figure
.26. A number of inter-atomic distances may be calcul ated for any material with a rock salt structure usi ng the lattice parameter
(a).
Figure: Unit cell structure of a rock salt lattice. So dium ions are shown in purple (small spheres) and chlori de ions are shown
in red (large spheres).

1.6.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839Cinnabar
Cinnabar, named after the archetype mercury sufilde, HgS, is a distorted rock salt structure in which the re sulting cell is
rhombohedral (trigonal) with each atom having a coordinati on number of six.
Wurtzite
This is a hexagonal form of the zinc sulfide. It is identical in the number of and types of atoms, but it is built from two
interpenetrating hcp lattices as opposed to the fcc lattices in zinc blende. As with zinc blende all the a toms in a wurtzite structure
are 4-coordinate. The wurtzite unit cell is shown in Fig ure.27. A number of inter atomic distances may be c alculated for any
material with a wurtzite cell using the lattice parameter (a).
However, it should be noted that these formulae do not necessarily apply when the ratio a/c is different fr om the ideal value of
1.632.
Figure: Unit cell structure of a wurtzite lattice. Z inc atoms are shown in green (small spheres), sulfur atom s shown in red
(large spheres), and the dashed lines show the unit cell.
Cesium Chloride
The cesium chloride structure is found in materials wit h large cations and relatively small anions. It has a simple (primitive) cubic
cell (Figure.16) with a chloride ion at the corners of the cube and the cesium ion at the body center. The coordination numbers
of both Cs+ and Cl-, with the inner atomic distances de termined from the cell lattice constant (a).

1.6.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839β-Tin
The room temperature allotrope of tin is β-tin or white tin. It has a tetragonal structure, in wh ich each tin atom has four nearest
neighbors (Sn-Sn = 3.016 Å) arranged in a very flattene d tetrahedron, and two next nearest neighbors (Sn-Sn = 3.175 Å). The
overall structure of β-tin consists of fused hexagons, each being linked to its ne ighbor via a four-membered Sn ring.
Defects in crystalline solids
Up to this point we have only been concerned with idea l structures for crystalline solids in which each at om occupies a designated
point in the crystal lattice. Unfortunately, defects or dinarily exist in equilibrium between the crystal la ttice and its environment.
These defects are of two general types: point defects a nd extended defects. As their names imply, point def ects are associated with
a single crystal lattice site, while extended defects occu r over a greater range.
Point defects: too many or too few or just plain wrong
Point defects have a significant effect on the prope rties of a semiconductor, so it is important to unders tand the classes of point
defects and the characteristics of each type. Figure.28 summarizes various classes of native point defects, however, they may
be divided into two general classes; defects with the wr ong number of atoms (deficiency or surplus) and defec ts where the identity
of the atoms is incorrect.
Figure: Point defects in a crystal lattice.
Interstitial Impurity
An interstitial impurity occurs when an extra atom is positioned in a lattice site that should be vacant i n an ideal structure (Figure
.28b). Since all the adjacent lattice sites are filled the additional atom will have to squeeze itself int o the interstitial site,
resulting in distortion of the lattice and alteratio n in the local electronic behavior of the structure. Small atoms, such as carbon, will
prefer to occupy these interstitial sites. Interstitia l impurities readily diffuse through the lattice via interstitial diffusion, which can4

1.6.13 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839result in a change of the properties of a material a s a function of time. Oxygen impurities in silicon gen erally are located as
interstitials.
Vacancies
The converse of an interstitial impurity is when ther e are not enough atoms in a particular area of the lattice. These are called
vacancies. Vacancies exist in any material above abs olute zero and increase in concentration with temper ature. In the case of
compound semiconductors, vacancies can be either ca tion vacancies (Figure.28c) or anion vacancies (Figur e.28d),
depending on what type of atom are missing.
Substitution
Substitution of various atoms into the normal lattice structure is common, and used to change the electron ic properties of both
compound and elemental semiconductors. Any impurity element that is incorporated during crystal growth c an occupy a lattice site.
Depending on the impurity, substitution defects can g reatly distort the lattice and/or alter the electro nic structure. In general, cations
will try to occupy cation lattice sites (Figure.28e), and anion will occupy the anion site (Figure.28f). For example, a zinc
impurity in GaAs will occupy a gallium site, if possible, while a sulfur, selenium and tellurium atoms would all try to substitute for
an arsenic. Some impurities will occupy either site indisc riminately, e.g., Si and Sn occupy both Ga and As sites in GaAs.
Antisite Defects
Antisite defects are a particular form of substitutio n defect, and are unique to compound semiconductors. An antisite defect occurs
when a cation is misplaced on an anion lattice site o r vice versa (Figure.28g and h). Dependent on the arr angement these are
designated as either AB antisite defects or BA antisit e defects. For example, if an arsenic atom is on a ga llium lattice site the defect
would be an AsGa defect. Antisite defects involve tting into a lattice site atoms of a different size than t he rest of the lattice, and
therefore this often results in a localized distort ion of the lattice. In addition, cations and anions wi ll have a different number of
electrons in their valence shells, so this substitution will alter the local electron concentration and the electronic properties of this
area of the semiconductor.
Extended Defects: Dislocations in a Crystal Lattice
Extended defects may be created either during crysta l growth or as a consequence of stress in the crystal lattice. The plastic
deformation of crystalline solids does not occur such that all bonds along a plane are broken and reform ed simultaneously. Instead,
the deformation occurs through a dislocation in the crystal lattice. Figure.29 shows a schematic represen tation of a dislocation
in a crystal lattice. Two features of this type of di slocation are the presence of an extra crystal plan e, and a large void at the
dislocation core. Impurities tend to segregate to the disl ocation core in order to relieve strain from their pr esence.
Figure: Dislocation in a crystal lattice.
Epitaxy
Epitaxy, is a transliteration of two Greek words epi, meaning "upon", and taxis, meaning "ordered". With respect to crystal growth
it applies to the process of growing thin crystalline layers on a crystal substrate. In epitaxial growth, t here is a precise crystal

1.6.14 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212839orientation of the lm in relation to the substrate. The growth of epitaxial films can be done by a numbe r of methods including
molecular beam epitaxy, atomic layer epitaxy, and chemic al vapor deposition, all of which will be described later.
Epitaxy of the same material, such as a gallium arsen ide lm on a gallium arsenide substrate, is called ho moepitaxy, while epitaxy
where the lm and substrate material are different is c alled heteroepitaxy. Clearly, in homoepitaxy, the sub strate and lm will have the
identical structure, however, in heteroepitaxy, it is important to employ where possible a substrate with the same structure and
similar lattice parameters. For example, zinc seleni de (zinc blende, a = 5.668 Å) is readily grown on gal lium arsenide (zinc blende,
a = 5.653 Å). Alternatively, epitaxial crystal growth ca n occur where there exists a simple relationship betwe en the structures of the
substrate and crystal layer, such as is observed between Al2O3 (100) on Si (100). Whichever route is chosen a c lose match in the
lattice parameters is required, otherwise, the strains induced by the lattice mismatch results in distortio n of the lm and formation of
dislocations. If the mismatch is signicant epitaxial g rowth is not energetically favorable, causing a textur ed lm or polycrystalline
untextured lm to be grown. As a general rule of thumb, epitaxy can be achieved if the lattice parameters of the two materials are
within about 5% of each other. For good quality epita xy, this should be less than 1%. The larger the misma tch, the larger the strain
in the lm. As the lm gets thicker and thicker, it will try to relieve the strain in the lm, which could incl ude the loss of epitaxy of the
growth of dislocations. It is important to note that the <100> directions of a lm must be parallel to th e <100> direction of the
substrate. In some cases, such as Fe on MgO, the [111] direc tion is parallel to the substrate [100]. The epitaxia l relationship is
specified by giving first the plane in the film that is p arallel to the substrate [100].
Bibliography
International Tables for X-ray Crystallography. V ol. IV; Kynoch Press: Birmingham, UK (1974).
B. F. G. Johnson, in Comprehensive Inorganic Chemistry, Pergamon Press, V ol. 4, Chapter 52 (1973).
A. R. West, Solid State Chemistry and its Applications, Wiley, New York (1984).
This page titled 1.6: Structure and Bonding - Crystal Structure is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128401.7: Structure and Bonding - Stereochemistry
Stereo isomers
Stereo isomers have the same empirical formula or mol ecular formula but different structural formulas. A typical example is
butane, C H, which can have two different possible struc tures: n-butane (Figure.30a) and iso-butane also known as 1methylpropane (Figure.30b).
Figure: The two stereo isomers of butane: (a) n-butane and (b) iso-butane.
Geometric isomers
Geometric isomers have the same empirical formula or molecular formula and also the same structural form ula, but have a different
relative arrangement of the substituent groups. For exa mple, the two geometric isomers of 1,2-dichloroethen e (Figure.31)
have the molecular formula of C H Cl, and the same str uctural formula of Cl(H)C=C(H)Cl, but the relative pos ition of the two
chlorine atoms can either be the same side of the C=C double bond (i.e., cis, see Figure.31a) or on opposite sides of the C=C
double bond (i.e., trans, see Figure.31b). The use of cis and trans is not limited to organic compounds such as olefins, b ut can
also be used in metal complexes, e.g., Figure.32.
Figure: The two geometric isomers of 1,2-dichloroethe ne.
Figure: Examples of (a) cis and (b) trans geometric isomers for metal complexes.4 10
2 2 2

1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840When it is not possible to describe geometric isomers by the terms cis or trans, the terms facial (fac, Figure.33a) or meridinal
(mer, Figure.33b) are commonly employed.
Figure: Examples of (a) fac and (b) mer geometric iso mers for metal complexes.
Optical isomers
If the mirror object and mirror image of a molecule are not the same (i.e., they are not superimposable) they are known as
enantiomers. If they also have optical activity they are calle d chiral and are described as having chirality. Enantiomers of a
particular compound have the same general properties with two exceptions:
1. Their behavior to polarized light.
2. Their reaction with other chiral molecules
It is possible to determine if a molecule is chiral o r not from its symmetry. Chiral molecules will have no symmetry or axis of
rotation. The optical activity of a chiral molecule will turn the plane of polarized light either to the right (+) or the left (-). The
former is known as dextrorotatory (D), while the latter is known as levorotatory (L).
Configuration
The configuration of a chiral molecule may be repre sented in a number of ways. Lactic acid (C H O) provides a suitable and
simple example. The two optical isomers of lactic acid can be represented in 3-dimensional (3D) form as shown in Figure.34;
however, it is also possible to draw the same molecules i n 2D using the Fischer projection (Figure.35). While th e Fisher
projection does not appear to dene the geometry abou t the central carbon atom, the convention is that th e side chains are out of the
plane of the page (towards the observer), while the top and bottom groups are into the plane of the page (away from the observer).
Thus, Figure.35a is a representation of Figure.34a, and Fig ure.35b is a representation of Figure.34b.
Figure: 3D representations of lactic acid.3 6 3

1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840
Figure: 2D Fischer representations of lactic acid.
Fischer-Rosenoff convention
The Fischer-Roseno convention defines chirality of a molecule using the Fischer projection. The conventio n is based upon D-(+)glyceraldehydes (Figure.36).
Figure: The Fischer projection of D-(+)-glyceraldehyd e.
To determine the chiral label for a molecule, the Fi scher projection is drawn with the longest carbon chain pointing away from the
observer, i.e., into the plain of the page. The numbe r 1 carbon (that of the highest substitution) is pos itioned at the top of the
diagram. If the functional group is on the right of the diagram the isomer is given the label D (from th e dextrorotatory enantiomer
of glyceraldehydes rather than the molecule being d extrorotatory per se), i.e., Figure.36. On the other han d if the functional
group is on the left of the diagram the isomer is gi ven the label L (from the levorotatory enantiomer o f glyceraldehyde rather than
the molecule being levorotatory per se).
Rules
Where molecules are large and complex a number of additi onal rules are useful:
1. Make any alcohol substituent to be nearest to the top, e.g., a butan-2-ol (Figure.37a) rather than a butan-3-ol (Fi gure
.37b).
2. Aldehydes and ketones are the number 1 carbon atom.
3. If there are both sets of substituents, rule 1 has p recedence over rule 2.
Figure: Preferred positioning of an alcohol substituen t to be nearest the top (a) rather than at the botto m (b), according to the
rules of the Fischer-Roseno convention.

1.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840Nomenclature in terms of R and S
The R/S nomenclature is a more widely used alternative to the D/L nomenclature, and is based upon the hierarchical or der of the
substituents. From the Fischer projection, the groups a re ordered with the largest atom first, as shown in Figu re.38. The lowest
numbered substituent is then oriented away from the o bserver (i.e., H in Figure.38). The order of the remain ing substituents 1,
2, 3 is then traced: if it goes clockwise the molecu le is labeled R, if it goes anti-clockwise (counter-clockwise) the mo lecule is
labeled S.
Figure: The structure of Slactic acid, and the order ing of the substituents.
The advantage of the R/S methodology is that it can also be used for geometric isomers. Thus, while cis and trans are useful when
the groups either side of a C=C double bond are the same (e.g., cis-1,2dichloroethene, Figure.39a); howeve r, when four
different groups are present (e.g., A, B, X, and Y as seen in Figure.39b) then an alternative must be used. By taking either
group A/B or X/Y and placing in order of precedence, the relat ive order defines the isomer. Thus, if in Figure b A>B and X>Y
the label Z (zusammen from the German for together) is used. Conversely, if in Figure b A<B and X>Y the la bel E (entgegen
from the German for opposite) is used.
Figure: The structures of (a) cis-1,2-dichloroethene a nd (b) a generic olen with four different substituent groups.
More complex molecules
As molecules become more complex with multiple functio nal groups and multiple chiral centers the D/L nomenclature has the
potential to become confusing. Erythrose has two chir al centers, and based upon the Fischer projections i t may be seen that since
the alcohol substituents in the 2 and 3 positions ar e on the same side of the backbone in the Fischer pro jection irrespective if it is D(-)-erythrose or L-(+)-erythrose (Figure.40a and b). Thus, the naming is simplified despite the presence of multiple side
groups. However, in threose (Figure.40c) the substitue nts are on different sides of the Fischer projection ra ising the issue as to
whether this should be L or D. However, in such cases the su bstituent at the bottom of the side chain takes pri ority, thus Figure
.40c is D-(-)-threose.
Figure: The Fischer projections of (a) D-(-)-erythrose, (b) L-(+)-erythrose, and (c) D-(-)-threose.
Note

1.7.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840D-(-)-erythrose and L-(+)-erythrose are enantiomers, and D-(+)-threose and L-(+)-threose are also enantiomers, but threose and
erythrose are diasteriomers. Enantiomers have the same physical properties (just different behavior to polarized light), while
diasteriomers may have different physical properties such a s melting points and solubility.
Amino Acids
Amino acids (or more properly α-amino acids) are comp ounds containing both an amine (NH) group and a carb oxylic acid
(CO H) attached to the same carbon atom. The presence o f both acid and base groups can result in the format ion of the
Zwitterionic form with ammonium (NH) and carboxylate (CO) g roups.
In defining the labels for amino acids, the basis is D-(-)-allothreonine (Figure.41), whereas for an amino acid such as
threonine the top substituent is used for a label, e.g., Figu re.42.
Figure: The Fischer projection of D-(-)-allothreonine.
Figure: The Fischer projection of D-(-)-threonine.
Similar chiral centers
Just because a compound has more than one chiral cen ter does not mean that it is optically active. A con sideration of erythritol
shows the presence of a mirror plane of symmetry (Figu re1.43). As such, erythritol is not optically active, i.e., there is no effect on
polarized light. In contrast, while threitol has the s ame molecular and geometric formula, the lack of a mirror plane of symmetry
(Figure.44) means that the L- and D+ forms are optically active.
Figure: The Fischer projections of D and L erythritol showing the presence of a mirror plane of symmetry. N.B. The presence
of a mirror plane means that erythritol is not optica lly active and hence there is no need to label with + or -.2
3+2-

1.7.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840
Figure: The Fischer projections of (a) L-(-)-threitol and (b) D-(+)-threitol.
Compounds with a D:L ratio of 1:1 are called racemic compounds and are totally optically inactive. However, it is also possible for
a racemic solution of a compound to crystallize to for m crystals of pure D or L, which may be manually separated.
Optical isomers that are not tetrahedral
Pyrimidal molecules
Pyramidal molecules can also exhibit chirality when t he three substituents are distinct, e.g., PR R R (Figure.4 5).
Unfortunately, most pyramidal compounds undergo an inv ersion of their isomers (in a similar manner to turni ng an umbrella inside
out), such that the chiral forms interconvert rapidly. In such a case, it is not possible to resolve (separ ate) the different forms.
Phosphines may generally be resolved because the barrier t o their inversion is suficiently large (ca. 132 kJ/mol)
Figure: An example of a chiral phosphine where R1 ≠ R2 ≠ R3.
The notation used for pyramidal molecules is the sam e as that for tetrahedral molecules, in that the ind ividual substituents are
ordered with the largest atom first. The lone pair i s defined as having the lowest numbering and thus is o riented away from the
observer. The order of the remaining substituents 1, 2, and 3 is then traced: if it goes clockwise the molecu le is labeled R, if it goes
anti-clockwise (counter-clockwise) the molecule is label ed S.
Chirality in octohedral complexes
The presence of a chelate ligand on an octahedral comple x can induce chirality in the complex.
A chelate ligand is a molecule or ion that is bonded to at least two points of a central atom or ion. The term chelate is from the
Greek chelè, meaning claw.
Unlike tetrahedral based compounds, chiral octahedral compounds have their nomenclature based on the struct ure of a helix. For
example, in the case of a bis-chelate complex (Figur e.46), with one of the chelate ligands pointing strai ght up the helix, the
direction of the other defines the chirality of the helix, i.e., if it is a left or right hand helix. If t he ligand points up to the left the
complex is assigned the symbol shown in Figure.46a, wh ile if the ligand points up to the right the comple x is assigned the
symbol shown in Figure.46b.1 2 3
Note

1.7.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840
Figure: The two optical isomers of a bis-chelate metal complex.
In complexes with three chelate ligands (i.e., a tris-ch elate complex, Figure.47), the same methodology appl ies, in that any
two ligands can be chosen and the same rules applied.
Figure: The two optical isomers of a tris-chelate meta l complex.
Methods of resolution of racemic mixtures
A racemic mixture, or racemate, is one that has equal amounts of left- and right-handed enantiomers of a c hiral molecule. The first
known racemic mixture was "racemic acid," which Louis Pa steur (Figure.48) found to be a mixture of the two en antiomeric
isomers of tartaric acid (Figure.49).
Figure: French microbiologist and chemist Louis Pasteur w ho is remembered for his remarkable breakthroughs in t he causes
and preventions of disease (1822 1895).
Figure: The Fischer projections of the two enantiomeri c isomers of tartaric acid.
In nature, it is common that only one of an optical isomers is naturally produced, but in laboratory synt hesis it is more common that
both isomers are made in equal amounts. The separati on of a racemate into its components (the pure enant iomers) is called a chiral
resolution.

1.7.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840Mechanical seperation
The crystals of enantiomerically pure compounds ofte n have different appearances. Thus, just as Pasteur did i n 1848, it is often
possible to look under a microscope and physically sepa rate the two different enantiomers.
Resolution by formation of diasteriomers
One of the differentiating properties of a chiral mo lecule is that each enantiomer reacts with another ch iral molecule to form a
diastereomeric pair of compounds. For example, a race mic acid, (+)HA and (-)HA, will react with a chiral base, (-)B, to form a
mixture of diasteriomers, [(-)BH+.(+)A-] and [(-)BH+.(-)A-]. Because diasteriomers have different physical pro perties they can be
separated by recrystallization. Once separated by re crystallization, the addition of excess acid will lib erate the enantiomerically
pure compound, i.e., (+)HA or (-)HA. A typical chiral ba se would be a natural alkaloid base to ensure that it is pure + or -. If it is a
base that is needed to be separated, then (-)malic acid is a suitable acid.
Resolution by chromatography
In a related method to resolution by the formation of diasteriomers, a chiral column material will allow for the chromatographic
separation of an enantiomeric mixture. Thus, the ret ention rate for (+)X will be different from (-)X on a column in which the
stationary phase is chiral, i.e., (-)A. Many common chi ral stationary phases are based on oligosaccharides such as cellulose or
cyclodextrin (in particular with β-cyclodextrin).
Labile stereo isomers and racemization
It is only possible to separate (resolve) racemic m ixtures if the molecule stays as one form for a lon g time. In other words, if there
is a mechanism by which the two forms are interconverted, then resolution cannot be achieved.
Intramolecular rearrangement
Intramolecular rearrangements involve no bonds being broken. The classic example is the inversion of an amine, (1.12), which has
a low energy barrier (24.7 kJ/mol).
Another example of an intramolecular rearrangement i s the conversion of a square-based pyramidal geometry via a trigonal
bipyramidal geometry to the isomeric square-based p yramidal geometry, or the alternative isomerization of one trigonal
bipyramidal geometry to another via a square-based p yramidal transition state. Such a process is known as a Berry rotation. The
Berry mechanism is a pseudorotation process for simul taneously interchanging two equatorial groups with th e two axial groups,
while the third equatorial group (called the pivot grou p) remains an equatorial group (Figure.50).
Figure: The Berry pseudorotation.
Intermolecular processes
Intermolecular processes involve bond breaking (and bond formation). For example a tetrahedral compound could loose one ligand,
which creates a labile pyramidal compound. Rapid inver sion of the pyramidal compound is followed by re-att achment of the
ligand. Such a process is often so fast that resolution cannot be achieved.
Intramolecular processes
Intramolecular processes with bond breaking (and makin g) also lead to racemization. For example, in an oct ahedral complex with
chelate ligands, if one of the ends of a chelate lig and detaches, it can reattach in the same configuratio n, or attach differently to
change the chirality. In this manner the chirality can be c hanged from one form to another.

1.7.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840Conformation
The conformation of a molecule arises from the rotati on of a single bond (Figure.51). However, even though t here is rotation
about the bond, there are energy barriers due to ste ric interactions of the substituents. In order to un derstand (and predict) these
interactions, it is necessary to visualize the molecu le in such a manner as to highlight the across-bond i nteractions; this is done by
using a Newman projection.
Figure: The rotation about the C-C single bond in et hane.
A Newman projection, useful in alkane stereochemistry, visualizes chemical conformations of a carbon-carbo n chemical bond from
front to back, with the front carbon represented by a dot and the back carbon as a circle (Figure.52). T he front carbon atom is
called proximal, while the back atom is called distal. This type of representation is useful for assessing the torsional angle between
bonds. Using ethane as an example, the Newman projecti on along the C-C single bond results in two basic con formations: eclipsed
(Figure.52a) and staggered (Figure.52b). The staggere d conformation will be energetically favored since th e substituents
are the most distant from each other. Conversely, the staggered will be the highest in energy. The differen ce in energy between the
two conformations will define the barrier to rotation. In t he case of ethane this is very small (12.5 kJ/mol).
Figure: The Newman projection of ethane showing (a) eclipsed (E) and (b) staggered (S) conformations.
Although we often only consider the two extreme confor mations, in reality there is a continuum around 360◦ rotation of the C-C
bond. Figure.53 shows the relative energy as a functi on of the dihedral angle for ethane. Since each carbo n in ethane has
equivalent substitution (i.e., three H atoms) the ener gy for each staggered conformation is the same. This is not true for more
complex molecules such as butane (Figure.54).

1.7.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840
Figure: The relative energy as a function of the dih edral angle for ethane.
Figure: The relative energy as a function of the dih edral angle for butane.
As may be seen from Figure.54, the staggered conformati on in which the two methyl groups (represented by the b lack circles)
are as far away from each other (anti) is the most energetically favored. The other two sta ggered conformations (gauche) are mirror
images of each other and are hence conformation ena ntiomers. It should also be noted from Figure.54 th at the eclipsed
conformations vary in energy since the presence of m ethyl methyl near neighbors is clearly less energetic ally favorable than
methyl H near neighbors.
Generally the rotation about C-C bonds has a low barr ier to rotation, however, if substituents are sucientl y bulky the molecule will
not twist around the bond, e.g., substituted bi-phenyl with st erically bulky substituents (Figure.55)....

1.7.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840
Figure: The ease of rotation about the C-C bond of a substituted bi-phenyl will depend on the steric bulk of X and Y.
Free rotation about a C-C bond is not fully possible when you have a ring system, e.g., in a cyclic compo und such as cyclohexane,
C H. The limited rotation about the C-C bonds results in the ipping of the ring conformation from the ch air form (Figure
.56a) to the boat form (Figure.56b). Since the boat f orm has steric hindrance between the hydrogen atoms, the chair form
is the more stable.
Figure: The chair (a) and boat (b) conformations of cyclohexane, C H.
Conformation of compounds with lone pairs
Lone pairs often behave in a different manner to su bstituents in regard to conformations. Thus, methyla mine (CH NH) would be
predicted to have the staggered conformation shown i n Figure.57a. However, the lower steric bulk of the lon e pair results in
the nitrogen being 0.09 Å away from the true center of the CH projection (Figure.57b).
Figure: The ideal (a) and observed (b) conformations of methylamine, CH NH.
In compounds with more than one lone pair, the lowest energy form is not always the anti conformation. For example, at 20 C
hydrazine (H NNH) is 100% gauche (Figure.58a); but for substituted hydrazines (i.e., a diamine, R NNR) if the substituent
groups are suficiently large then the anti conformati on will dominate (Figure.58b).
Figure.58: The stable conformation of hydrazine (H2N NH2) at 20 ◦C (a) as compared to the anti conformati on (b) observed
for diamines (R2NNR2).6 12
6 12
3 2
3 2
2 2 2 2

1.7.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212840The conformation of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is domin ated by the lone pairs rather than the hydrogen ato ms. Instead of the
expected anti conformation (c.f., Figure.54 where the black circles would represent the hydrogen atoms) in the free state the
dihedral angle is 94 (Figure.59). The conformation of hydrogen peroxide is therefore neither eclipsed nor staggered but an
intermediate structure. When in the solid state hydrogen bonding will cause the shape and angles to change.
Figure: The structure of hydrogen peroxide in the fr ee state.
Bibliography
R. S. Berry, J. Chem. Phys., 1960, 32, 933.
A. Keys, S. G. Bott, and A. R. Barron, J. Chem. Cryst., 1998, 28, 629.
This page titled 1.7: Structure and Bonding - Stereochemistry is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.◦

1.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126111.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
The choice of solvent is an important parameter for any chemical reaction. The following provides a guide to some of the
consideration to be made in choosing a solvent to ensur e the desired reaction occurs.
Solvation
Solvation may be defined as the interaction between th e solvent and the solute, however, two general classes of solvation have
different consequences to the stability of either re agents or products in a chemical reaction, and hence the potential of a reaction to
occur
Specific solvation is where the solvent interacts with one of the ions (or mole cules) in solution via a covalent interaction.
Furthermore, there will be a specific number of solvent mole cules bound to each ion (or molecule), e.g., [Cu(NH)] and
[Mg(H O)6] (Figure.60a).
Non-specific solvation is as a result of van der Waals or dipole-dipole forces b etween the solvent and an ion (or molecule).
There will be no defined number of interactions and the solv ent...ion interaction will be highly fluxional, e.g., whi le water
solvates the chloride ion (Figure.60b) the number of water molecules around each anion is not fixed
Figure: Examples of (a) specific and (b) non-specific solvation.
Table.10 shows the ability of three solvents to act wi th specific and non-specific solvation. The relative solvation ability of
each solvent results in three different products from the diss olution of iron(III) chloride (FeCl).
Solvation DMSO (Me SO) Pyridine (C H N) Acetonitrile (MeCN)
Specific Good Very good Poor
Non-specific Good Poor Moderately good
Dissolution of FeCl in DMSO results in the dissociation of a chloride ligand, (1.8.1), due to both the specific solvation of the
FeCl cation and the non-specific solvation of the Cl - anion. In fact, the good solvation properties of DM SO means that depending
on the concentration (and temperature) a series of dis sociations may occur, (1.8.2).
In contrast, if FeCl is dissolved in pyridine (py) th e neutral Lewis acid-base complex is formed, (1.8.3), be cause while pyridine is
a very good at specific solvation (Table.10), it is poor at solvating the chloride anion.
In a similar manner, FeCl (MeCN) will be formed by the d issolution in acetonitrile, because although it is no t good at specific
solvation, it is not sufficiently good at non-specific solvation to stabilize the chloride anion. However, sin ce the FeCl anion has a3 42+
22+
2 5 5
2+
3 3
4-

1.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212611lower charge density that Cl-, it can be supported b y the non-specific solvation of acetonitrile and th us a disproportionation reaction
occurs, (1.8.4).
Interference by the solvent
Rather than solvating a molecule or ion, the solvent can t ake an active and detrimental role in the synthesis of a de sired compound.
Solvolysis
The archetypal solvolysis reaction is the reaction wit h water, i.e., hydrolysis, (). However, solvolysis is a gen eral reaction,
involving bond breaking by the solvent. Thus, the rea ction with ammonia is ammonolysis, (), the reaction with acetic acid is
acetolysis, (), and the reaction with an alcohol is alcoholysis, () where Et =. In each case the same general react ion
takes place yielding the cation associated with the s olvent.
Competition reactions
Where more than one reaction could occur the reaction inv olving the solvent can often compete with the desired react ion.
If it is desired to synthesis the Lewis acid-base com plex between diethylether (Et O) and boron triuoride (BF) it is important to
choose a solvent that will not compete with the comple x formation. For example, pyridine is a poor choice be cause the nitrogen
donor is a stronger Lewis base than the diethylether, (1.8.9), and thus no reaction would occur between dieth ylether and boron
trifluoride. In contrast, since acetonitrile (MeCN) is a po or Lewis base, then the reaction will occur.
If the synthesis of GeCl from germanium tetrachloride (GeCl) and a source of chloride anion, then water woul d be a poor choice
of solvent since hydrolysis of GeCl would result. Liqu id hydrogen chloride would be equally poor solvent si nce strong Cl-...H-Cl
hydrogen bonding would stabilize the chloride anion and preclude reaction. In contrast, nitromethane (CH NO) would be a polar
enough solvent to solvate the GeCl, but it will be displac ed by the chloride anion, which would be only weakly solvated.
Salt formation
The formation of a salt via a double displacement rea ction, (1.8.10), can be promoted by the choice of sol vent by shifting the
equilibrium by stabilization of one or more reagent/pr oduct.
Salt stabilization through relative acidity
The attempted formation of nitronium perchlorate fr om nitric acid and perchloric acid, (1.8.11), in water will result in the
decomposition of the NO cation, (1.24). However, if the r eaction is carried out in a stronger acid, i.e., sulfuri c acid, the NO
cation is stable, and the resulting salt can be recysta llized, (1.8.12).
In a similar manner, the weak basic character of water means the equilibrium reaction, (1.25), has a very s mall equilibrium
constant, K. However, if the reaction is carried out in a strongly basic solvent such as ammonia the uride an ion is stabilized, (1.26),
and can be precipitated by cation exchange.2 3
3 2
2+2+

1.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212611
Salt stabilization through solvation
The following observations may be explained by a consider ation of the solvation ability of the solvent.
1. The reaction of silver nitrate with barium chloride i n water yields silver chloride and barium nitrate, (1.8.1 3).
2. The reaction of barium nitrate with silver chloride in am monia yields barium chloride and silver nitrate, (1.8.14).
Since silver nitrate and barium nitrate are soluble in both solvents, the differences must be due to dif ferences in the solubility of the
chlorides in each solvent. A consideration of the r elative stability of solid silver chloride versus th e solvated species (Figure
.61) shows that the enthalpy of solvation in water is less than the lattice energy. Thus, if silver chloride were present as Ag+
and Cl- in water it would spontaneously precipitate. I n contrast, the enthalpy of solvation in ammonia is gr eater than the lattice
energy, thus solid AgCl will dissolve readily in liquid ammonia. The reason for the extra stabilization from the specific solvation of
the silver cation by the ammonia, i.e., the formation of the covalent complex [Ag(NH)].
Figure: Enthalpy of solvation of silver chloride in w ater and ammonia in comparison to the lattice energy.
As may be seen from Figure.62, the opposite effect occ urs for barium chloride. Here the enthalpy of solvati on in ammonia is
less than the lattice energy. Thus, if barium chlori de were present as Ba and Cl in ammonia it would spon taneously precipitate.
In contrast, the enthalpy of solvation in water is g reater than the lattice energy, thus solid BaCl will d issolve readily in water. The
stabilization of Ba (aq) occurs because water will hav e a larger sphere of non-specific solvation as a conseq uence of having two
lone pairs, allowing interaction with the Ba as well as ot her water molecules (Figure.63).3 2+
2+ 2
2+
2+

1.8.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212611
Figure: Enthalpy of solvation of barium chloride in water and ammonia in comparison to the lattice energ y.
Figure: Schematic representation of the extended wate r solvation (aquation) sphere about Ba2+ cation.
Electron transfer reaction
A consideration of the oxidation, (1.8.15), and reduc tion, (1.8.16), reactions that occur for pure water at neutral pH (where [H] =
10) would suggest that water will not tolerate oxidant s whose E0 is greater than 0.82 V nor tolerate reduct ants whose E0 is less
than -0.41 V.
Thus, while water has a fair range to support redox rea ctions it is not very good at the extremes with stro ng reducing agents or
strong oxidizing agents. Liquid ammonia is an excell ent solvent for very strong reducing agents because of the stabilization of
solvated electrons, i.e., [e (NH)]. In contrast, hydroc hloric acid is a good solvent for reactions involving very strong oxidizing
agents.
This page titled 1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.+
-7
3 6

1.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126121.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of Combustion
When discussing the combustion of a compound it is ordi narily referring to the reaction of an organic comp ound (hydrocarbon)
with oxygen, in which the carbon is converted to carbo n dioxide (CO) and the hydrogen forms water (H O) as a vapor, e.g.,
(1.9.1).
However, this only a narrow view of combustion, and a mor e general denition should be that combustion or burn ing is the sequence
of exothermic chemical reactions between a fuel and an oxidant accompanied by the production of heat an d conversion of chemical
species. Based upon this definition methane can combust in the presence of fluorine (F) as strong oxidant, (1.9.2).
In considering the combustion of any flammable compo und, for example gasoline, it should be noted that th e compounds that make
up gasoline are quiet stable in the absence of a sourc e of oxygen (usually from the air). Furthermore, some form of energy input
(heat, flame, or spark) must be provided. Thus, the comb ustion of gasoline provides the archetypal example o f the three component
explosive system typical of a traditional chemical e xplosive: fuel (something that will burn), an oxidize r (usually a source of
oxygen), and energy (ignition). In this regard, combu stion also includes the exothermic reactions of many metals with oxygen,
(1.9.3).
It is not just reactive metals that can be used as t he fuel component of combustion, but many of their c ompounds as well. The
formation of water from the hydrogen in organic comp ounds, in combination with an oxygen source, releases significant energy. It
stands to reason therefore that any compound compri sing of hydrogen and an element can be a potential f uel: a compound of
hydrogen and another element is known as a hydride. This is especially true for the hydrides of reacti ve metals such as aluminum
and sodium (and metalloids such as boron, (1.9.4)), but is also true for the hydrides of silicon and phosp horus. These hydride
compounds react with an oxidizer in a manner analogou s to that of a hydrocarbon, as may be seen by a compar ison of (1.9.5) and
(1.9.1).
Figure.64 shows a comparison of the heat of combusti on of various inorganic fuels with commonly used jet fuels (JP-10 and
JP-8). Hydrocarbons heat of combustion is limited by th e C:H ratio, while graphite is the limiting case. Boron and boron
compounds have greater volumetric and gravimetric en ergy density than hydrocarbons, and therefore were stu died as potential
high-energy fuels.2 2

1.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212612
Figure: Heat of combustion of various fuels.
Ammonia has been proposed as a practical alternative to fossil fuel for internal combustion engines. The energy value of
ammonia is 22.5 MJ/kg, which is about half that of diese l. In a normal engine, in which the water vapor is not condensed, the
caloric value of ammonia will be about 21% less than this value; however, it can be used in existing engine s with only minor
modifications to carburetors/fuel injectors.
Oxygen (O) from the air does not have to be the sour ce of oxidizer. Alternatives such as hydrogen peroxi de (H O), nitrous oxide
(N O), and nitrates (e.g., ammonium nitrate, NH (NO)) are al l sources of oxygen for combustion or explosions. Howev er, this
does not mean that every compound containing oxygen can be an oxidizer. For example, alcohols such as met hanol will burn (in
the presence of additional oxygen), but they will not act as an oxidizer. The oxygen within any compound m ust be reactive. By this
we mean that it must be able to be released, preferen tially as the more reactive oxygen atom (O) rather th an O, or be attached
(chemically bonded to an element that wants to get r id of the oxygen (i.e., an element that is readily red uced). The most likely
element in this case is nitrogen, with sulfur and phosp horus also potential candidates. Almost all compounds containing nitrogen
bonded to oxygen can act as an oxidizer. Generally, the more ox ygen atoms attached to nitrogen the more reactive the compound.
The efficiency of a chemical reaction such as combust ion is dependent on how well the fuel and oxidizer ar e mixed at the
molecular scale. Obviously the best situation is if both components are in the same molecule. Self-oxidiz ers are compounds
containing oxygen in a reactive form as well as a sui table fuel (carbon or hydrogen). The most common se lf-oxidizers are organic
nitrates. It should be pointed out that in spite of t he presence of reactive oxygen, self-oxidizers may sti ll require an external source
of oxygen to ensure complete reaction, and some form o f energy input (ignition) is still required.
Oxygen balance
While many compounds contain oxygen that does not mea n they will combust efficiently in the absence of an external oxidizer, or
whether they have sufficient oxygen to completely self -combust, or whether they can act as an oxidizer for o ther compounds. The
simplest test for a compound's potential to fulfill these roles is its oxygen balance. The oxygen balance for a chemical is the amount
of oxygen needed or produced to ensure the complete oxi dation of all the carbon, hydrogen, or other elements.Note
2 2 2
2 4 3

1.9.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212612Compounds such as trinitrotoluene (TNT, Figure.65a) ha ve a negative oxygen balance since extra oxygen is needed for
complete formation of all the CO and H O possible, (1.9.6). Thus, despite its reputation as an explosive, T NT is only efficient in
the presence of an external oxidant, which may be air or another compound that provides a positive oxygen balanc e.
Figure: The structures of (a) trinitrotoluene (TNT) a nd (b) The structure of performic acid.
In contrast to TNT, performic acid (Figure.65b) is an example of a compound with a zero oxygen balance: it has all the
oxygen it needs for complete combustion, (1.9.7), and hence only requires energy to detonate making at a much more dangerous
compound per se than TNT.
A positive oxygen balance means that the compound l iberates oxygen surplus to its own needs, for exampl e the decomposition of
ammonium nitrate provides one atom of oxygen per mol ecule, (1.9.8). Clearly, any compound with a positive ox ygen balance
makes a good oxidizer and is highly incompatible with c ombustible chemicals.
Quantification of oxygen balance
A quantification of oxygen balance allows for the det ermination of approximate ratio of reagents to optim ize
combustion/explosion. In this regard oxygen balance is defined as the number of moles of oxygen (excess or deficient) for 100 g of
a compound of a known molecular weight (M), (1.8.9) wher e x = number of atoms of carbon, y = number of atoms of hydrogen, z
= number of atoms of oxygen, and m = number of atoms of meta l oxide produced.
In the case of TNT, the M = 227.1 g/mol, the number o f carbon atoms (x) = 7, the number of hydrogen atoms (y) = 5, the
number of oxygen atoms (z) = 6, and the number of atoms of meta l oxide produced (m) = 0. Therefore:
A summary of selected oxygen balance values is given in Table.11.
Table.11: Oxygen balance of selected compounds.2 2
w
Example
w

1.9.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212612Element or Compound Oxygen balance (%)
Carbon -266.7
Sulfur -100
Aluminum powder -89
Trinitrotoluene -74
Nitroglycerine +3.5
Ammonium nitrate +20
Ammonium perchlorate +27
Potassium chlorate +26
Sodium chlorate +45
Sodium nitrate +37
Tetranitromethane +57
Lithium perchlorate +45
This page titled 1.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of Combustion is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2140861.10: Periodic Trends for the Main Group Elements
Within the main group (s- and p-block) elements of t he Periodic Table (Figure.66) there are some general trends that we can
observe for the elemental form, as well as the hydrides, oxide s, and halides.
Figure: The main group elements (Adapted from www.me ta-synthesis.com).
Periodic trends for the main group elements
Within the main group (s- and p-block) elements there are some general trends that we can observe.
The further down a given Group the elements have increase d metallic character, i.e., good conductors of both heat and
electricity, and exhibit delocalized bonding.
Moving from left to right across a Period the elements have gr eater non-metallic character, they are insulators with loc alized
bonding.
Within the p-block at the boundary between the metallic elements (Figure.66, grey elements) and nonmetal element s
(Figure.66, green elements) there is positioned boron and silicon that are metalloid in character (Figure.66, pi nk
elements), i.e., they have low electrical conductivity but it increases with temperature.
As an example of these changes Table.12 shows the trends acros s one Period.
Table.12: Summary of trends for elements across the Per iodic Table.
Element Na Mg Al Si P S Cl Ar
PropertiesElectropositi
ve metalElectropositi
ve metalMetal but
forms
covalent
bondsMetalloid
semiconduct
or
metal/nonmetal
characteristi
csE-E bonding
in elementsE-E bonding
in elementsSimple
moleculeMonoatomic
gas
Periodic trends for the main group hydrides
The properties of main group hydrides are dependant on the difference in electronegativity between the e lement and hydrogen
(Table.13). Elements on the left of the Periodic Tab le are highly electropositive and form ionic hydride s, while those of the
center and right are covalent in character. However, of those with covalent E-H bonds, there is a change from polymeric hydrides to
molecular compounds. For example, the Group 13 element hydrides (i.e., BH) form hydrogen-bridged oligomers (i.e., B H). In
contrast, HCl is a diatomic molecule.3 2 6

1.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/214086Table.13: Summary of properties of selected main gro up hydrides as a function of the relative electronega tivities.
HydrideElement
electronegativityHydrogen
electronegativityE-H polarity Structure Comments
NaH 0.9 2.1 M H IonicReacts with H O to
liberate H
BH 2.0 2.1 B -HOligomeric and
polymericReacts slowly with
H O
CH 2.4 2.1 C -H Molecular Insoluble in H O
HCl 3.0 2.1 Cl -H MolecularDissolves in H O to
form H and Cl
Periodic trends for the main group oxides
As with hydrides the properties of main group oxides a re dependant on the difference in electronegativity between the element and
oxygen. Highly electropositive metals for ionic oxides, while other elements for covalent bonds (albeit pol ar in character) with
oxygen. In addition, the aggregation of covalent oxid es decreased across the Period from left to right (Tab le.14). As may also
be seen from Table.14, oxides of elements on the lef t of the Periodic Table dissolve in water to form basic solutions, while
those on the right form acidic solutions. There is a class of oxides (especially those of Group 13 and 14) that can react as either an
acid or a base. These are known as amphoteric substances.
The word is from the Greek prefix ampho meaning "both"
Table.14: Comparison of oxides across the Periodic Tabl e.
Oxide Bonding Reactivity with H O Description
Na O Ionic Dissolves to give a strong base Basic
Al O Covalent polymericDissolves in both acidic and
basic solutionAmphoteric
SiO Covalent polymericDissolves in both acidic and
basic solutionAmphoteric
CO Covalent molecular Dissolves to give a weak acid Acidi c
SO Covalent molecular Dissolves to give a strong acid Aci
In summary, oxides of the main group elements show two tre nds.
1. From left to right across a Period, the oxides change from ionic → oligomeric/polymeric covalent → molecular cov alent
2. From left to right across a Period, the oxides change from ionic → oligomeric/polymeric covalent → molecular cov alent.
Periodic trends for the main group chlorides
The trend between ionic and non-ionic/covalent in mo ving across a Period is also true for the chlorides of the main group elements.
Those on the left (i.e., Group 1 and 2) are ionic and soluble in water, while those to the right tend to gi ve acidic solutions due to
reactions with the water and the formation of hydrochlori c acid, e.g., (1.10.1).
This page titled 1.10: Periodic Trends for the Main Group Elements is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.+ - 2
3δ+ δ2
4δ- δ+2
δ- δ+ 2
+ Note
2 3

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Hydrogen
2.1: Discovery of Hydrogen
2.2: The Physical Properties of Hydrogen
2.3: Synthesis of Molecular Hydrogen
2.4: Atomic Hydrogen
2.5: The Proton
2.6: Hydrides
2.7: The Hydrogen Bond
2.8: Isotopes of Hydrogen
2.9: Nuclear Fusion
2.10: Storage of Hydrogen for Use as a Fuel
Thumbnail: Zeppelin the Hindenburg on fire at the moorin g mast of Lakehurst (United States of America) 6 May 19 37. (Public
Domain; Sam Shere via Wikipedia)
This page titled 2: Hydrogen is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126162.1: Discovery of Hydrogen
Hydrogen gas, H2, was first artificially synthesized by Phillip von Hohenheim (known as Paracelsus, Figure.1) by mixing
metals with strong acids. He was unaware that the flammable gas produced by this chemical reaction was a new chem ical element.
In 1671, Robert Boyle (Figure.2) rediscovered the re action between iron lings and dilute acids, which resul ts in the production
of hydrogen gas. He noted that these fumes were highly flammab le and that the flame gave o a lot of heat but not much l ight.
Figure: Renaissance physician, botanist, alchemist, and astrologer Paracelsus
(1493 1541).
Figure: Irish philosopher, chemist, physicist, and inven tor Robert Boyle
(1627 1691).
In 1766, Henry Cavendish (Figure.3) was the first to re cognize hydrogen gas as a discrete substance, by iden tifying the gas
from a metal-acid reaction as flammable air. One of the richest men in Britain at the time, he lived in London and spent his time in
his private laboratory at his home. In 1781 he was t he first person to nd that the gas produces water when burned. This was a key
experiment in disproving the Aristotelian theory of t he four elements. As a consequence of his work he is usua lly given credit for
its discovery as an element. However, it was Antoine Lav oisier (Figure.4) who in 1783 named the element hydrogen (from the
Greek hydro meaning water and genes meaning creator) after he reproduced Cavendish's fin dings.
The four Aristotalian elements were Earth, Fire, Air and Water. A fifth element, Aether, was ascribed as a divine substance that
made up the heavenly spheres and heavenly bodies (stars a nd planets).

2.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212616
Figure: British scientist Henry Cavendish (1731 - 1810).
Figure: French chemist and biologist Antoine-Laurent d e Lavoisier (1743 1794).
Using his invention, the vacuum flask, James Dewar (Figur e.5) was the first to liquefy hydrogen in 1898. He pro duced solid
hydrogen the next year.
Figure: Scottish chemist and physicist Sir James Dewar FRS (1842 1923).
This page titled 2.1: Discovery of Hydrogen is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126172.2: The Physical Properties of Hydrogen
Table.1: Physical properties of hydrogen.
Chemical Symbol H
Atomic number 1
Electron configuration 1s
Atomic weight 1.00794
Melting point -259 C
Boiling point -253 C
Density (gas) 0.090 g/L
Density (liquid) 0.70g/L
Ionization potential 13.598 eV
Pauling electronegativity 2.1
Ionic radius (H) 1.54 Å
van der Waal radius 1.2 Å
Explosive limit 4 - 75%
Ignition temperature 585 C
This page titled 2.2: The Physical Properties of Hydrogen is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.1

2.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126182.3: Synthesis of Molecular Hydrogen
Although hydrogen is the most abundant element in th e universe, its reactivity means that it exists as co mpounds with other
elements. Thus, molecular hydrogen, H, must be prep ared from other compounds. The following outlines a se lection of synthetic
methods.
Steam reforming of carbon and hydrocarbons
Many reactions are available for the production of hy drogen from the reaction of steam with a carbon sour ce. The choice of
reaction is guided by the availability of raw materi als and the desired purity of the hydrogen. The simpl est reaction involves
passing steam over coke at high temperatures (1000 C).
Coke is a grey, hard, and porous carbonaceous materi al derived from destructive distillation of low-ash, low-sulfur bituminous
coal. As an alternative to coke, methane may be used at a sligh tly higher temperature (1100 C).
In each case the carbon monoxide formed in the reac tion can react further with steam in the presence of a suitable catalyst (usually
iron or cobalt oxide) to generate further hydrogen.
This reaction is known as the water gas-shift reaction, and was discovered by Italian physicist Felice Fontan a (Figure.6) in
1780.
Figure: Italian physicist Felice Fontana (1730 - 1805).
The dominant industrial process for hydrogen product ion uses natural gas or oil refinery feedstock in the presence of a nickel
catalyst at 900 C.
Electrolysis of water
Electrolysis of acidified water in with platinum electro des is a simple (although energy intensive) route to hydrog en.
On a larger scale hydrolysis of warm aqueous solutions o f barium hydroxide can yield hydrogen of purity gre ater than 99.95%.
Hydrogen is also formed as a side product in the prod uction of chlorine from electrolysis of brine (NaCl) solutions in the presence
of a mercury electrode.2

2.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212618The sodium mercury amalgam reacts with water to yield hydro gen.
Thus, the overall reaction can be written as:
However, this method is being phased out for environmental reasons.
Reaction of metal with acid
Hydrogen is produced by the reaction of highly electroposi tive metals with water, and less reactive metals with acids, e. g.,
This method was originally used by Henry Cavendish (Figu re.7) during his studies that led to the understandi ng of hydrogen
as an element (Figure.8).
Figure: Henry Cavendish (1731 - 1810).
Figure: Cavendish's apparatus for making hydrogen in t he left hand jar by the reaction of a strong acid wi th a metal and
collecting the hydrogen gas above water in the right hand inverted jar.
The same method was employed by French inventor Jacqu es Charles (Figure.9) for the first ight of a hydroge n balloon on 27
August 1783. Unfortunately, terrified peasants destroyed h is balloon when it landed outside of Paris.th

2.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212618
Figure: Jacques Alexandre César Charles (1746 1823).
Hydrolysis of metal hydrides
Reactive metal hydrides such as calcium hydride (CaH) underg o rapid hydrolysis to liberate hydrogen.
This reaction is sometimes used to inflate life rafts a nd weather balloons where a simple, compact means of gen erating H is
desired.
This page titled 2.3: Synthesis of Molecular Hydrogen is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew
R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2

2.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126192.4: Atomic Hydrogen
Atomic hydrogen has the electron conguration of 1s an d as such represents the simplest atomic conguration. However, as a
consequence there is dispute as to its proper positi on within the Periodic Table. Its electron conguration is similar to the valence
electron conguration of the alkali metals (ns) sugge sting it be listed at the top of Group 1 (1A). However, it s reaction chemistry is
dissimilar to the alkali metals. Hydrogen is also one electron short of a Nobel gas conguration, and theref ore it is possible to think
of its relationship to the halogens.
Vapor phase
Atomic hydrogen (H) is highly reactive and consequen tly has a short lifetime due to its reaction chemist ry. Consequently, in order
to generate and observe the reactivity they must be gener ate at low pressures.
Thermolysis of hydrogen compound (commonly halide) o r photolysis at an energy above the bond dissociatio n energy results in the
homoleptic cleavage of the H-X bond to generate the approp riate radical species.
Alternatively, atomic hydrogen can be generated from elemen tal hydrogen.
The reverse reaction (recombination of two hydrogen atoms) is highly exothermic (-434 kJ.mol) and forms the basis of the heat
generated in arc welding.
Solution
Atomic hydrogen may be generated in aqueous solution thro ugh the solvation of electrons.
The formation equilibrium constant (K) is very smal l resulting in very low concentrations being generat ed (10 M). As expected
solvated atomic hydrogen is a strong reducing agent.
Solid state
Hydrogen atoms may be trapped in the solid state latt ice upon generation by photolysis of HX. Observation by electron spin
resonance (esr) of a signal split by s = / nucleus (i.e., H) r esults in a doublet with a coupling of 1428 MHz.
This page titled 2.4: Atomic Hydrogen is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.1
-1
eq-5

2.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126202.5: The Proton
The proton, H, is the name given to hydrogen in the +1 oxidation state.
Gas phase
The proton can be formed from the photolysis of atom ic hydrogen in the vapor phase at low pressure.
The proton is more reactive than the hydrogen atom because of its high charge density. In addition, the pro ton's small ionic radius,
1.5 x 10 cm, means that it can get close to other atoms an d hence form strong bonds.
The strength of the bonding interaction is such tha t it is very hard to measure directly. Instead the rel ative bond strength between
the proton and an appropriate base, B, is measured in the p resence of a competing base, B.
In measuring the exchange reaction, the relative proton affinity of B and B is measured. This is also known as the gas p hase
acidity, and as such it is a measure of the inherent acid ity of a species X-H because it obviates any solvent effec ts.
Liquid and solution
The high reactivity of the proton means that it does not exist f ree in solution. There are however many H containing species. These
are generally classified as acids.
The reaction between the acid and the base is a prot on transfer reaction. While the proton travels from B to B, it is never free in
solution. Instead a bridged transition state or intermediat e is formed, B H B.
Acidity and pH
The most common solvent for H+ is water. The acid form is usually defined as the hydronium ion or H O, (2.5.5). The terms
oxonium, hydroxonium and oxidanium are also used for the H O. Although we commonly use H O it is known from
spectroscopy that larger complexes are formed such as H O (Fi gure.10).
Figure: Structure of H O.
Acids and bases have been characterized in a number of different ways. In 1680 Robert Boyle (Figure.11) d efined an acid as a
compound that dissolved many other compounds, had a sour taste, and reacted with alkali (base).+
-15
1 2
1 2
1 2
1...+...2
3+
3+3+
9 4+
9 4+

2.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212620
Figure: Portrait of Robert Boyle (1627 1691).
Boyle's simple observational description was rationaliz ed by Danish physical chemist Johannes Brønsted (Figur e.12).
Brønsted proposed that acids are proton donors, and bases are proton acceptors. An acid-base reaction is one in which a proton is
transferred from a proton donor (acid) to a proton a cceptor (base). Based upon Brønsted's proposal simple acids contain an
ionizable proton. Examples of simple acids include n eutral molecules (HCl, H2SO4), anions (HSO, H PO), and cations (NH).
The most common Brønsted bases include metal hydroxides (MOH).
Figure: Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted (1879 1947).
Brønsted noted that when an acid donates a proton it forms a conjugate base. The following are examples of an acid and its
conjugate base.4-2 4-4+

2.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212620Exercise \
What is the conjugate base of HCl?
Answer
Cl
Exercise \
What is the conjugate base of HSO
Answer
SO
Exercise \
What is the conjugate base of [Al(H O)]
Answer
[Al(H O) (OH)]
The same occurs when a base accepts a proton it forms a conjugate acid. The following are examples of a ba se and its conjugate
acid.
Exercise \
What is the conjugate acid of NH?
Answer
NH
Exercise \
What is the conjugate acid of S?
Answer
HS
Exercise \
What is the conjugate acid of CO?
AnswerExercises
4422 63+
2 52+
Exercises
4+
232-

2.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212620HCO
Thus, the reaction between an acid and a base results in t he formation of the appropriate conjugate base and conju gate acid.
A specific example is as follows:
What is the conjugate acid and base formed from the reac tion of NH with S?
Answer
In the equilibrium reactions shown in (2.12) and (2.1 3) there is a competition between the two bases for the proton. As would be
expected the strongest base wins.
When a strong acid is added to (dissolved in) water it will r eact with the water as a base:
In contrast, when a strong base is added to (dissolved in) wa ter it will react with the water as an acid:
pH a measure of acidity
The acidity of a water (aqueous) solution depends on t he concentration of the hydronium ion, i.e., [H O]. The acidity of a solution
is therefore the ability of the solution to donate a proto n to a base. The acidity or pH of a solution is defined as:
It is important to note that the value is the activity of H O and not the concentration.
Activity is a measure of the eective concentration of a species in a mixture. The dierence between activit y and other measures
of composition such as concentration arises because mo lecules in non-ideal gases or solutions interact with e ach other, either to
attract or to repel each other.
The activity of the H O ion can be measured by
(a) A gas electrode
(b) Acid-base indicators
Proton Transfer Reactions
The proton transfer reaction is one of the simplest reactions in chemistry. It involves no electrons and l ow mass transfer/change,
giving it a low energy of activation. For proton transfe r between O-H or N-H groups and their associated bases th e reaction is very
fast. The proton transfer occurs across a hydrogen-bonde d pathway during which the proton is never free.
This page titled 2.5: The Proton is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.3Exercise
4+
2+
3+
3+
Note
3+

2.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212620

2.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126212.6: Hydrides
The combination of hydrogen with another element pro duces a hydride, E H. The formal charge or oxidation state of the hydrogen
in these compounds is dependant on the relative electrone gativity of the element in question.
Ionic hydrides
Hydrogen compounds with highly electropositive metals, i.e., those in which the metal has an electronegati vity of less than 1.2, are
ionic with the hydrogen having a s configuration (H). Typical ionic metal hydrides are those of the Group 1 (IA) metals and the
heavier Group 2 (IIA) metals.
The ionic radius of the hydride ion is in between tha t of fluoride and chloride and the same as oxide (T able.2). As a
consequence, in the solid state the hydride ion replic ates that of a halide ion (e.g., Cl), and as such sim ilar solid state structures are
observed (Table.3).
Table.2: Selected ionic radii.
Ion Ionic Radius (Å)
H 1.40
F 1.36
Cl 1.81
O 1.40
Table.3: Lattice parameters (Å) for hydrides, and ha lides of the Group 1 metal salts with cubic rock salt st ructures.
Metal Hydride Fluoride Chloride
Li 4.085 4.0173 5.129
Na 4.880 4.620 5.640
K 5.700 5.347 6.292
Rb 6.037 5.640 6.581
Cs 6.376 6.008 7.020
Unlike the halide ions that are soluble in water, the hydride ion reacts with water, (2.32), and consequent ly NaH and CaH are
commonly used as drying agents. The liberation of h ydrogen was used as a commercial source of hydrogen fo r small-scale
applications.
Group 1 and 2 metal hydrides can ignite in air, espec ially upon contact with water to release hydrogen, whic h is also
flammable. Hydrolysis converts the hydride into the an alogous hydroxide, which are caustic bases. In pract ice, most ionic
hydrides are dispensed as a dispersion in oil, which can be saf ely handled in air.
Covalent Hydrides
The most common binary compounds of hydrogen are th ose in which hydrogen bonds have covalent bond charac ter. The E-H bond
is usually polar ranging from those in which the hydr ogen is polarized positively (e.g., those with non-me tals such as F, O, S, and
C) to where it is negative (e.g., those with metals and metalloids such as B, Al, etc). Magnesium hydride is i ntermediate between
covalent and ionic since it has a polymeric solid simi lar to AlH, but reacts rapidly with water like ionic hy drides. Table.4 listsx y
2 22
WARNING

2.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212621the important covalent hydrides of p-block elements. It should be noted that all organic hydrocarbons c an be thought of as simply
the hydrides of carbon!
Group 13 Group 14 Group 15 Group 16 Group 17
B H C H, C H, C H NH, N H H O, H O HF
(AlH) Si H PH, P H H S, H S HCl
Ga H Ge H AsH H Se HBr
SnH SbH H Te HI
The elements of Group 14 to 17 all form hydrides with normal covalent bonds in which the hydrogen is bond ed by a single bond to
the element in question. In contrast, the elements o f Group 13 (as typified by boron) all exhibit a second type of covalent bond: the
electron deficient hydrogen bridged bond. In this type of bond the hydrogen nucleus is embe dded in a molecular orbital that
covers more than two atoms to create a multi-center t wo-electron bond. Diborane (Figure.13) represents the ar chetypal
compound containing the hydrogen bridge bond. Hydrid es are not limited to terminal (E-H) or those bridging two atoms (E-H-E),
but are also known where the hydrogen bridges (or caps) mor e than two atoms, i.e., Figure.14.
Figure: Structure of diborane (B2H6); where pink = b oron; white = hydrogen.
Figure: The structure of {[(Me P) WH] Li }4 showing the pr esence of terminal, bridging, and trifurcated hydrid es. The
methyl groups have been omitted for clarity. Adapted from A. R. Barron, M. B. Hursthouse, M. Motevalli, a nd G. Wilkinson, J.
Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 81.
Synthesis of covalent hydrides
Covalent hydrides can be made by a range of synthetic routes. The simplest is direct combination of the elem ents (in a similar
manner to that used with ionic hydrides).2 6 n 2n+2 n 2n n 2n-2 3 2 4 2 2 2
3 n n 2n+2 3 2 4 2 2 n
2 6 n 2n+2 3 2
4 3 2
3 3 5- +

2.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212621The use of a hydride as a reagent to reduce a halide or oxi de of the desired element
Metal phosphides, carbides, silicides, and borides result in the formation of the hydride.
Hydride compounds can be interconverted in the presen ce of a catalyst, heat, or an electrical discharge. This is the basis of catalytic
cracking of petroleum mixtures.
Interstitial hydrides
Many transition metal, lanthanides and actinides absor b hydrogen to give a metallic hydride which retain t he properties of a metal,
although the presence of hydrogen does result in embr ittlement of the metal. As such these hydrides are bes t considered as alloys
since they do not have defined stoichiometries. For ex ample, vanadium absorbs hydrogen to form an alloy wit h a maximum
hydrogen content of VH. In a similar manner palladiu m forms PdH. The hydrogen atoms are present in inters titial sites in the
metal's lattice; hence interstitial hydride. Interstitial hydrides show certain promise as a way for safe hydro gen storage.
Bibliography
A. R. Barron, M. B. Hursthouse, M. Motevalli, and G. Wilkinson, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 81.
This page titled 2.6: Hydrides is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.1.6 0.6

2.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128492.7: The Hydrogen Bond
Hydrogen bonds are formed between a species with a pol ar X -H bond and a species with a lone pair (Y), i.e., X -H...Y.
The most common species for X are oxygen and nitrogen, and to a lesser extent carbon, fluorine, and sulfur. However, as long as
the X-H bond is polar then hydrogen bonding is possibl e. Similarly, the most common Lewis bases that hydroge n bond involve
oxygen, nitrogen, and fluorine as the donor atom. Aga in there are many examples of other atoms, but as long as the atom has a lone
pair that is chemically active, hydrogen bonding can o ccur.
The majority of hydrogen bonds are asymmetrical, that is the hydrogen is closer to one atom than the othe r (Figure.15), even
when X and Y are the same element, i.e., O-H...O. While the ty pical hydrogen bond involves one Lewis base (lone pai r donor),
there are many examples where the hydrogen interacts with two L ewis base lone pairs (Figure.16).
Figure: Structure of (Bu) Ga(OPh)(pyz) (PhOH) from X- ray crystallographic data showing the presence of an a symmetrical
hydrogen bond. Hydrogen atoms attached to carbon are omitted for clarity. Adapted from L. H. van Poppel, S. G. Bott and A. R.
Barron, Polyhedron, 2002, 21, 1877.
Figure: Structure of [H{PhN(py)(quin)}]BF from X-ray crystallographic data showing the presence of a trifu rcated
asymmetrical hydrogen bond. Hydrogen atoms attached t o carbon are omitted for clarity. Adapted from J. J. Allen, C. E. Hamilton,
and A. R. Barron, J. Chem. Cryst., 2009.
Hydrogen bonds are mostly electrostatic attractions, and as such they are weaker than covalent bonds, but str onger than van der
Waal interactions. With bond strengths generally cove ring the range of 5 50 kJ/mol, the energy required to break a hydrogen bondδ- δ+ δ- δ- δ+ δt2.

2.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849is comparable to that of thermal motion within the t emperature range of 0 200 C. As a consequence the numb er of groups involved
in hydrogen bonding decreases with increasing tempera ture, until few hydrogen bonds are observed in the vap or phase. One noted
exception is the hydrogen bridged anion [F-H-F], in whic h the strong interaction (243 kJ/mol) is covalent i n character involving a
three-center molecular orbital bond.
Classes of hydrogen bond
Although hydrogen bonds may be characterized with resp ect to the X and Y atom, it is more useful to classify them as either
intramolecular or intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Th is is due to the difference in physical and chemical properties between these
two classes.
Intramolecular
Intramolecular hydrogen bonds (X-H...Y) arise where the X an d Y atoms are in the same molecule (Figure.17).
Figure: Structure of 3- tert-butyl-2-hydroxy-5-methylacetophenone showing the pr esence of an intramolecular hydrogen
bond. Hydrogen atoms attached to carbon are omitted for clarity. Adapted from M. B. Power, A. R. Barron, S. G. Bott, E. J. Bishop,
K. D. Tierce and J. L. Atwood, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1991, 241.
Intermolecular
If the hydrogen bond (X-H Y) involves X and Y being from different molecules this is an intermolecular hydro gen bond. Within
the range of intermolecular hydrogen bonded compoun ds there are two sub-categories: those involving dis crete molecular species
(oligomers) and those resulting in polymeric species.
Carboxylic acids are a typical example of a discrete oligomeric species that are held together by interm olecular hydrogen bonds
(Figure.18a). A wide range of structurally analogous compounds also form head-to-tail hydrogen bonded di mers (e.g., Figure
.19). In a polymeric hydrogen bonded species every mol ecule hydrogen bonds but in a random form. As an exa mple, liquid
primary alcohols form extended hydrogen networks (Figu re.18b). Such an arrangement is labile and as such it is difficult to
determine definitive speciation. Liquids that form this type of hydrogen-bonded network are known as asso ciated liquids. In the
solid state the networks generally adopt a more ordered st ructure. For example as is seen in the structure of ice.◦

2.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849
Figure: Structure of (a) the head-to-tail dimmer fo rmed between two carboxylic acid molecules, and (b) a typical network of
a primary alcohol in the liquid phase.
Figure: Structure of the hydrogen bonded diner of (C 6H5)NNN(H)(C6F5). Adapted from J. T. Leman, J. Braddo ck-Wilking,
A. J. Coolong, and A. R. Barron, Inorg. Chem., 1993, 32, 4324.
Methods of study
The study of the structure arising from hydrogen bon ding and the properties exhibited due to the presenc e of hydrogen bonds is
very important.
Diffraction methods
X-raydiffraction of single crystals is the most common structural method employed to determine the presen ce, effect, and strength
of a hydrogen bond. Unfortunately, in order for the l ocation of the hydrogen to be determined with some d egree of accuracy,
diffraction data of a high quality is needed and/or low temperature (e.g., -196 C) data collection is req uired. Neutron scattering can
be used where very accurate data is required because h ydrogen atoms scatter neutrons better than they do X- rays. Figure.20
summarizes the key parameters that are obtained from X-ray (and neutron) diffraction experiments.
Figure: Structural parameters obtained from diraction methods.
Given the electrostatic nature of a hydrogen bond be tween a polar X-H bond and a Lewis base it is reasonable that the X-H...Y
angle (θ) is roughly linear (i.e., 180). However, it is not alway s so and nonlinear interactions are known where steric o r
conformational restrictions limit the orientation of th e X-H bond with respect to Y.
The distance between X and Y, d(X...Y), is less than the su m of the van der Waal radii of X and Y (Table.5). Th is is in line
with the relative strength of these interactions. As would b e expected the shorter the X...Y distance the stronger the hydrogen bond.
Table.5: Comparison of the X...Y distance in hydroge n bonded species with the sum of the van der Waal radi i.◦

2.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849X Y Sum of van der Waal radii (Å) Typical X Y distance (Å)
O O 2.8 2.50-2.69
O N 2.9 2.75-2.85
N N 3.0 2.69-2.98
The bond distance to hydrogen, d(X-H), is often longer in hydrogen bonded species. For example the O-H distan ce for an alcohol
in the absence of hydrogen bonding is typically 0.97 Å. In contrast, the value typically seen for a hydrog en-bonded analog is 1.05
Å.
Spectroscopy
Spectroscopy is a simple method of comparing hydrogen-bond ed systems in particular in the solution or liquid phase.
Infra red and Raman
The X-H stretching frequency in the IR (and Raman) spec trum is dependant on the identity of X, i.e., O-H = 3610 - 3640 cm and
N-H = 3400 - 3500 cm. However, the ν(X-H) is shifted to lower energy (lower frequency) as a consequence of hydrogen bonding.
In addition, while non-hydrogen bonded X-H stretches are sharp, the presence of hydrogen bonding results in th e peak being
broadened. Figure X demonstrates both these effects. The O-H stretch for dilute BuOH in CCl is a sharp peak at 36 50 cm due to
the lack of hydrogen bonding between the two componen ts (Figure.21a), and the presence of hydrogen bondin g between
BuOH and BuOH is limited by the dilution. By contrast, a d ilute solution of BuOH in Et O results in a shift to lower frequency
and a significant increase of peak width (Figure.21b) as a result of fairly strong O-H O bonds. Finally, a dilu te solution of
BuOH in NMe results in a further shift to 3250 cm and a very broad peak (Figure.21c). The broadening of the peaks is due
to the distribution of X-H distances within a X-H Y hydrogen bond.
Figure: Schematic representation of the O-H stretch re gion in the IR spectra of a dilute solution of BuOH i n (a) CCl4, (b)
Et O, and (c) NEt.
NMR
The presence of hydrogen bonding results the shift t o higher ppm (lower frequency) of the H NMR resonance fo r the proton. This
shift is due to the decrease in shielding of the pr oton. A dilute solution of BuOH in CCl shows a resonance typical of a nonhydrogen bonded compound (Figure.22a), while that fo r BuOH in NMe (Figure.22b) shows a significant low field
shift. Very strong intra or intermolecular hydrogen bon ded species show a very large H NMR shift (e.g., Figure.22c)....
-1
-1
n4-1
n n n2
n3-1
n
2 3
n4
n3

2.7.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849
Figure: Schematic representation of the relative shift of the OH resonance for (a) BuOH in CCl, (b) BuOH i n NEt, and
(c) concentrated acetic acid.
Effects of hydrogen bonding
Physical effects
The presence of intermolecular hydrogen bonding prov ides additional attractive forces between molecules. T hus, properties that
depend on intramolecular forces are affected.
Liquids with significant hydrogen bonding exhibit hig her boiling points, higher viscosity, and higher heat of vaporization (∆H) as
compared to analogous compounds without extensive hydr ogen bonding. For solids the presence of hydrogen bond ing results in an
increase in the melting point of the solid and an increase in the associated heat of fusion (∆H).
The archetypal case for the effect of hydrogen bond ing is the melting and boiling points of the hydrid es of the Group 16 elements,
i.e., H E. For a series of analogous compounds with the sam e molecular structure it would be expected that the boiling points
would be related to the molecular mass. However, as can be seen from Table, the melting and boiling points of water are
anomalously higher than those of its heavier analogs. In fact from Figure.23 it is clear that just conside ring H S, H Se, and
H Te, the expected trend is observed, and it is simil ar to that for the Group 14 hydrides (CH, SiH, etc). Th erefore, water must
have additional intermolecular forces as compared to its heavier homologs. This observation is consistent with the strong hydrogen
bonding in water, and the very weak if nonexistent hydroge n bonding in the sulfur, selenium, and tellurium analogs.
Table: Summary of physical properties for the hydride s of the Group 16 elements.
Compound Molecular weight (g/mol) Melting point (C) Bo iling Point (C)
H O 18.01 0 100
H S 24.08 -85.5 -60.7
H Se 80.98 -60.4 -41.5
H Te 129.62 -49 -2n
4n
v
f
2 2
2 4 4

2.7.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849
Figure: Plot of boiling point as a function of molec ular weight for the hydrides of the Group 14 (EH) an d 16 (H E)
elements.
A similar but not as pronounced trend is observed for the Group 15 hydrides, where ammonia's higher values a re associated with
the presence of significant hydrogen bonding (Table.7).
Table: Summary of physical properties for the hydride s of the Group 15 elements.
Compound Molecular weight (g/mol) Melting point (C) Bo iling Point (C)
NH 17.03 -77.7 -33.35
PH 34.00 -133.5 -87.4
AsH 77.95 -113.5 -55
ShH 124.77 -88.5 -17
Would you expect H S to have a higher or lower boiling poi nt that H O? Why?
Answer
The boiling point for H O is 150.2 C, while that of 70.7 C. The difference in boiling point is due to the stronger
intermolecular hydrogen bonding in H O than in H S.
The types of hydrogen bond can also have a signicant effect on the physical properties of a compound. For example, the cis isomer
of hydroxybenzaldehyde melts at 1 C, while the trans isomer has melting and boiling points of 112 C. Both compounds exhibit
strong hydrogen bonding in the solid state, however, as may be seen from Figure.24a, cis-hydroxybenzaldehyde
(salicylaldehyde) has a configuration that allows str ong intramolecular hydrogen bonding, which precludes any intermolecular
hydrogen bonding. The melting point of cis-hydroxybenzaldehyde is going to be controlled by t he van der Waal forces between
adjacent molecules. In contrast, since intramolecular hydrogen bonding is precluded in the trans isomer (Figure.24b) it can
form strong intermolecular hydrogen bonds in the so lid state, and thus, it is these that define the mel ting point. The boiling points
are controlled in a similar manner.4 2
Exercise
2 2 2 2
2 2◦ ◦
2 2 2 2

2.7.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849
Figure: Structures of (a) salicylaldehyde and (b) tran s-hydroxybenzaldehyde.
4-Hydroxybenzoic acid melts at 213 C, while 2-hydroxybenzo ic acid melts at 158 C. Explain this observation.
Answer
2-Hydroxybenzoic acid exhibits strong intramolecular hydrogen bonding while 4-hydroxybenzoic acid has stro ng
intermolecular hydrogen bonding.
Melting and boiling are not the only physical propert ies that are aected by hydrogen bonding. Solubility ca n also be aected.
Consider two isomers of C H O: BuOH and Et O. The n-butanol i s much more soluble in water than diethyl ether. The r eason for
this is that while both compounds can hydrogen bond to water, those between nBuOH and water are much stronger th an those
between Et O and water, and thus, dissolution of BuOH in wa ter does not disrupt the very strong hydrogen bondin g in water as
much as Et O does.
Acid strength
The acidity of a protic species can be affected by t he presence of hydrogen bonding. For example, conside r the di-carboxylic acid
derivatives of ethylene (fumaric acid). Each of the carboxylic acid groups has sequential equilibria tha t may be defined by the pK
values, (2.36). Table lists the pK values for the cis and trans isomers. The acidity of the first and second carboxyl ic group for
the trans isomer is similar, the difference being due to the i ncreased charge on the molecule. In contrast, the se cond proton in the
cis isomer is much less acidic than the first proton: why? A consideration of the structure of the mono a nion of the cis isomer
(Figure.25) shows that a very strong intramolecular h ydrogen bond is formed once the first proton is remo ved. This hydrogen
bond makes the second acidic proton much more difficult t o remove and thus lowers the acidity of the proton.
Table: Acidity equilibrium constants for cis and trans isomers of fumaric acid.
Isomer pK pK Ratio
Trans 3 4.5 25:1
Cis 1.9 6.2 10,000:1Exercise
4 10n2
2n
1 2

2.7.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849
Figure: Structure of cis-[O C-HC=CH-CO H].
Solid state structure
In the solid state, molecules that can form hydrogen bonds will tend to arrange themselves so as to maxim ize the formation of
linear hydrogen bonds. The structure of ice is a typi cal example, where each water molecule's hydrogen bonds to four other
molecules creating a diamond-like lattice (Figure.2 6). However, ice isn't the only compound whose solid sta te structure is
defined by its hydrogen bonding. Cyanuric acid form s six strong intermolecular hydrogen bonds to three other molecules in the
plane of the heterocyclic ring and thus creates a graphite -like structure (Figure.27).
Figure: The diamond-like structure formed in ice by hydrogen bonding.2 2-

2.7.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849
Figure: The hydrogen bonding of cyanuric acid.
Conformational stabilization
The presence of hydrogen bonding can stabilize certa in conformations over others that in the absence of h ydrogen bonding would
be more favored. For example, based on steric considera tions H NCH CH C(O)H would be expected to adopt a staggere d
conformation as is typical for compounds with free r otation about a C-C bond. However, due to the presence of a strong
intramolecular hydrogen bond it adopts a sterically dis favored eclipsed conformation (Figure.28).
Figure: Stable conformation of H NCH CH C(O)H.
This conformational stabilization is even more impor tant in biopolymers such as peptides. If we assume that a peptide chain
(Figure.29) made from a sequence of amino acids woul d not adopt any eclipsed conformations on steric gro unds, and that the
amide group (H-N-C=O) is near planar due to delocaliza tion, then there will be 3 possible conformations per nitrogen in the
peptide chain, i.e., three each for the C-C and C-N bo nds (Figure.29). Assuming a modest peptide has 50 ami no acids, there
will be 3 potential conformations of the polymer chai n, i.e., over 5 x 10 conformations. However, in reality there are limits to
the number of conformations observed since particul ar ones are stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen b onds. The most important
of these are the α-helix (Figure.30) and β-sheet structures.2 2 2
2 2 2
2x50 47

2.7.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212849
Figure: A section of a peptide polymer chain showing the possible rotational freedom of the C-C and C-N bo nds.
Figure: A representation of a peptide α-helix structu re showing the stabilizing hydrogen bonds.
Bibliography
J. T. Leman, J. Braddock-Wilking, A. J. Coolong, and A. R. Bar ron, Inorg. Chem., 1993, 32, 4324.
K. Nakamoto, M. Margoshes, and R. E. Rundle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1955, 77, 6480.
M. B. Power, A. R. Barron, S. G. Bott, E. J. Bishop, K. D. Tierce and J. L. Atwood, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1991, 241.
R. Taylor and O. Kennard, Acc. Chem. Res., 1984, 17, 320.
This page titled 2.7: The Hydrogen Bond is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128502.8: Isotopes of Hydrogen
Physical effects
The presence of intermolecular hydrogen bonding prov ides additional attractive forces between molecules. T hus, properties that
depend on intramolecular forces are affected.
Table.9: Summary of isotopes of hydrogen.
Isotope Hydrogen-1 Hydrogen-2 Hydrogen-3
Special name Hydrogen Deuterium Tritium
Symbol H D T
Atomic number 1 1 1
Number of neutrons 0 1 2
Mass number 1 2 3
Natural abundance 99.9844% 0.0156% very small
Synthesis of deuterium compounds
Electrolysis of water
The electrolysis of hydrogen-1 water (H O) in the presenc e of an alkali results in the formation of hydrogen and oxygen.
In a similar manner the hydrolysis of deuterated water (D O) yields deuterium and oxygen.
However, the rate of electrolysis of D O is slightly slower than that of H O. Thus, the partial hydrolysis of water with a mixture of
natural isotopes results in the slight enrichment of the water with D O. The level of enrichment in one step is less than 1%. In order
to obtain high levels of D O (e.g., ca. 30%) it is necessary to reduce the original volume of water by 1/100,000.
Chemical equilibrium
Proton exchange reactions can be used to enrich comp ounds in deuterium. For example, the reaction of HSD with water shown in
(2.8.3) has a slight preference for the formation of H S, i.e., K = 1.012. Thus, bubbling HSD through water resu lts in the
enrichment of the water in HOD. However, about 30% enrichment i s about the best that can be achieved by this method.
Fractional distillation
The boiling point of H O is (by definition) 100 C, in c ontrast the boiling point of D O is 101.4 C. Thus, it is possible to separate
H O from D O by fractional distillation. This method prov ides the most suitable route to high isotopic enrichm ent and D O of
99.8% can be produced this way.
The term heavy water is used for D O of greater than 99.8% enrichment.
Uses of deuterium compounds
Possible nuclear fusion
The largest use of D O is as a moderator and heat excha nger for fission nuclear reactors, however, the bigges t potential application
will be if nuclear fusion is realized as a commercial pro cess.2
2 2
2th
2 eq
2 ◦
2◦
2 2 2
Note

2.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212850The fusion of two deuterium atoms to form a helium at om and energy would be one source of energy, (2.8.4), however, deuteriumtritium fusion is the most promising, (2.8.5).
The deuterium part of the fuel does not pose a great problem because about 1 part in 5000 of the hydrog en in seawater is
deuterium. This amounts to an estimate that there is over 10 tons of deuterium in the oceans. The tritiu m part of the fuel is more
problematic since there is no significant natural so urce (Table.9), and the tritium would have to be obt ained by breeding the
tritium from lithium.
Since a gallon of seawater could produce as much ener gy as 300 gallons of gasoline, there is clearly a la rge amount of energy that
can potentially be realized through nuclear fusion. Unfortunately, this advantage is also a disadvantage s ince the temperatures
attained are similar to the surface of the sun, which would vaporize any conventional container. Fusion expe riments therefore use a
magnetic field to contain the reaction. The shape of th e eld is like a bottle, hence the term "magnetic bottle".
One demonstrated fusion process is the so-called hydroge n bomb or thermonuclear bomb in which a fission atom bomb is used to
initiate a fusion reaction. The atomic bomb is surr ounded by a layer of lithium deuteride. Neutrons from the atomic explosion
(fission) cause the lithium to be converted into he lium, tritium, and energy, (2.8.6). The atomic explosi on also supplies the
50,000,000 C temperature needed for the subsequent fu sion of deuterium with tritium, (2.8.5). So in-fact the hydrogen bomb is
misnamed and it should be called a deuterium bomb.
The original calculations to model the hydrogen bom b were performed using ENIAC (short for Electronic Numer ical
Integrator And Computer) that was originally designed to generate tables of trajectories of shells red fro m large artillery. The
artillery ring tables were made by women mathematicia ns who were called calculators hence the name used to day. Built in
1946 ENIAC is often assumed to be the first programmable electronic computer, however, it was predated by the six Colossus
machines that were used to successfully crack the German Enigma code as early as 1944. However, the existence of the
Colossus machines was kept secret until 1975.
Spectroscopy
In the chemical laboratory deuterium compounds are common ly used in spectroscopy for:
a) The assignment of resonances in IR, Raman, and NMR spec troscopy.
b) As a non-proton containing solvent in 1H NMR spectrosc opy.
A description of these applications is given below.
Reaction mechanism and rate determination
Given the larger mass of deuterium over hydrogen ther e is an associated dierence in the rate of reaction s (see below) and therefore
investigations using hydrogen and deuterium analogs can provide information as to reaction mechanisms.
The spectroscopic dierences between hydrogen and deute rium can also be used as a tracer to uniquely determ ine the source of
particular substituents. For example, the magnesium (o r Grignard) reduction of a ketone yields upon hydrol ysis the secondary
alcohol. If the reaction is carried out in a deutera ted solvent and H O used for hydrolysis then the seco ndary carbon is deuterated,
(2.43). In contrast, if the reaction is carried out in a non-deuterated solvent and hydrolysis is accompl ished with D O then the
deuterated alcohol is formed, (2.44). These experiment s define that the initial reduction occurs at the ketone' s α-carbon.15
Note

2.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212850
Given the following reactions and the isotope distributi on of the products suggest the reaction mechanism.
Answer
Differences between hydrogen and deuterium
Properties that depend on nuclei properties
The nuclear magnetic moment of an atomic nucleus ar ises from the spins of the protons and neutrons within the nucleus. As a
consequence the magnetic moment for hydrogen and de uterium are very different and hence the conditions for detection by NMR
are very different. Thus, in observing the H NMR spec trum of a compound not only are the deuterium atoms not observed, but the
coupling is now H-D rather than H-H (Figure.31).Exercise

2.8.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212850
Figure: An example of the differences in the H NMR sp ectrum upon deuterium substitution.
Deuterium is better at scattering neutrons than hydr ogen. The H and D cross sections are very distinct and different in sign, which
allows contrast variation in such experiments. Hydrogen's low electron density makes it difficult to determine its position by X-ray
diffraction methods, neutron diffraction methods al low for highly accurate structure determination. Hydr ogen can be seen by
neutron diffraction and scattering, however, it has a large incoherent neutron cross-section. This is nil for deuterium and thus
delivers much clearer signals may be obtained for d euterated samples. Neutron scattering of deuterated sa mples is indispensable for
many studies of macromolecules in biology.
Properties that depend on mass
The difference in mass between hydrogen and deuterium obviously results in a difference in molecular mass of their analogous
compounds. This difference can be used for analysis by m ass spectrometry, but it also results in different de nsities of compounds.
For example, the density of H O at 25 C is 0.997 g/cm, whil e the density of D O at 25 C is 1.104 g/cm.
The vibrational frequency for a diatomic molecule, H-X, ca n be defined by the equation:
where f is the H-X bond force constant, and µ is the reduced mass.
If substitute H for D the D-X force constant is the same as the H-X force constant, but the reduced mass is t wice the value for the
H-X bond. As a result the ratio of the vibrational frequ ency of an H-X bond to that of the analogous D-X bond i s given by the
following equation.
With the change in vibrational energy there is concomita nt change in the bond strength.
Thus, the rate of reactions will be faster for hydroge n derivative than the deuterium analog. The ratio of the rate constants will be
dependant on the involvement of H-X bond breaking or forming in the rate limiting step (the slowest reactio n step within the
overall reaction mechanism). When an H-X bond is made o r broken in the rate limiting step, then the ratio o f the rate constants
upon deuterium substitution will be:
This is known as the primary isotope effect. In this case where H-X bond breaking or forming is not part of the rate limiting step,
then the isotope effect will be much smaller and is known as a secondary isotope effect.1
2◦ 32◦ 3
H-X H-X

2.8.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212850The position of equilibrium reactions that involve hydrogen exchange, (2.8.12), will be effected by the p resence of deuterium to
favor the deuterium being concentrated in the more stable bond. This is the basis of the concentration of HOD from HSD and
water, (2.8.3).
Bibliography
M. B. Power, S. G. Bott, J. L. Atwood, and A. R. Barron. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 3446.
A. S. Borovik and A. R. Barron, Main Group Chem. 2005, 4, 135.
This page titled 2.8: Isotopes of Hydrogen is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128512.9: Nuclear Fusion
The process of nuclear fission and radioactive decay are both associated with the conversion of an atom with a large nucleus to an
atom (or atoms) with a smaller nucleus. In the process, mass is lost and energy is produced. However, what happen s if two atoms
with small nuclei are combined to give a single atom with a larger nucleus? In such a process the nuclei wo uld be fused together,
and this process is called nuclear fusion.
One of the simplest fusion processes involves the fusing o f two hydrogen-2 (deuterium) atoms:
The mass of each deuterium atom is 2.0140 amu, while th e mass of the resulting helium is 4.0026 amu. The mass defect of the
reaction is 0.0254 amu or 0.63% of the original mass. While this percentage of the original mass may no t seem much, it should be
noted that the mass defect for the conversion of ura nium-238 to lead-206 is only 0.026%, and that for spl itting uranium-235 is
0.056%. Based upon these comparisons it is clear tha t fusion of hydrogen produces 24x the energy kg/kg than natural radioactivity
and 11x that of nuclear fission.
In addition to being a plentiful source of energy, fu sion is actually the most important process in the u niverse. Since the statement
in 1847 of the Law of conservation of energy (the to tal amount of energy in an isolated system remains co nstant) scientists had
wondered how the sun works. No source of energy was known in the 19 century that could explain the sun. Based upon the age of
the earth it is known that the sun is 4,550,000,000 ye ars old, and it was marveled at the continued source of energy over that span
of time. By the 1920s nuclear energy was defined as be ing the most powerful source of energy, and British a strophysicist Arthur
Eddington (Figure.32) suggested that the sun's energy ari ses from the fusion of hydrogen into helium.
Figure: (left) Arthur Stanley Eddington (1882 1944). (middle) Henry Norris Russell (1877 - 1957). (right) Hans Albrecht
Bethe (1906 - 2005).
In 1929 American Henry Norris Russell (Figure) studied the spectrum of the sun. Based upon his studies he cal culated the
composition of the sun to be 90% hydrogen, 9% helium, and 1% of all other elements up to iron (but nothin g of higher atomic
number). Given the composition it became clear that t he only reaction possible to account for the sun's en ergy was the fusion of
hydrogen. In 1938 Hans Bethe (Figure.34) demonstrated a model for how the sun worked. The energy source is the fusion of
hydrogen to give helium (Figure.35), while in massive starts the presence of heavier elements such as carbo n, oxygen,
nitrogen, neon, silicon, and iron are the result of the f usion of helium.th

2.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212851
Figure: The proton-proton chain dominates in stars the size of the Sun or smaller.
Why is it that uranium, thorium and other radioactive elements undergo radioactive decay, but hydrogen do es not undergo
spontaneous fusion? The reason for this difference is that any change that uranium undergoes occurs inside a nucleus that is already
formed, while fusion requires that two nuclei must com e together. This process results in extremely large re pulsive forces. So why
does it happen in a star? The temperatures inside a s tar approach 15,000,000 C, while the high pressure res ults in a density of
approximately 160 g/cm which for comparison is 8x tha t of gold. Under these conditions the nuclei are free to move in a sea of
electrons. Nuclear fusion takes place in the core of th e sun where the density is at the highest but an expl osion does not result due
to the extreme gravity of the sun: 333,000x that of Earth.
Research into controlled fusion, with the aim of prod ucing fusion power for the production of electricity, has been conducted for
over 50 years. It has been accompanied by extreme s cientific and technological difficulties, but has r esulted in progress. At present,
break-even (self-sustaining) controlled fusion react ions have not been demonstrated, however, work continu es since the fuel for
such a fusion reaction is hydrogen (in its compounds inc luding water) is the 3 most abundant element on the Earth.
This page titled 2.9: Nuclear Fusion is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX)
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.◦
rd

2.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128522.10: Storage of Hydrogen for Use as a Fuel
This module is based upon the Connexions course Methods of Hydrogen Storage for Use as a Fuel Case St udy by Christian
Cioce.
Introduction
Dihydrogen is a colorless and odorless gas at room tem perature which is highly ammable, releasing a large amo unt of energy when
combusted. As compared with combustion of the current fu els which operate automobiles, for example petrol or diesel, the energy
released when hydrogen is combusted is more than thre e times greater. The heat of combustion for hydrogen is 141.9 kJ/mol as
compared to 47.0 kJ/mol and 45.0 kJ/mol for gasoline and diese l, respectively.
Furthermore, the combustion of hydrocarbons releases the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO) into the atmo sphere, and is
therefore not a "clean" fuel. When hydrogen is combus ted in the presence of oxygen (from air) the only p roduct is water, (2.52).
Both its clean reactivity and the large chemical energy m ake H extremely appealing for use as a fuel in automobiles.
If hydrogen has such a potential as a fuel why has it not been widely implemented? Dihydrogen is a gas at r oom temperature.
Gases, compared to the other states of matter (liquid and solid), occupy the most volume of space, for a given number of molecule s.
Octane and the other hydrocarbons found in gasoline a re liquids at room temperature, demanding relatively small fuel tanks.
Liquids are therefore easier to store than compressed gas es.
Hydrogen has a high energy content per weight (more t han three times as much as gasoline), but the energy density per volume is
rather low at standard temperature and pressure. V olum etric energy density can be increased by storing the gaseous hydrogen under
increased pressure or storing it at extremely low temp eratures as a liquid. Hydrogen can also be adsorbed i nto metal hydrides and
highly porous materials (Table.10). The current avai lable methods of storing hydrogen include compressed hydrogen and
liqueed hydrogen, however many promising methods exist, namely metal organic materials (MOMs), metal hydrides and carbon
nanostructures.
Table.10: Comparison of hydrogen storage ability of metal hydrides.
Material H-atoms per cm (x 10) % of weight that is H
H2 gas, 200 bar (2850 psi) 0.99 100
H2 liquid, 20 K (-253 C) 4.2 100
H2 solid, 4.2 K (-269 C) 5.3 100
MgH 6.5 7.6
Mg NiH 5.9 3.6
FeTiH 6.0 1.89
LaNi H 5.5 1.37
Liquid hydrogen
Liquid hydrogen is made possible by cryogenically co oling it to below its boiling point, -253 C. As a liqu id, the same amount of
gaseous hydrogen will require much less volume, and t herefore is feasible to individual automobile use. A refrigeration system is
required to keep the liquid cooled, for if the syste m temperature rises above hydrogen's critical point (- 241 C), the liquid will
become a gas. There must exist a vacuum insulation betwe en the inner and outer walls of liquid hydrogen tank system, for heat
cannot travel through a vacuum. There is a tradeo, h owever, because the tank must be an open system to pre vent overpressure. This
will lead directly to heat loss, though minimal.Note
3 222
2 4
5 6

2.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212852The relative tank size has a broad range, with small tanks having a volume of 100 L, and large spherical tanks sizing all the way up
to 2000m. Refrigerationsystemsarenotalikelyfeaturefo reveryautomobile, and open systems may pose a hazard should an accident
occur. Cooling hydrogen down to a liquid is a conven ient method of storage, however, and its implementatio n most likely will be
limited to large stationary tanks as well as mobile multi-a xle trucks.
Compressed hydrogen
Compressing gas is the process of applying an externa l force which minimizes the distance between gas particl es, therefore forcing
the system to occupy less volume. This is attractive sin ce many particles can exist in a reasonably sized ta nk. At room temperature
and atmospheric pressure, 4 kg of hydrogen occupies a volume of 45 m, which corresponds to a balloon with a diameter of 5 m.
Clearly compression is required to store and transpor t the gas. When it comes to individual mobility howev er, these tanks are still
far too large for the average sized automobile.
Compressed tanks are regularly lled to 200 atmosphere s in most countries. Storing 4 kg of hydrogen still r equires an internal
volume of 225 L (about 60 gallons). This amount can be d ivided into 5 tanks with 45 L internal volume.
Metal hydrides for storage
Metal hydrides are coordinated complexes and/or cryst al systems which reversibly bind hydrogen. The hydrog en is favorably
incorporated into the complex and may be released b y applying heat to the system. A major method to dete rmine a particular
complex's eectiveness is to measure the amount of hy drogen that can be released from the complex, rather t han the amount it can
store (Table.10).
Some issues with metal hydrides are low hydrogen capacit y, slow uptake and release kinetics, as well as cost. The rate at which the
complex accepts the hydrogen is a factor, since the t ime to fuel a car should ideally be minimal. Even m ore importantly, at the
current stage of research, the rate at which hydrogen i s released from the complex is too slow for automobil e requirements. This
technology is still a very promising method, and furt her research allows for the possibility of highly bin ding and rapid reversal
rates of hydrogen gas.
This page titled 2.10: Storage of Hydrogen for Use as a Fuel is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.3

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Group 1 - The Alkali Metals
3.1: The Alkali Metal Elements
3.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metals
3.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium
3.4: Organolithium Compounds
This page titled 3: Group 1 - The Alkali Metals is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126233.1: The Alkali Metal Elements
The Group 1 metals have a particular name: the alkal i metals. This is due to the formation of alkali (basic) solutions upon their
reaction with water. Table.1 lists the derivation of the names of the alkali metals.
Table.1: Derivation of the names of each of the alk ali metal elements.
Element Symbol Name
Lithium Li Greek lithos meaning stone
Sodium NaLatin natrium or Arabic natrun meaning
soda
Potassium KFrom the Latin kalium, and from Arabic alqali meaning plant ashes
Rubidium Rb Latin rubidus meaning deepest red
Caesium Cs Latin caesius meaning blueish grey
Francium Fr Named after France
Caesium is the international spelling standardized by the IUPAC, but in the United States it is more commonly spelled as
cesium.
Discovery
Lithium
Petalite (Li O.Al O.8SiO) was first discovered in 1800 by J osé Bonifácio de Andrade e Silva (Figure.1), who discove red the
mineral in a Swedish mine on the island of Utö. However, i t was not until 1817 that Johan August Arfwedson (Figure.2)
working in the laboratory of J öns Jakob Berzelius (Figure.3), discovered the presence of a new element while analyzing
petalite ore. Named from the Greek lithos meaning stone reflected its discovery in a mineral, as opposed to so dium and potassium,
which had been discovered in plant tissue; its name was later standardized as lithium. The element was not isolated until 1821,
when William Brande (Figure.4) isolated the element b y performing electrolysis on lithium oxide, a proces s previously
employed by Sir Humphry Davy to isolate potassium and sodium.
Figure: Portuguese statesman and naturalist José Bonifácio de Andrada e Silva (1763 - 1838).Note
2 2 3 2

3.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212623
Figure: Swedish chemist Johan August Arfwedson (1792 - 18 41).
Figure: Swedish chemist Friherre J¨ ons Jacob Berzelius (1 779 - 1848).
Figure: English chemist William Thomas Brande FRS (1788 - 1866).
Sodium
3.1.1.2 Sodium Elemental sodium was first isolated by Sir Humphry Davy (Figure.5) in 1806 by passing an electri c current
through molten sodium hydroxide.

3.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212623
Figure: British chemist and inventor Sir Humphry Davy FRS (1778 - 1829).
Potassium
The name kalium was taken from the word alkali, which came from Arabic al qali meaning the calcined ashes. The name
potassium was made from the English word potash, meaning an alkali extracted in a pot from the ash of burnt wood or tree leaves.
Potassium metal was discovered in 1807 by Sir Humphry Dav y (Figure.5), who derived it from caustic potash (KOH), b y the
use of electrolysis of the molten salt.
Rubidium
Rubidium was discovered using spectroscopy in 1861 by Robert Bunsen (Figure.6) and Gustav Kirchho (Figure. 7) in the
mineral lepidolite. The first rubidium metal was pro duced by Bunsen from the reaction of rubidium chlori de (RbCl) with
potassium.
Figure: German chemist Robert Wilhelm Eberhard Bunsen (1811 - 1899).

3.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212623
Figure: German physicist Gustav Robert Kirchho (1824 - 1887).
Caesium
Like Rubidium, caesium was discovered spectroscopical ly by Bünsen (Figure.6) and Kirchho (Figure.7) in 1860 in
mineral water from Drkheim, Germany. The residues of 44,0 00 liters of mineral water yielded several grams of a caesium salt. Its
identification was based upon the bright blue lines i n its spectrum and it was the first element discover ed by spectral analysis. The
first caesium metal was subsequently produced in 1882 by e lectrolysis of caesium chloride.
Francium
Originally known as eka-caesium, francium was discovere d in 1939 by Marguerite Perey (Figure.8) of the Curie Institute in
Paris, France when she purified a sample of actinium-22 7, which had been reported to have a decay energy of 220 keV. However,
Perey noticed decay particles with an energy level be low 80 keV. Perey thought this decay activity was cause d by a previously
unidentified element, which exhibited chemical proper ties of an alkali metal. This led Perey to believe t hat it was element 87,
caused by the alpha decay of actinium-227. Perey name d the new isotope actinium-K (now referred to as franciu m-223) and in
1946, she proposed the name catium for her newly disco vered element, however, she subsequently suggested fra ncium, after
France.
Figure: French physicist Marguerite Catherine Perey (1909 - 1975), a student of Marie Curie, and the first woman to be
elected to the French Académie des Sciences.
Abundance
The abundance of the alkali metals is given in Tabl e.2. Sodium's high abundance is due mainly to large underground deposits
of rock salt (NaCl). However, sodium is also more abundant in seawater (10,800 ppm) as compared to potassium (380 ppm).
Table.2: Abundance of alkali metal elements.

3.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212623Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
Li 20 (Earth's crust), 40 (soil), 0.17 (sea water)
Na 23,000 (Earth's crust), 10,500 (sea water)
K 21,000 (Earth's crust), 14 (soil), 380 (sea water)
Rb 90 (Earth's crust), 30 - 250 (soil), 0.1 (sea water)
Cs 3 (Earth's crust), 0.0001 (soil), 0.0003 (sea water)
Fr Essentially nil
Isotopes
The naturally abundant isotopes of the alkali metal s are listed in Table.3. All of the isotopes of franc ium are radioactive.
Lithium-7 and sodium-23 are both useful NMR nucleus havin g I = /.
Table.3: Abundance of the major isotopes of the alka li metals.
Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Lithium-6 7.5
Lithium-7 92.5
Sodium-23 100
Potassium-39 93
Potassium-40 0.0118
Potassium-41 6.9
Caesium-133 100
Potassium has three isotopes (Table.3), of which potassi um-40 is radioactive and provides the basis for the de termination of
the age of rocks between 10 and 10 years old, i.e., those formed in proterozoic and cenozoic periods of geol ogical time. The
decay of potassium-40 occurs with a half life of 1.3 1 x 10 years, by two routes. That associated with a b eta particle decay accounts
for 89% of the decay:
While that associated with an electron capture and by positron emission decay accounts for 11% of the dec ay to give argon-40.
Since many rocks contain potassium containing mineral s the decay of potassium-40 after solidification of the rock will result in the
formation of argon trapped in the rock. The argon-4 0 content is determined by mass spectrometry, while t he potassium content is
determined by flame spectrophotometry. The ratio of the two, (3.2), will allow for the determination of the elapsed time since the
rock solidified.
Caesium has at least 39 known isotopes (more than any other element except francium) ranging from caesium -112 caesium-151;
however, caesium-133 is the only naturally occurring s table isotope. The other isotopes have half-lives from a few days to fractions
of a second. The radiogenic isotope caesium-137 is pr oduced from the detonation of nuclear weapons and is produced in nuclear
power plants, and was released to the atmosphere most nota bly from the 1986 Chernobyl accident.12
5 9

3.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212623Physical properties
Many of the physical properties of the alkali metals (T able.4) are typical of metals, e.g., thermal and ele ctrical conductivity.
However, due to the relatively weak inter-atomic forces (weak M-M bonding) they are soft and readily cut with a knife.
Table.4: Selected physical properties of the alkali metal elements.
Element Melting point (C) Boiling point (C) Density (g/cm)Electrical resistivity
(Ω·cm)
Li 453 1615 0.534 12.17 @ 86 C
Na 370 1156 0.968 5.23 @ 29 C
K 336 1032 0.89 7.01 @ 22.8 C
Rb 312 961 1.532 12.52 @ 53 C
Cs 201 944 1.93 37.38 @ 28.1 C
Reactivity
All the alkali metals are highly reactive and are as a consequence of the stability of the M ion are st rong reducing agents (Table
.5). The metals react readily with hydrogen and oxygen.
Table.5: Electrochemical reduction potential for a lkali metals.
Reduction Reduction potential (V)
Li + e → Li -3.045
Na + e → Na -2.7109
K + e → K -2.924
Rb + e → Rb -2.925
Cs + e → Cs -2.923
All of the alkali metals react with water to liberate hydrogen.
The reactions of alkali metals with water are exotherm ic and the heat generated is sucient to ignite the hydrogen. In addition
the solutions formed are highly alkaline. Caution s hould be taken when handling alkali metals and stora ge should always be
under mineral oil.
A similar, but less violent, reaction is also observed with ammonia when catalyzed by transition metal ions.
In the absence of a catalyst, the Group 1 metals dissolve i n liquid ammonia to form solutions with characteristic pro perties.
Highly reducing.
Blue color.
ESR signal due to solvated electrons.
As an example, the dissolution of sodium in liquid ammonia re sults in the formation of solvated Na+ cations and electron s.◦ ◦ 3
+ + + + + WARNING

3.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212623The solvated electrons are stable in liquid ammonia and f orm a complex: [e (NH)]. It is this solvated electron that g ives the strong
reducing properties of the solution as well as the c haracteristic signal in the ESR spectrum associated wit h a single unpaired
electron. The blue color of the solution is often asc ribed to these solvated electrons; however, their abs orption is in the far infra-red
region of the spectrum. A second species, Na-(solv), is actually responsible for the blue color of the soluti on.
The formation of the sodium anion is confirmed by complex ation of the cation with a cryptan ligand (C) such as a cro wn ether.
The resulting complex is found to be isostructural to the iodide analog in the solid state.
Vapor phase
All the alkali metals form M dimers in the vapor phase in an analogous manner to hydrogen. As with dihydrogen the bonding is
associated with the molecular orbital combination of the t wo valence s-orbitals (Figure.9).
Figure: Molecular orbital diagram for the formation of M.
Sodium vapor is commonly used for lighting in a gas discharge lamp, which uses sodium in an excited state to produce light
(Figure.10). There are two varieties of such lamps: low pr essure and high pressure.-3 6

3.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212623
Figure: A low pressure sodium streetlamp.
This page titled 3.1: The Alkali Metal Elements is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126243.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metals
The chemistry of the alkali metals is dominated by t he stability of the +1 oxidation state and the noble gas configuration of the M
cation. The alkali metals all have low first ionization ene rgies (Table.6) but very high second ionization energie s.
Table.6: First ionization potentials for the alkali metals.
Element 1 ionization energy (kJ/mol)
Li 526
Na 502
K 425
Rb 409
Cs 382
As a consequence of the stability of M, the Group 1 meta ls have the least variation in chemistry of the any Gr oup in the periodic
table. The only exceptions are the subtle trends tha t exist for lithium due to its small size (Table.7). All of the metals are more
electropositive than hydrogen (Table.8).
Table.7: Radii of alkali metals. N.B. Some values are unknown.
Element Atomic radius (Å) Ionic radius (Å) Covalent radius (Å)Van der Waals radius
(Å)
Li 1.52 0.68 1.52 1.82
Na 1.86 0.97 1.53 2.27
K 2.31 1.33 1.90 2.75
Rb 2.44 1.47 2.47 Cs 2.62 1.67 2.65 Fr - 1.80 2.70 Table.8: Pauling electronegativities of Group 1 ele ments.
Element Electronegativity
H 2.20
Li 0.98
Na 0.93
K 0.82
Rb 0.82
Cs 0.79
Fr 0.70
Solid State
In the solid state, the compounds of the alkali meta ls generally form ionic lattices, e.g.,. These struct ures are essentially
electrostatic in nature and the lattice energy is usua lly defined as the enthalpy of formation of the ion ic compound from gaseous
ions and as such is invariably exothermic.+
st

3.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212624In all cases the lattice energies is high and is fou nd to be proportional to the ratio of the charges on the ions and the sum of the ionic
radii ().
The ionic radii for alkali metal cations are given in T able.7; those for common anions are given in Table.9.
Table.9: Ionic radii of common anions.
Anion Ionic radius (Å)
F 1.33
Cl 1.81
Br 1.96
I 2.20
H 1.54
O 1.32
The ratio of the ionic radii (r /r) neatly defines t he structural type observed for alkali metal salts (Table.10). The unit cells for
ZnS (zinc blende), NaCl (rock salt), and CsCl are shown in Fig ure.11, Figure.12, and Figure.13, respectively.
Table.10: Defining MX structural types for alkali me tal salts.
r /r Structural type Metal coordination number
0.225 - 0.414 ZnS (zinc blende) 4
0.414 - 0.732 NaCl (rock salt) 6
0.732 - CsCl 8
Figure: Unit cell structure of a zinc blende (ZnS) l attice.
Figure: Unit cell structure of a rock salt lattice.2+ + -

3.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212624
Figure: Unit cell of CsCl.
As an example, the structure of KBr can be predicted f rom the data in Table.7 and Table.9. The ionic rad ius of K is 1.33
Å, while that for Br is 1.96 Å. The ratio of the ionic radii (r /r) is 0.67. Hence, KBr has a NaCl (rock salt) structure.
What is the structure of NaH?
Answer
The ionic radius of Na is 0.97 Å, while that for H is 1.54 Å. The ratio of the ionic radii (r /r) is 0.67. He nce, NaH has a
NaCl (rock salt) structure
What is the structure of RbF?
Answer
The ionic radius of Rb is 1.47 Å, while that for F is 1.33 Å. The ratio of the ionic radii (r /r) is 1.10. Hence, RbF has a
CsCl structure.
Complexes
The coordination complexes of the alkali metal cati ons (M) involve electrostatic, or ion-dipole, inter actions (Figure.14) that
have no preferred direction of interaction. Thus, the ionic radius of the cation (Table.7) controls the c oordination numbers of
the metal in its complexes (Table.11).
Figure: A schematic representation of the ion-dipole or electrostatic interaction of Na+ with water.
Table.11: Coordination number for alkali metal ion s in aqueous complexes.
Aqua ion n
[Li(H O)] 4
[Na(H O)] 6
[K(H O)] 6
[Rb(H O)] 6-8
[Cs(H O)] 8+
- + Exercise: Sodium Hydride
+ - + Exercise: Rubidium Fluoride
2 n+
2 n+
2 n+
2 n+
2 n.+

3.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212624In general the alkali metal ions form complexes with hard donor such as oxygen (H O, ROH, RCO, etc.) or nitrog en (e.g., NH,
NR, etc.). The aquo complexes readily exchange the wate r for other ligands, (3.13); however, the equilibrium constants are small
when the ligand is similar in size to water.
As a consequence of the low equilibrium constants for m onodentate ligands, the alkali metal cations, M, fav or coordination to
polydentate ligands such as ethylenediaminetetraacet ic acid (EDTA, Figure.15), polyethers, and even natural polyesters or
polypeptides. In each case the polydentate ligand wraps it self around the cation.
Figure: Structure of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA).
Macrocyclic ligands
Macrocyclic ligands represent a special class of polyd entate ligand. They are defined as being a cyclic co mpound with nine or more
members including all the heteroatoms and with three or more donor atoms. and are given the special name of cryptands when
they are synthetic bi- and poly-cyclic multidentate ligands. Crown ethers is the name applied to macrocy clic ligands that consist of
a ring containing several ether groups. Figure.16 shows seve ral common macrocyclic ligands.
Figure: The structures of some common macrocyclic liga nds.
Macrocyclic ligands are generally oxygen or nitrogen donor ligands, and they form highly stable 1:1 complexe s with alkali metal
ions in which all or most of the coordination sites o n the metal are occupied, i.e., [M(L)] rather than [M(L)(H O)]. Since the
external surface of the macrocyclic ligands comprise s of organic residue (e.g., CH groups) the complexes ar e soluble in organic
solvents. Thus, crown ethers are commonly used to solubil ize salts (e.g., NaCl) in organic solvents. They have a lso been used to
create solutions of nanoparticles, such as carbon nan otubes (Figure.17), that are ordinarily highly insol uble in common
organic solvents (Table.12).2 2-3
2 n+

3.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212624
Figure: Representation of the reaction between Na/Hg amalgam, dibenzo-18-crown-6, and puried single wall ed carbon
nanotubes (SWNTs) in toluene and the formation of the [Na(dibenzo-18-crown6)] [SWNT] complex. Adapted from R. E.
Anderson and A. R. Barron, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 3436
Table.12: The concentration of Na/dibenzo-18-crown -6 solubilized reduced single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) in various solvents.
Solvent SWNT concentration (mg/L)
CH Cl 14.05
DMF 11.42
hexane 4.65
toluene 3.79
EtOH 2.37
MeOH 2.37
CHCl 0.30
H O 0.10
The most important factor in the coordination of va rious macrocyclic ligands to alkali metal ions is the relative size of the ion and
the ligand cavity. For example, 4,7,13,16,21,24-hexaoxa-1,10diazabicyclo[8,8,8]hexacosane is a potentially oc ta-dentate ligand;
however, the binding eciency is very dependant on the identity of the M+ ion (Figure.18). The low binding c onstant for
lithium is probably as a consequence that the ligand would have to distort to coordinate to the small cat ion. Conversely, the lower
equilibrium for caesium is due to its being to large t o t completely into the ligand cavity.n
2 2

3.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212624
Figure:: Relative stability constants (log K) of alka li metal ions to 4,7,13,16,21,24-hexaoxa1,10diazabicyclo[8,8,8]hexacosane and relationship to the M ionic radius.
One application of the size effect for macrocyclic l igands is the ability to selectively bind different m etals. For example, the
4,7,13,16,21-pentaoxa-1,10-diazabicyclo[8,8,5]tricosane and 4,7,13,16,21,24-hexaoxa-1,10diazabicyclo[8,8,8]hexac osane ligands
shown in Figure.19 have very different binding const ants to Na and K, as a consequence of the relative si ze of the cation
and the ligand cavity (Table.13).
Figure: Structure of (a) 4,7,13,16,21-pentaoxa-1,10- diazabicyclo[8,8,5]tricosane [2,2,1] and (b) 4,7,13, 16,21,24-hexaoxa1,10-diazabicyclo[8,8,8]hexacosane [2,2,2].
Table.13: Equilbrium constants for the M+ complexes f or macrocyclic ligands with different cavity sizes. Th e structures of the ligands are
shown in Figure.19.
Cation [2,2,2] [2,2,1]
Na 800 250,000
K 250,000 700+

3.2.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212624Bibliography
1. R. E. Anderson and A. R. Barron, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 3436.
2. J. M. Lehn, Supramolecular Chemistry: Concepts and Perspectives. VCH (1995).
This page titled 3.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metals is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew
R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126253.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium
While lithium shows many properties that are clearly c onsistent with its position in Group 1, it also has key differences to the other
alkali metals. In fact, in many ways it is more simil ar to its diagonal neighbor magnesium (Mg) than the o ther Group 1 metals - a
phenomenon known as the diagonal effect.
Charge/radius
The ionic radius for the +1 cation of lithium is ve ry small in comparison with its next highest homolog, sodium (Table.14).
This results in a correspondingly high value for the charge density (z/r). As may be seen from Table the charge density for
lithium is significantly higher than that of its Group 1 rela tions.
Table: Comparison of charge densities for lithium, sod ium, potassium, and magnesium.
Element z r (Å) z/r (Å)
Li +1 0.68 1.47
Na +1 0.97 1.03
K +1 1.33 0.75
Mg +2 0.66 3.03
As a result of the high charge density, the Li ion is a highly polarizing ion. One of the main consequence s of this is that lithium
tends to form polar covalent bonds rather than ionic interactions. For example, alkyl lithium compounds (R Li) contain covalent LiC bonds in a similar manner to the Mg-C bonds in Grignards (RMgX, where X = Cl, Br)
Lattice energy
Lithium compounds have high lattice energies as compa red to the other Group 1 metals (Table). As a consequ ence lithium
compounds would be less soluble than the highly soluble sodi um compounds. In some cases (Li O, Li N) they react with water.
Table: Comparison of lattice energies for compounds o f lithium, sodium, potassium, and magnesium.
Compound Lattice energy (kJ/mol)
LiF -1046
NaF -923
KF -821
MgF -2957
Coordination number
The small size of lithium results in a lower coordina tion number (4) for compounds and complexes than obse rved for the other
Group 1 metals. However, lithium and magnesium complexes and organometallic compounds both have most common ly fourcoordinate metal centers (in the absence of large steri c constraints).
Chemical reactivity
A review of some of the reactions of lithium, magnesiu m and the other Group 1 metals shows the anomalous beha vior of lithium
and its similarity to magnesium. Both lithium and mag nesium reacts with carbon or nitrogen to form the cor responding carbide and
nitride. Whereas sodium and the other Group 1 metals show no reaction under ambient conditions. The combus tion of either
lithium or magnesium in air results in the formation of the oxides, Li O and MgO, respectively. In contrast, s odium forms the
peroxide, Na O.-1
2 3
2 2

3.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212625It is not only in the reactivity of the elements tha t this relationship between lithium and its diagonal neighbor exists. Many of the
compounds of lithium have a similar reactivity to th ose of magnesium rather than sodium. For example, the c arbonates of lithium
and magnesium decompose under thermolysis to yield the oxides, (3.14) and (3.15), in contrast, sodium carbo nate (Na CO) is
stable to thermolysis.
This page titled 3.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2 3

3.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126263.4: Organolithium Compounds
One of the major uses of lithium is in the synthesis of organolithium compounds, RLi. They have great im portance and utility in
industry and chemical research. Their reactivity resemb les that of Grignard reagents, but they are generally more r eactive.
Synthesis
The best general method for RLi synthesis involves the reaction of an alkyl or aryl chloride with lithi um metal in benzene or an
aliphatic hydrocarbon (e.g., hexane), (3.4.1).
While it is possible to use diethyl ether (Et O), the solvent slowly attack the resultant alkyl lithium compound, (3.4. 2).
Metal-hydrogen exchange, (3.4.3), metal-halogen exchange, (3.19), and metal-metal exchange can also be used, (3.4. 4).
All organolithium compounds are produced as solutions and are hence used in synthetic protocols by volume of solution. It is
therefore important to know the exact concentration of RLi in solution. The simplest approach to quantify the amount of
organolithium is to react a known volume with water, (3.4.5), and then titrate (with acid) the resultant base that is fo rmed.
However, while the concentration of freshly prepared sa mples of organolithium reagents can the theoretical ly measured in this way,
real samples always contain some amount of LiOH or oth er bases. A simple titration inevitably results in an over estimation of the
organolithium reagent. To overcome this a double titration method is used.
Gillman double titration method
The careful addition of a known volume of an organol ithium reagent solution (between 0.5 and 1.5 mL) to an excess of water
yields a solution of LiOH that can be titrated with a standardized solution of hydrochloric acid, using phe nolphthalein as the
indicator. The presence of any LiOH in the original or ganolithium solution will be incorporated into this ti tration, and thus the
result will be a measure of the total base content in the solution, i.e., (3.4.6).
In order to determine the amount of LiOH present as im purity in the organolithium solution it is necessary to react the RLi without
the formation of base, then titrate the resulting so lution. To do this, an aliquot (the same amount as us ed before) of the
organolithium is reacted slowly with 1,2-dibromoethane (BrCH CH Br) dissolved in dry diethyl ether (Et O). After 5 min of
stirring, the solution is diluted with an excess of wa ter and then titrated with a standardized solution of hydrochloric acid, again
using phenolphthalein as the indicator. The dierence o f the two titrations gives the exact concentration of the org anolithium.
An aliquot of nBuLi in hexanes (0.50 mL) was added to degassed water (20 mL). After any visible reaction had ceased, a few
drops of a phenolphthalein solution in water/methano l are added resulting in a pink color indicative of a basic pH. The
resulting mixture is titrated with standardized hydro chloric acid ([HCl] = 0.1034 N) until complete disappe arance of the pink
color (7.90 mL).2
2 2 2
Example

3.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212626A second aliquot of nBuLi in hexanes (0.50 mL) is ad ded to 1,2-dibromoethane (0.20 mL, Et2O). After 5 min of stirring, the
mixture was diluted with water (20 mL) and after addit ion of the phenolphthalein indicator titrated (with v igorous stirring due
to the biphasic nature of the system) with standardized hydrochloric acid ([HCl] = 0.1034 N) until complete disappearance of
the pink color (0.25 mL).
The concentration of nBuLi is calculated as follows:
Step 1.
Step 2.
Step 3.
Properties
Alkyl lithium compounds are either low melting solids o r liquids, and often with high volatility (depending o n the substituent) due
to the covalent nature of the bonding. They are solu ble in aliphatics, aromatics, and ethers. However, while the reaction with ethers
is generally slow, (3.17), alkyl lithium compounds can polyme rize tetrahydrofuran (THF).
Organolithium compounds react rapidly with air and wat er (both vapor and liquid). The reaction with water is the basis of the
Gillman double titration method for determining the conc entration of organolithium reagents in solution.
Structure
The structure of organolithium compounds is dominat ed by their highly oligomeric nature as a result of 3-center 2-electron
bridging bonds. In all cases the extent of oligomeriza tion is dependant on the identity of the alkyl (or aryl) group. The alkyl-bridged
bond is similar to those found for beryllium and aluminum compounds.
In the vapor phase any particular organolithium der ivative show a range of oligomeric structures. For exam ple, the mass spectrum
of EtLi shows ions associated with both tetramers (e.g., [Et Li]) and hexamers (e.g., [Et Li]). The structures of the different
oligomers have been predicted by molecular orbital calc ulations (Figure.20).
Figure: Proposed vapor phase structures for various oligo mers of RLi.
Solution molecular weight measurements indicate the oli gomerization is present (in the absence of a coordi nating ligand such as
Et O or an amine). The extent of oligomerization depe nds on the steric bulk of the alkyl group (Table.16). Oligomerization
and solution structures have also been investigated by Li and C NMR spectroscopy.
Table.16: Extent of oligomerization (n) for organo lithium compounds [RLi] in benzene solution.3 4+
5 6+
7 13
n

3.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212626R [RLi] R [RLi]
Me 4 Et 6
Bu 6 Bu 4
There are a large number of X-ray crystallographicall y determined structures for organolithium derivatives. The archetypal
example is MeLi, which exists as a tetramer in the sol id state (Figure.21). The lithium atoms are arranged as a tetrahedron and
the carbon atoms are positioned on the center of the facial planes, i.e., the carbon is equidistant from eac h of the lithium atoms. In
contrast, EtLi has a similar tetrahedral structure, b ut the α-carbon of the ethyl groups are asymmetrical ly arranged such that it is
closer to one lithium atom than the other two.
This page titled 3.4: Organolithium Compounds is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.n n
n t

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: Group 2 - The Alkaline Earth Metals
4.1: The Alkaline Earth Elements
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
4.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium
4.4: Organometallic Compounds of Magnesium
Thumbnail: A crystal of strontianite. Both strontianite, one of the most important strontium ores, and stront ium are named after the
town of Strontian, Scotland, the location of one of the f irst mines for strontium ores.
This page titled 4: Group 2 - The Alkaline Earth Metals is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126304.1: The Alkaline Earth Elements
The Group 2 metals have a particular name: the alkal ine earth metals. The name is derived from the observ ation that they have such
high melting points (Table.1) that they remain soli ds (earths) in a fire. Table.2 lists the derivation of the names of the
alkali metals.
Table.1: Melting points of the alkaline earth metal s in comparison with the alkali metals.
Alkali metal Melting point (C) Alkaline earth metal Melting poi nt (C)
Li 180.54 Be 1287
Na 97.72 Mg 650
K 63038 Ca 842
Rb 39.31 Sr 777
Cs 28.44 Ba 727
Fr 27 (estimated) Ra 700
Table.2: Derivation of the names of the alkaline ea rth metals.
Element Symbol Name
Beryllium BeFrom the Greek berullos meaning to
become pale, in reference to the pale
semiprecious gemstone beryl
Magnesium Mg From the Magensia district in Greece
Calcium Ca From the Latin calcis meaning lime
Strontium SrFrom the mineral strontianite named after
the Scottish village of Strontian
Barium Ba From the Greek bary, meaning heavy
Radium Ra From the Latin radius meaning ray
Discovery
Beryllium
Beryllium was discovered by Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin (Fi gure.1) in 1798 as a component in beryls and emeral ds; however,
Fredrich Wöhler (Figure.2) and Antoine Bussy (Figure. 3) independently isolated the metal in 1828 by react ing potassium
with beryllium chloride, (4.1.1).◦ ◦

4.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630
Figure: French pharmacist and chemist Louis Nicolas Vauq uelin (1763 - 1829).
Figure: German chemist Friedrich Wöhler (1800 - 1882) also known for his synthesis of urea and, thus, the foun ding of the
field of natural products synthesis.
Figure: French chemist Antoine Alexandre Brutus Bussy (1 794 - 1882).

4.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630Magnesium
Magnesium is found in large deposits of magnesite and dolomite, and in mineral waters where the Mg ion is so luble. In 1618 a
farmer at Epsom in England attempted to give his cows water from a well. The farmer noticed that the water seemed to heal
scratches and rashes. These Epsom salts were recognized to be hydrated magnesium sulfate, Mg SO. The metal was first isolated in
1808 by Sir Humphry Davy (Figure.4) via the electrolysis of a mixture of magnesia and mercury oxide.
Figure: British chemist and inventor Sir Humphry Davy FRS (1778 - 1829).
Antoine Bussy (Figure.3) subsequently prepared magnes ium by heating magnesium chloride and potassium in a glass tube,
(4.1.2). When the potassium chloride was washed out, small glo bules of magnesium remained.
Calcium
Calcium oxide or lime was known in ancient Rome, while even in 975 AD, Plaster of Paris (calcium sulphate) was r eported to be
useful for setting broken bones. The element itself was not isolated until 1808 when Sir Humphry Davy (Figure.4)
electrolyzed a mixture of lime and mercuric oxide (HgO). His work was based upon prior work by Jöns Berzelius (Figure.5)
who had prepared calcium amalgam (an alloy of calcium an d mercury) by electrolyzing lime in mercury.
Figure: Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius (1779 1848).2+

4.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630Strontium
Discovered in lead mines in 1787 the mineral strontia nite was named after the Scottish village of Strontian. Although it was
realized that this mineral was different from others that contained barium, it wasn't until 1798 that Tho mas Hope (Figure.6)
suggested the presence of a new element. As with calcium, metallic strontium was first isolated by Sir Humphry Da vy (Figure
.4) in 1808 using electrolysis of a mixture containing str ontium chloride and mercuric oxide.
Figure: Scottish chemist Thomas Charles Hope (1766 - 184 4).
Barium
Barium minerals were known by alchemists in the early Middle Ages. Stones of the mineral barite found in Bo logna, Italy (also
known as Bologna stones), were known to glow after exposure to light. Carl Sch eele (Figure.7) identified barite in 1774, but
did not isolate barium. Barium was first isolated as B a in solution by Sir Humphry Davy (Figure.4) in 1808. The oxidized
barium was at first called barote, by Guyton de Morveau, (Figure.8) which was changed by An toine Lavoisier (Figure.9)
to baryta, from which barium was derived to describe the metal.
Figure:: German-Swedish pharmaceutical chemist Carl W ilhelm Scheele (1742 - 1786). Author Isaac Asimov has called him
"hard-luck Scheele" because he made a number of chemica l discoveries before others who are generally given th e credit.2+

4.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630
Figure:: French chemist and politician Louis-Bernard Guyton de Morveau (1737 - 1816) changed his name to GuytonMorveau after the French Revolution.
Figure: French chemist and biologist Antoine-Laurent d e Lavoisier (1743 1794).
Radium
Radium was discovered by Marie Curie (Figure.10) and h er husband Pierre (Figure.11) in 1898 while studying
pitchblende. After removing uranium they found that t he remaining material was still radioactive. They then separated out a
radioactive mixture consisting mostly of barium and an element that gave crimson spectral lines that had never been documented
before. In 1910, radium was isolated as a pure metal b y Curie and André-Louis Debierne (Figure.12) through t he electrolysis
of a radium chloride solution by using a mercury cathode and distilling in an atmosphere of hydrogen gas.

4.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630
Figure: Marie Curie (1867-1934). Copyright Academy of Achievement.
Figure: French physicist Pierre Curie (1859 1906).
Figure: French chemist André-Louis Debierne (1874 - 19 49).

4.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630Abundance
The abundance of the alkaline earth elements is giv en in Table.3. Beryllium is rare, but found in the mi neral beryl
(Be Al Si O). While magnesium is widespread within the Eart h's crust, commercial sources tend to be from sea water as well as
the carbonate minerals magnesite (MgCO) and dolomit e [(Ca,Mg)CO]. Calcium is also commonly found as the c arbonate,
however, strontium and barium are present as the sulfates cel estine (SrSO) and barites (BaSO), respectively.
Table.3: Abundance of alkaline earth elements.
Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
Be 2.6 (Earth's crust), 6 (soil), 2 x 10 (sea water)
Mg 23,000 (Earth's crust), 10,000 (soil), 1,200 (sea water)
Ca 41,000 (Earth's crust), 20,000 (soil), 400 (sea water)
Sr 370 (Earth's crust), 200 (soil), 8 (sea water)
Ba 500 (Earth's crust), 500 (soil), 0.001 (sea water)
Ra 6 x 10 (Earth's crust), 8 x 10 (soil), 1 x 10 (sea wate r)
Calcium is a key element for living. Not only is it p resent as the skeletal material for shell sh and cra bs (CaCO) its phosphate
derivative, hydroxyapetite [Ca (OH)(PO)] is the structur al material of bones and teeth. Calcium is also pres ent in soft tissue at a
level of ca. 22g/kg. Calcium is a vital metal for the foll owing:
Links large molecules together.
Used in the activation of muscles
Used in enzyme activation by stabilization of particular conformations of proteins to be acted upon by enzymes.
Isotopes
The naturally abundant isotopes of the alkaline ear th elements are listed in Table.4. All of the 25 isot opes of radium are
radioactive, and while radium-223, radium-224, and radi um-228 are found in nature as decay products of eith er uranium or
thorium, they are only present in trace amounts.
Table.4: Abundance of the major isotopes of the alka line earth elements.3 2 6 18
3 3
4 4
-7
-7 -7 -10
5 4 3

4.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Beryllium-9 100
Magnesium-24 78.99
Magnesium-25 10
Magnesium-26 11.01
Calcium-40 96.941
Calcium-42 0.647
Calcium-43 0.135
Calcium-44 2.086
Calcium-46 0.004
Calcium-48 0.187
Strontium-84 0.56
Strontium-86 9.86
Strontium-87 7.0
Strontium-88 82.58
Barium-130 0.106
Barium-132 0.101
Barium-134 2.417
Barium-135 6.592
Barium-136 7.854
Barium-137 11.23
Barium-138 71.7
Radium-226 100
Although beryllium-7 and beryllium-10 are found as t race isotopes, they are so rare beryllium is consider ed mononuclidic element
(a chemical element which is found essentially as a s ingle nuclide, of only one atomic mass). Calcium has four stable isotopes plus
two more isotopes (calcium-46 and calcium-48) that ha ve such long half-lives (2.8 x 10 and 4 x 10 years, respectively) that for
all practical purposes they can be considered stable.
Measurement of the Sr/ Sr ratio allows for geological da ting of minerals and rocks. Strontium-90 (half-life = 28.9 years) is a byproduct of nuclear fission and found in nuclear fall out. For example, the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear acciden t contaminated released a
large amount of strontium-90. Since strontium substitu tes for calcium in bones it prevents excretion from t he body and thus
presents a significant health risk, however, strontium- 89 is a short-lived artificial radioisotope that is use d in the treatment of bone
cancer.
Naturally occurring barium is a mix of seven stable isotopes (Table.4), but there are a total twenty-two isotopes known, most
of which are highly radioactive and have half-lives in the several millisecond to several day range. The only notable exception is
barium-133 which has a half-life of 10.51 years.15 19
87 86

4.1.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630Industrial production
The industrial production of beryllium is usually f rom the reaction of beryl (Be Al Si O) with Na (SiF) which yi elds the
beryllium fluoride, Na (BeF). Subsequent reactions with base gi ve the hydroxide.
Reaction of the hydroxide with the ammonium salt of HF, followed by thermolysis gives beryllium fluoride (B eF2). Finally,
reduction of the fluoride with magnesium yields berylli um.
Although magnesium is an abundant metal in dozens of mineral the majority of commercial production comes from sea water,
where it is present at about a level of 12% that of sodium. Calcium hydroxide is added to seawater to for m magnesium hydroxide
precipitate.
Subsequent reaction with hydrochloric acid yields concent rated magnesium chloride solution.
Electrolysis of the magnesium chloride produces mag nesium. At the cathode, the Mg ion is reduced to magnes ium metal, (4.1.7),
while at the anode chlorine gas is formed, (4.1.8).
Strontium metal is produced in an analogous manner; h owever, it may also be prepared from strontium oxide b y reduction with
aluminum in vacuum at a temperature at which strontium disti lls off.
Reactivity and toxicity
The chemistry of the Group 2 elements is dominated by the + 2 oxidation state and the noble gas configuration of the M cation.
Calcium, strontium, and barium react with water on con tact to produce the hydroxide and hydrogen gas. Althou gh the lighter
alkaline earth metals do not react violently with water, they do burn in air.
Magnesium burns with a very bright white flame such tha t caution should be taken not to look at the ame di rectly. Magnesium is
capable of reducing water, (4.1.10), and as a result, wat er cannot be used to extinguish magnesium res; the hy drogen gas produced
will only intensify the re. In addition, magnesium also reacts with carbon dioxide, (4.1.11), precluding the use of carbon dioxide re
extinguishers. Class D dry chemical re extinguisher or sand are used for magnesium res.
Strontium and barium burn in air to produce both the oxide and the nitride, but since the metals do not react with nitrogen except at
high temperatures they only form the oxide spontaneously at room temperature.
Beryllium is a class 1 carcinogen, i.e., it is carcinog enic to both animals and humans. Beryllium is harmfu l if inhaled; if the
concentration in air is high enough (greater than 10 0 µg/m3) an acute condition can result, called acute beryllium disease, which
resembles pneumonia. Acute beryllium disease was report ed as being associated with the manufacture of fluores cent lighting tubes
(a practice that ceased in 1949).
The human body absorbs strontium as if it were calcium, and while stable isotopes have pose no signicant heal th threat, the uptake
of radioactive strontium-90 can lead to various bone disorders and diseases, including bone cancer. All wate r or acid soluble barium
compounds are extremely poisonous. At low doses, barium a cts as a muscle stimulant, while higher doses affect t he nervous
system. Radium is highly radioactive and its decay produc t, radon gas, is also radioactive.3 2 6 18 2 6
2 4
22+
2+

4.1.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212630This page titled 4.1: The Alkaline Earth Elements is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126314.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
Calcium represents the typical Group 2 metal. The ch emical properties of its compounds can be applied to all the heavier
homologs.
Solid state
In the solid state the compounds of the alkaline me tals generally form ionic lattices. In fact (except for beryllium and to a lesser
extend magnesium) the lattice parameters calculated from the ionic radii of Group 2 metals are within 1% o f the experimentally
determined values, indicating the highly ionic character.
Due to the increased ionic charge the cations of the alkaline earths are less than that of their alkali m etal neighbors. Thus, the ionic
radius of Ca (0.99 Å) is less than that of K (1.33 Å), but more similar to Na+ (0.97 Å). This diagonal relatio nship is seen for the
other metals in Group 2.
Oxides
Combustion of the Group 2 metals gives the monoxide, MO. In the case of SrO and BaO further reaction occurs by the absorption
of oxygen under pressure to give the peroxides, MO. The peroxide and superoxides are not stable for the lighter homologs because
the smaller M ions are more polarizing and cause the peroxide and superoxides to decompose to the monoxid e. Calcium peroxide
can be prepared by the reaction of the hydroxide with hydrogen peroxide.
As typical for the Group 2 oxides, calcium monoxide is b asic and reacts with water to give the hydroxide, (4. 2.2). In fact, thin films
of the Group 2 oxides of calcium, barium and strontium wil l readily absorb water and form the hydroxides.
Carbonate
Calcium carbonate (CaCO) is a common substance found in rock in all parts of the world, and is the main co mponent of shells of
marine organisms, snails, pearls, and eggshells. Calcium c arbonate is usually the principal cause of hard wate r. Most calcium
carbonate used is extracted by quarrying or mining. However, pure calcium carbonate (e.g., for pharmaceut ical use) can be
produced from a pure quarried source (usually marble) or manufactured by the sequential reaction involvi ng the thermal
decomposition of the carbonate to the monoxide, (4.2.3), followed by the reaction with water to give the hy droxide, (4.2.2), and
finally, the reaction with carbon dioxide to reform the car bonate, (4.2.4).
Calcium carbonate crystallizes as a variety of mineral forms.
Aragonite
Calcite (Figure.13)
Vaterite
Chalk
Travertine
Limestone
Marble2+ +
2+

4.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.13: Unit cell of calcite a common form of ca lcium carbonate (CaCO3).
Calcium carbonate is one of the most widely used mine ral materials, the following represents a list of some of the main
applications.
Construction industry as a building material (marble) o r as an ingredient of cement.
Purification of iron from iron ore in a blast furnace.
A drilling fluids in the oil industry.
Filler material for latex gloves.
Filler (extender) in paints.
Filler in plastics.
Babies' diapers.
DIY adhesives, sealants, and decorating fillers.
Whiting in ceramics/glazing application.
The filler in glossy paper.
The production of blackboard chalk (CaSO).
An abrasive in household cleaning products.
Dietary calcium supplement.
Inert filler for tablets and pharmaceuticals.
Toothpaste.
Halides
Calcium chloride, bromide, and iodide are all ionic, water-soluble salts. In contrast, due to its high lat tice energy for the small
fluoride ion, CaF is only slightly soluble (Table.5). The fluorite structure typified for CaF (Figure.14) is found for most
of the MX ionic solids.
Table.5: Solubility of calcium halides in water.4
2 2

4.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631Compound Solubility @ 20 °C (g/100 mL) Solubility @ 100 °C (g/ 100 ml)
CaF 0.0016 0.0017
CaCl 74.5 159
CaBr 142 312
CaI 209 426
Figure.14 Unit cell for the uorite (CaF2) structure. Calcium atoms are shown in green (small), uorine atom s are shown in red
(large), and the dashed lines show the unit cell.
Complexes
The coordination complexes of the alkaline earth me tal cations (M) involve electrostatic, or ion-dipol e, interactions that have no
preferred direction of interaction. Calcium will tol erate a wide range of coordination numbers, however, 6 and 8 are the most
common. Complexes generally form with oxygen donors in a wide range of ligands, including: ROH, R O, R C=O, RCO, an d
PO. While complexes with nitrogen donor ligands are kno wn they are usually present with oxygen donors as well. As with the
Group 1 metals, the aquo complex readily exchanges t he water for other ligands, however, since the bond ene rgy is larger for Ca
than for Na, the equilibrium constants are larger for an alogous complexes.
Bibliography
J. M. Buriak, L. K. Cheatham, R. G. Gordon, J. J. Graham, and A. R. Bar ron, Euro J. Solid State Inorg. Chem., 1992, 29, 43.
R. E. Anderson and A. R. Barron, Main Group Chem., 2005, 4, 279.
C, Lupu, R. S. Arvidson, A. Lüttge and A. R. Barron, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2354.
Calcium Carbide: From Gaslight to Fertilizer
Calcium carbide has an interesting role in the socie tal and commercial changes that took place in the l ate 19 and early 20
centuries. However, in order to understand the effects of calcium carbide it is important to realize the st ate of the art of lighting in
the late 18 century.
It was in 1792 that William Murdoch (Figure.15) first b egan experimenting with the use of gas, derived from the heating of
coal and other materials, for lighting. Murdoch produ ced this coal gas, or manufactured gas and conveyed i t through metal pipes,
lighting his cottage and offices in Redruth, Cornwall (Figure.16).2
2+
2 2 2422+
th th
th

4.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.15: Scottish engineer, inventor, and pioneer of gas lighting William Murdoch (1754 - 1839).
Figure.16: Murdoch's house at Redruth was the first dom estic residence to be lit by gas.
In 1802 as part of the public celebrations of the Pe ace of Amiens (between England and France) Murdoch mad e a public exhibition
of his lighting by illuminating the exterior of the Soho Foundry in Birmingham, England. Then in 1807 an e ntrepreneur, Fredrick
Winsor (originally Friedrich Albrecht Winzer) displaye d gaslights along the top of the wall between Carlton House and the Mall in
London. This demonstration for city use was a revelatio n. By 1823 Britain had 300 miles of gas pipe and by 1850 it was 2000
miles. Gaslight had a profound impact on society. Walk ing the streets at night was safer, and it allowed for l onger working hours. It
also made evening activities easier. As a consequence rea ding and evening schools became popular pastimes. Unf ortunately,
gaslight was rather dull orange in color (Figure.17), but it was due to another area of chemical research that a brighter
alternative was discovered.

4.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.17: A gas light still in use on the streets of Lo ndon.
In 1895 the Frenchman Henry Moissan (Figure.18) was tryi ng to make diamonds by the reaction of carbon (grap hite) with
almost anything he could lay his hands on. Although h ighly unsuccessful, one of his experiments did prove useful. By reacting
carbon with lime, the common name for calcium oxide (CaO) at 2000 C (in an electric arc furnace that he h ad helped develop) he
produced calcium carbide (CaC).
Figure.18:French chemist Ferdinand Frederick Henri Moi ssan (1852 - 1907).
Pure calcium carbide is colorless, but most samples hav e a color ranging from black to grayish-white, depen ding on the grade. As
an ionic salt it has a high melting point (2160 C). While the structure of calcium carbide (Figure.19) h as a tetragonal lattice, it
is related to that of a cubic rock salt structure, but wher e the anion is the linear C moiety.◦
22-

4.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.19:The unit cell of calcium carbide (CaC). A dapted from N. N. Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, Chemistry of the
Elements, Butterworth-Heinemann (1984).
Although now used extensively, at the time of its discov ery calcium carbide itself did not prove very inter esting, its reaction with
water had a profound effect on illumination. The reacti on of calcium carbide with water yields acetylene, (4.2.5).
Unlike coal gas, acetylene burns with a very bright whi te ame. Although electricity was starting to become mo re commonly used it
was very expensive and acetylene offered a cheaper al ternative for domestic lighting. Thus, by 1899 ther e were over 250,000
acetylene gas jets in Germany alone. The reaction of calcium carbide to form acetylene was used in a vari ety of portable lamps.
These so-called carbide lamps were used in slate, copper and tin mines, and were also used extensively as headl ights in early
automobiles and bikes (Figure.20).
Figure.20:The carbide lamp on a 1911 Renault.2

4.2.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631Unfortunately for acetylene there was one discovery a nd one economic change that brought the use of acet ylene as a light source to
an end. In 1893 Auer von Welsbach (Figure.21) invented the gas mantel (Figure.22). By the impregnation of silk or
cotton with a mixture of thorium dioxide and cerium(IV) oxide (99:1), and using this in combination with g as he was able to
produce a very white ame.
Figure.21:Austrian scientist and inventor Carl Auer Fr eiherr von Welsbach (1858 - 1929).
Figure.22 Gas mantles. Copyright Science Museum, Londo n.
The other impact on acetylene, was that by 1905 the c ost of electricity was significantly lower, and as a c onsequence the price of
CaC dropped to 30%. There were stockpiles of calcium c arbide all over Europe and America. This may have bee n the end of
calcium carbide's usefulness, however, in 1895 Heinrich Caro (Figure.23) and Adolf Frank (Figure.24), at the Ge rman
chemical giant Badische Anilin- und Soda-Fabrik (BASF), wer e trying to make hydrogen cyanide (HCN) to use in its color dye
business. In 1898, one of their colleagues demonstrat ed that what was actually produced during the reactio n at temperatures
exceeding 1000 °C was not cyanide, as they had hoped. It turned out that what Caro and Frank had found was that that when
calcium carbide is reacted with nitrogen at 1000 ◦C it forms calcium cyanamide (CaCN), (4.2.6). The cyan amide anion has the
structure [N=C=N].2
2-

4.2.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.23:German chemist Heinrich Caro (1834 - 1910).
Figure.24: German chemist, engineer, and businessman Ad olph Frank (1834 1916).
In contact with water calcium cyanamide decomposes and l iberates ammonia:
As such, CaCN is an excellent solid fertilizer that is r eadily plowed into the soil. By 1908 calcium cyanamid e was also found to be
a plant protection agent, which, at a time when all wee d control was performed mechanically, represented a g reat step forward.
Consequently, the output of calcium cyanamide grew en ormously. In 1910, 30,000 tons were produced, but in 19 28, global
production had reached 1.2 million tons. After a tempo rary decline, demand has again risen in recent years owing to the ban on
several pesticides due to the environmental damage they cause. Even after 100 years of use, no harmful long-term effects to the
earth or environment have been observed, nor have weeds or pests developed a resistance to calcium cyanamide.
Bibliography
N.-G. Vannerberg, Acta Chem. Scand., 1962, 16, 1212.
M. A. Bredig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1942, 64, 1730.
Y. Yamamoto, K. Kinoshita, K. Tamaru, and T. Yamanaka, Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan, 1958, 31, 501.
Portland Cement
Chemical Composition of Portland Cement
There are four chief minerals present in a Portland c ement grain: tricalcium silicate (Ca SiO), dicalcium s ilicate (Ca SiO),
tricalcium aluminate (Ca Al O) and calcium aluminoferr ite (Ca Al Fe O). The formula of each of these minerals ca n be broken
down into the basic calcium, silicon, aluminum and iro n oxides (Table.6). Cement chemists use abbreviated n omenclature
based on oxides of various elements to indicate che mical formulae of relevant species, i.e., C = CaO, S = SiO, A = Al O, F =
Fe O. Hence, traditional cement nomenclature abbreviates ea ch oxide as shown in Table.6.
Table.6: Chemical formulae and cement nomenclature for major constituents of Portland cement. Abbreviat ion notation: C = CaO, S = SiO,
A = Al O, F = Fe O.2
3 5 2 4
3 2 5 4 n 2-n 7
2 2 3
2 3
2 3 2 3

4.2.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631Mineral Chemical formula Oxide composition Abbreviation
Tricalcium silicate (alite) Ca SiO 3CaO.SiO C3S
Dicalcium silicate (belite) Ca SiO 2CaO.SiO C2S
Tricalcium aluminate Ca Al O 3CaO.Al O C3A
Tetracalcium aluminoferrite Ca Al Fe O 4CaO.Al Fe O C4AF
The composition of cement is varied depending on the application. A typical example of cement contains 5070% C3S, 1530% C2S,
510% C3A, 515% C4AF, and 38% other additives or minera ls (such as oxides of calcium and magnesium). It is the hydration of
the calcium silicate, aluminate, and aluminoferrite minerals that causes the hardening, or setting, of c ement. The ratio of C3S to
C2S helps to determine how fast the cement will set, wi th faster setting occurring with higher C3S contents. L ower C3A content
promotes resistance to sulfates. Higher amounts of f errite lead to slower hydration. The ferrite phase ca uses the brownish gray
color in cements, so that white cements (i.e., those that are low in C4AF) are often used for aesthetic purposes.
The calcium aluminoferrite (C4AF) forms a continuous phase around the other mineral crystallites, as the iron containing species
act as a fluxing agent in the rotary kiln during cem ent production and are the last to solidify around the others. Figure.25
shows a typical cement grain.
Figure.25: A pictorial representation of a cross-sectio n of a cement grain. Adapted from Cement Microscopy, Halliburton
Services, Duncan, OK.
It is worth noting that a given cement grain will not have the same size or even necessarily contain all t he same minerals as the next
grain. The heterogeneity exists not only within a given part icle, but extends from grain to grain, batch-to-batch, plant to plant.
Bibliography
H. F. W. Taylor, Cement Chemistry, 2nd Ed., Academic Press, London (1997).
Manufacture of Portland Cement
Portland Cement is manufactured by heating calcium ca rbonate and clay or shale in a kiln. During this proc ess the calcium
carbonate is converted to calcium oxide (also known a s lime) and the clay minerals decompose to yield dic alcium silicate
(Ca SiO, C S) and other inorganic oxides such as alumina te and ferrite. Further heating melts the aluminate a nd ferrite phases.
The lime reacts with dicalcium silicate to from tric alcium silicate (Ca SiO, C S). As the mixture is cooled, t ricalcium aluminate
(Ca Al2O, C A) and tetracalcium aluminoferrite (Ca AlnFe O, C AF) crystallize from the melt and tricalcium silica te and the
remaining dicalcium silicate undergo phase transiti ons. These four minerals (C S, C S, C A, and C AF) comprise the bulk of most
cement mixtures. Initially Portland cement production was carried out in a furnace, however, technological de velopments such as3 5 2
2 4 2
3 2 4 2 3
4 n 2-n 7 n 2-n 3
2 4 2
3 5 3
3 6 3 4 2-n 7 4
3 2 3 4

4.2.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631the rotary kiln have enhanced production capabiliti es and allowed cement to become one of the most widel y used construction
materials.
Cement plants generally produce various grades of ce ment by two processes, referred to as either the wet or dry process. The dry
process uses a pneumatic kiln system which uses superhe ated air to convert raw materials to cement, whereas th e wet process
slurries the raw materials in water in preparation for conversion to cement. Cement manufacturers due to it s higher energy
efficiency generally favor the dry process, but the wet process tends to produce cement with properties mor e palatable to the energy
services industry. The American Petroleum Institute (API) Class H cement used in energy service applications is produced by the
wet process, and thus will be the focus of the following discu ssion.
The cement manufacturing process begins at the quarr y (Figure.26), where limestone formations are ripped a nd crushed in
two crushers to a mean particle size of 4". The quarr y formation is not entirely limestone, and no attempt is made to isolate the
limestone from the other minerals. On the contrary, the rippers act to blend in the impurity minerals as eve nly as is feasible while
still maintaining an acceptable limestone content so as not to waste the formation. This is accomplished by ripping the formation
face at a 45 (Figure.27). The rock is quality contro lled via mobile X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy (Figure.28) at
the starting point of a mobile covered conveyor bel t system (Figure.29), which transports the material t o a dome storage unit
(Figure.30).
Figure.26: Limestone quarry face in Midlothian, TX (Copyright Halliburton Energy Services).
Figure.27: Limestone quarry formation, showing the 45 ◦ ripping technique (Copyright Halliburton Energy Se rvices).◦

4.2.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.28: Mobile crusher and XRF unit (Copyright Ha lliburton Energy Services).
Figure.29: Covered conveyor belt for limestone transp ort (Copyright Halliburton Energy Services).
Figure.30: Exterior view of dome storage unit with c onveyor loading port (Copyright Halliburton Energy Services).
The dome storage unit has a capacity of 60 kilotons, and is filled by dispensing the rock from the conve yor at the top of the dome
into a pile built in a circular pattern (Figure.31). The rock is reclaimed from storage via a raking de vice (Figure.32) that
grates over the pile at the natural angle of materi al slide. The raked material slides to the base of the raking unit, where a second
conveyor system transfers material to either of two limestone buffer bins (Figure.33), each of which is d edicated to a
particular kiln process. There is an additional buffe r bin for mill scale from a nearby steel plant, as well as a buffer bin for sand. It

4.2.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631is worth noting at this point that the mill scale fr om the steel plant contains significant levels of b oron, which acts as an innate
retarder and seems to affect adversely, though not ov erly severely, the early compressive strength develo pment when compared to
cement from other plants.
Figure.31: Interior view of dome storage unit, illust rating its radial piling (Copyright Halliburton Ener gy Services).
Figure.32: Raking device for reclaiming stored limest one (Copyright Halliburton Energy Services).

4.2.13 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.33: Buffer bin (Copyright Halliburton Energy Services).
Material leaving the buffer bins is monitored for el emental composition via XRF and feed rates are adjust ed for maintaining proper
ow of calcium, silicon, aluminum, and iron. The raw mate rials are carried to ball mills (Figure.34) for grind ing to ne powder,
which is then mixed with water. The resulting slurry is then sent to the rotary kiln for burning (Figure.35), or transformation
into cement clinker.
Figure.34: Coarse grinder (Copyright Halliburton Ene rgy Services).

4.2.14 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.35: A wet rotary kiln (Copyright Halliburton Energy Services).
The kilns are red to an internal material temperatu re of 2700 F (Figure.36) with a fuel of nely ground co al, natural gas, and/or
various waste materials. Around fifty percent of the e nergy expenditure in the wet kiln process is dedicat ed to evaporating the water
from the slurry, in contrast to the dry process, which spends most of its energy on the calcining process. Sin ce the dry process only
requires approximately half the energy of the wet pro cess, it is generally more attractive to cement man ufacturers. Unfortunately,
the dry process in current use produces poor API Class H cement. A fuller understanding of the differences in cement synthesis via
the two processes could lead to the development of a more effective dry synthesis of Class H cements, but that is beyond the scope
of this work.
Figure.36: Interior view of an operational wet kiln (Copyright Halliburton Energy Services).
After the clinker leaves the kiln, it enters a cooler that uses pressurized air to cool the clinker. The ene rgy absorbed by the air in the
cooler serves to pre-heat the air for feed into the kiln. The cooled clinker is then taken to storage to await nal grinding with
approximately ve percent gypsum by weight. After grin ding to the specied fineness, the nal cement powder is pneumatically
transferred to storage silos until it is shipped to the c ustomer.
Quality control of the clinker and nal powder is handl ed via an automated X-ray diffraction/X-ray fluoresce nce (XRD/XRF)
system, simple wet chemical analyses, simple optical m icroscopy, and periodic performance tests, including c ompressive strength
and thickening time. This entire process results in the heterogeneous nanocomposite of calcium silicate and aluminate particles,
among other materials, which make up a typical cement gr ain.◦

4.2.15 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631Hydration of Portland Cement
The addition of water to dry cement powder results in a thin cement slurry that can be easily manipulated and cast into different
shapes. In time, the slurry sets and develops strength through a series of hydration reactions. Hydration of cement is not linear
through time, it proceeds very slowly at first, allowin g the thin mixture to be properly placed before har dening. The chemical
reactions that cause the delay in hardening are not completely understood; however, they are critical to developing a rational
methodology for the control of cement setting.
Tri- and di-calcium silicates
The tri- and di-calcium silicates (C S and C S, respect ively) comprise over 80% by weight of most cement. I t is known that C S is
the most important phase in cement for strength deve lopment during the first month, while C S reacts much mo re slowly, and
contributes to the long-term strength of the cement. Both the silicate phases react with water as shown below t o form calcium
hydroxide and a rigid calcium-silicate hydrate gel, CSH, (4.2.7) and (4.2.8).
The detailed structure of CSH is not completely known, h owever it is generally agreed upon that it consists of condensed silicate
tetrahedrally sharing oxygen atoms with a central, c alcium hydroxide-like CaO layer. Calcium hydroxide c onsists of hexagonal
layers of octahedrally coordinated calcium atoms and tetrahedrally coordinated oxygen atoms. Taylor has proposed that the
structure is most similar to either Tobermorite or Jennit e, both of which share a skeletal silicate chain Figure.37.
Figure.37: Schematic representation of Tobermorite, viewed along a polysilicate chain. Silicate ions eithe r share oxygen atoms
with a central CaO core or bridge silicate tetrahedr a. Interlayer calcium ions and water molecules are om itted for clarity.
Although the precise mechanism of C3S hydration is un clear, the kinetics of hydration is well known. The hyd ration of the calcium
silicates proceeds via four distinct phases as shown i n Figure.38. The first 15-20 minutes, termed the pre-ind uction period
(Figure.38a), is marked by rapid heat evolution. Duri ng this period calcium and hydroxyl ions are releas ed into the solution.
The next, and perhaps most important, phase is the ind uction period (Figure.38b), which is characterized by v ery slow
reactivity. During this phase, calcium oxide continues to dissolve producing a pH near 12.5. The chemical reac tions that cause the
induction period are not precisely known; however, it is clear that some form of an activation barrier mu st be overcome before
hydration can continue. It has been suggested that in pure C3S, the induction period may be the length o f time it takes for CSH to
begin nucleation, which may be linked to the amount of time required for calcium ions to become supersatu rated in solution.
Alternatively, the induction period may be caused by the development of a small amount of an impermeable calcium-siliconhydrate (CSH) gel at the surface of the particles, whi ch slows down the migration of water to the inorganic oxides. The initial Ca/Si3 2 3

4.2.16 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631ratio at the surface of the particles is near 3. As ca lcium ions dissolve out of this CSH gel, the Ca/Si ratio in the gel becomes 0.81.5. This change in Ca/Si ratio corresponds to a chan ge in gel permeability, and may indicate an entirely new mechanism for CSH
formation. As the initial CSH gel is transformed into the more permeable layer, hydration continues and the i nduction period gives
way to the third phase of hydration, the acceleratory peri od (Figure.38c).
Figure.38: Hydration of C3S over time: (a) the prei nduction period, (b) the induction, (c) period the acceleratory period, and
(d) the deceleratory period.
After ca. 3 hours of hydration, the rate of CSH format ion increases with the amount of CSH formed. Solidificat ion of the paste,
called setting, occurs near the end of the third per iod. The fourth stage (Figure.38d) is the decelerator y period in which
hydration slowly continues hardening the solid cement until the reaction is complete. The rate of hydratio n in this phase is
determined either by the slow migration of water thro ugh CSH to the inner, unhydrated regions of the parti cles, or by the migration
of H through the CSH to the anhydrous CaO and SiO, and the mi gration of Ca and Si4+ to the OH- ions left in solution.
Calcium aluminate and ferrite
In spite of the fact that the aluminate and ferrite phases comprise less than 20% of the bulk of cement, their reactions are very
important in cement and dramatically affect the hyd ration of the calcium silicate phases, see below. Rela tive to C3S, the hydration
of C3A is very fast. In the absence of any additives, C3A reacts with water to form two intermediate hexagona l phases, C2AH8 and
C4AH13, (4.2.9). The structure of C2AH8 is not precisely k nown, but C4AH13 has a layered structure based on the calcium
hydroxide structure, in which one out of every three Ca is replaced by either an Al or Fe with an OH anion in the interlayer
space to balance the charge. All of the aluminum in C 4AH13 is octahedral. C2AH8 and C4AH13 are meta-stable phas es that
spontaneously transform into the fully hydrated, the rmodynamically stable cubic phase, C3AH6, (4.2.10). In C 3A, aluminum
coordination is tetrahedral. The structure consists o f rings of aluminum tetrahedrally linked through br idging oxygen atoms, which
slightly distorts the aluminum environment. In C3AH6, alum inum exists as highly symmetrical, octahedral Al(OH) units.
If the very rapid and exothermic hydration of C3A i s allowed to proceed unhindered in cement, then the se tting occurs too quickly
and the cement does not develop strength. Therefore, gypsum [calcium sulfate dihydrate, CaSO ·2(H O)] is added to slow down
the C3A hydration. In the presence of gypsum, tricalc ium aluminate forms ettringite, [Ca Al(OH).12(H O)].(SO).2(H O),
(4.2.11), which can also be written as C3A.3(CaSO).32(H O). E ttringite grows as columns of calcium, aluminum and oxygen
surrounded by water and sulfate ions, as shown in Figure. 39.+22+
2+ 3+ 3+ 6
4 2
3 6 2 2 4 3 2
4 2

4.2.17 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.39: Ettringite columns (a) consisting of octahe dral aluminum, tetrahedral oxygen, and 8-coordinate calcium. The
coordination sphere of each calcium is filled by wate r and sulfate ions. The packing of the columns (b) rep resented by large circles,
the smaller circles represent channels containing with water and sulfate ions.
Tetracalcium aluminoferrite (C4AF) reacts much like C3 A, i.e., forming ettringite in the presence of gypsum. Ho wever, hydration
the ferrite phase is much slower than hydration of C3 A, and water is observed to bead up on the surface of C 4AF particles. This
may be due to the fact that iron is not as free to m igrate in the pastes as aluminum, which may cause the f ormation of a less
permeable iron rich layer at the surface of the C4AF particles and isolated regions of iron hydroxide. In ce ment, if there is
insufficient gypsum to convert all of the C4AF to ettr ingite, then an iron-rich gel forms at the surface of the silicate particles which
is proposed to slow down their hydration.
Portland Cement
The hydration of cement is obviously far more compl ex than the sum of the hydration reactions of the in dividual minerals. The
typical depiction of a cement grain involves larger silicate particles surrounded by the much smaller C3 A and C4AF particles. The
setting (hydration) of cement can be broken down int o several distinct periods. The more reactive alumin ate and ferrite phases react
first, and these reactions dramatically affect the h ydration of the silicate phase. Scrivener and Pratt us ed TEM to develop the widely
accepted model depicted in Figure.40.
In the first few minutes of hydration (Figure.40b), the aluminum and iron phases react with gypsum to form an amorphous gel
at the surface of the cement grains and short rods o f ettringite grow. After this initial period of react ivity, cement hydration slows
down and the induction period begins. After about 3 h ours of hydration, the induction period ends and th e acceleratory period
begins. During the period from 3 to 24 hours, about 30% of cement reacts to form calcium hydroxide and CSH. T he development
of CSH in this period occurs in 2 phases. After ca. 10 hours hydration (Figure.40c), C3S has produced outer CSH, which
grows out from the ettringite rods rather than direct ly out from the surface of the C3S particles. Theref ore, in the initial phase of the
reaction, the silicate ions must migrate through th e aluminum and iron rich phase to form the CSH. In th e latter part of the
acceleratory period, after 18 hours of hydration, C3 A continues to react with gypsum, forming longer ettri ngite rods (Figure
.40d). This network of ettringite and CSH appears to for m a hydrating shell about 1 µm from the surface of anh ydrous C3S. A
small amount of inner CSH forms inside this shell. After 1 3 days of hydration, reactions slow down and the dece leratory period
begins (Figure.40e). C3A reacts with ettringite to for m some monosulfate. Inner CSH continues to grow near the C3S surface,
narrowing the 1 µm gap between the hydrating shell and anhydrous C3S. The rate of hydration is likely to dep end on the diusion
rate of water or ions to the anhydrous surface. After 2 weeks hydration (Figure.40f), the gap between the hydr ating shell and
the grain is completely filled with CSH. The original, outer C SH becomes more fibrous.

4.2.18 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.40: Schematic representation of anhydrous cemen t (a) and the effect of hydration after (b) 10 minu tes, (c) 10 hours, (d)
18 hours, (e) 13 days, and (f) 2 weeks. Adapted from M. Bishop, PhD Thesis, Rice University, 2001
Bibliography
H. F. W. Taylor, Cement Chemistry, 2nd Ed., Academic Press, London (1997).
H. F. W. Taylor, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1986, 69, 464.
V. S. Ramanchandran, R.F. Feldman, and J. J. Beaudoin, Concrete Science, Heyden and Son Ltd., Philadelphia, PA, 1981.
H. N. Stein and J. Stevels, J. App. Chem., 1964, 14, 338.
M. Grutzeck, S. Kwan, J. Thompson, and A. Benesi, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1999, 18, 217.
V. S. Ramachandran, Concrete Admixtures Handbook, 2nd Edition, Noyes Public ations, New Jersey (1995).
K. L. Scrivener and P. L. Pratt, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1984, 31, 351.
Hydration Inhibition of Portland Cement
In the oil industry, Portland cement supports borehole s of ever increasing depth. This application requires a high degree of control
over the setting kinetics to allow the cement to be pu mped down in a liquid form. A number of chemical inh ibitors are employed to
delay the setting time. The ideal inhibitor for oil we ll cementing would predictably delay the setting of c ement, and then suddenly
allow hydration to continue at a rapid rate.
A wide range of compounds show set inhibition of the hydration of Portland cement. Some common examples in clude, sucrose,
tartaric acid, gluconic acid δ-lactone, lignosulfonat e, and organic phosphonic acids, in particular nitr ilo-tris(methylene)phosphonic
acid (H6ntmp). The structures of these retarders are shown i n.

4.2.19 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.41: Structural formulae of common cement ret arders. (a) sucrose, (b) tartaric acid, (c) gluconic a cid d-lactone, (d)
sodium lignosulfonate, and (e) nitrilo-tris(methylene) phosphonic acid (H6ntmp).
In spite of the fact that the science of cement hydr ation inhibition has been investigated for over 40 y ears, the mechanistic details
are still the subject of much speculation. There are ve primary models for cement hydration inhibition: calcium complexation,
nucleation poisoning, surface adsorption, protective coating/osmotic bursting, and dissolution-precipita tion. A summary of the
characteristic behavior of selected retarders is shown i n Table.7.
Table.7: Summary of the behavior of various hydrati on retarders.
Retarder Characteristic behavior
sucroseCa binding, acts directly on silicates, accelerates ett ringite
formation
tartaric acidacts via calcium complexation and calcium tartrate c oating,
inhibits ettringite formation
lignosulfonateaccelerates ettringite formation, calcium becomes inc orporated
into the polymer matrix during hydration, forms a di ffusion barrier
nitrilo-tris(methylene)phosphonic acid (H ntmp)promotes Ca dissolution, forms [Ca(H ntmp)], heterogeneo us
nucleation on aluminates creates a protective coating around the
grain66

4.2.20 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631Calcium complexation
Inhibition by calcium complexation relies largely o n the requirement that small calcium oxide/hydroxid e templates must form in
the pore water of cement pastes before silicate tetra hedra can condense into dimeric and oligomeric sili cates to form CSH. Calcium
complexation involves either removing calcium from solution by forming insoluble salts, or chelating ca lcium in solution. Calcium
complexation lowers the amount of calcium effectivel y in solution, delaying the time to Ca(OH) super-satur ation and preventing
precipitation of the necessary templates. Simple calc ium complexation should dramatically increase the am ount of Si(OH)
tetrahedra in solution, and indeed this is observed wi th most retarders. However, if the retarder were acting solely by calcium
complexation, then one molecule of retarder would be required per calcium ion in solution, and good inhi bitors are used in much
smaller quantities, on the order of 0.1-2% by weight of cement. In addition, there is no simple correla tion between either calcium
binding strength or calcium salt solubility and reta rding ability. Yet it has been shown that in pure sys tems, i.e., of C3S and C2S,
that the lime concentration in solutions is the most i mportant factor in determining the precipitation of CSH. Therefore, although
calcium complexation must play some role in inhibiti on, other mechanisms of inhibition must be at work as well. An example of a
retarder that operates primarily through calcium co mplexation is tartaric acid, however, the formation of insoluble calcium tartrate
on cement grains suggest that dissolution/precipitation o ccurs in addition (Figure.42).
Figure.42: Schematic representation of cement hydrat ion in the presence of tartaric acid. The aluminate (and aluminate
ferrate) phases (shown in purple) surround the silicate phases (C3S and C2S). Tartaric acid adsorbs onto the alum inum surfaces and
reacts with calcium ions from gypsum to deposit a thick calcium tartrate coating on the cement grain. Adap ted from M. Bishop,
PhD Thesis, Rice University, 2001.2

4.2.21 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631Nucleation poisoning
As with calcium complexation, nucleation poisoning must r ely on the formation of small calcium oxide/hydroxid e templates in the
pore water of cement pastes before silicate tetrahedr a can condense into dimeric and oligomeric silicates to form CSH. Inhibition
by nucleation poisoning is where the retarder blocks the growth of CSH or Ca(OH) crystals through inhibiting a gglomerates of
calcium ions from forming the necessary hexagonal pa ttern. Nucleation inhibitors act on the surface of sm all clusters, therefore,
less than one molecule of retarder per calcium ion i s required to produce dramatic results. This type of inhibition also results in an
increase in the amount of silicate ions in solution, as condensation of silicate chains onto calcium ox ide templates to form the CSH
is inhibited. As a retarder sucrose acts via nucleation po isoning/surface adsorption.
Surface adsorption
Surface adsorption of inhibitors directly onto the su rface of either the anhydrous or (more likely) the partially hydrated mineral
surfaces blocks future reactions with water. In addition, if such inhibitors are large and anionic, then the y produce a negative charge
at the surface of the cement grains, causing the grains to repel each other thereby reducing inter-particle interactions.
Lignosulfonates are typical of retarders that act via surf ace adsorption.
Protective coating/osmotic bursting
The formation of a protective coating with its subsequ ent bursting due to the build up of osmotic pressur e was originally posited to
explain the existence of the induction period in C3S and cement hydration, however it may be applied to in hibition in general. In
this mechanism, a semi-permeable layer at the surface of the cement grain forms and slows down the migration of water and
lengthens the induction period. Osmosis will drive wate r through the semi-permeable membrane towards the unhy drated mineral,
and eventually the ow of water creates higher pressure inside the protective coating and the layer bursts. Hy dration is then allowed
to continue at a normal rate.
Dissolution-precipitation
A detailed study of several retarders (in particular the organic phophonates) has shown that the actually accelerate certain stages of
the hydration process. This is unexpected since the p hosphonates have been termed super retarders, due to t heir increased effect on
cement hydration relative to the effect of conventi onal retarders. So how is it that a retarder can be s o efficient at hydration
inhibition at the same time as accelerating the proc ess? The ability of phosphonates to retard cement setti ng is due to the
lengthening the induction period, without slowing down the time it takes for setting to occur (once the ac celeratory period has
begun).
Phosphonates are known to complex calcium and other M cations, poison the nucleation and growth of barium su lfate crystals,
and inhibit the hydration of Fe O and Al O surfaces via direct surface adsorption, thus it was assumed that wi th regard to cement
hydration inhibition occurred by one of these mecha nism. However, the mechanism by which phosphonates inhibi t cement
hydration consists of two steps. First dissolution, whereb y calcium is extracted from the surface of the ceme nt grains (Figure
.43a) exposing the aluminum rich surface to enhanced (catalyzes) hydration and ettringite formation (Fig ure.43b). Second
precipitation, whereby the soluble calcium-phosphona te oligomerizes either in solution or on the hydrate surface to form an
insoluble polymeric Ca-phosphonate (Figure.43c). Th e Ca-phosphonate material binds to the surface of t he cement grains
inhibiting further hydration by acting as a diffusion ba rrier to water as well as a nucleation inhibitor.2
2+
2 3 2 3

4.2.22 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212631
Figure.43: Schematic representation of the H6ntmp in hibition of cement showing (a) the phosphonic acid pr omoting calcium
dissolution, allowing water and gypsum to react with t he aluminum phases at the surface of the cement grain, (b) the formation of a
meta-stable calcium phosphonate, which precipitates on to the hydrating aluminate surfaces (c), forming a ba rrier to water and
sulfate diffusion. Adapted from M. Bishop, PhD Thesis, Ri ce University, 2001.
Bibliography
N. Thomas and J. Birchall, Cement and Concrete Research, 1983, 13, 830.
D. Double, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1983, A30, 53.
M. Bishop, S. G. Bott, and A. R. Barron, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3074.
M. Bishop and A. R. Barron, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 7042.
This page titled 4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126324.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium
While the chemistry of strontium, barium (and radium) is similar to that of calcium, magnesium and beryll ium show marked
differences. In both cases these differences are due to the sma ll size of the ions.
Beryllium
Beryllium can be thought of as being even more cova lent than magnesium. The small size (ca. 0.3 Å) resul ts in a very high charge
density of Be. In addition, the ionization energy fo r beryllium is a large positive value (1 ionization energy = 899.5 kJ/mol, 2
ionization energy = 14,848.7 kJ/mol). Both of these f actors means that the free ion does not exist. Instea d, beryllium forms covalent
compounds in a similar manner to its diagonal analog aluminum. Both beryllium and aluminum form covalent compounds or
strongly solvated cations, and both form polymeric hy drides, chlorides, and alkyls.
Beryllium chloride is not a lattice structure with a concomitantly high melting and boiling point as ob served for the other Group 2
metals (Table4.8). Instead BeCl is a polymer in the so lid state (Figure.44a), and an equilibrium between a monomer (Figure
.44b) and dimer (Figure.44c) in the vapor phase.
Table.8: Summary of structures for alkaline earth ch lorides (MCl).
M Structure
Be Polymer (4-coordinate Be)
Mg Cadmium chloride structure (6-coordinate Mg)
Ca Deformed rutile structure (6-coordinate Ca)
Ca Deformed rutile structure (6-coordinate Sr)
BaPbCl structure (9-coordinate Ba) or fluorite structure (8coordinate Ba)
Figure.44: Structures of BeCl.
Magnesium
The ionic radius for the +2 cation of magnesium is fairly small (0.65 Å). As a consequence the charge dens ity (z/r) is high, which
results in a high polarizing power of the Mg ion. Thus, magnesium tends to form polar covalent bonds rather than ionic
complexes. As with lithium there is a wide range of organ ometallic derivatives of magnesium, especially the Grignards (RMgX,
where X = Cl, Br).
A further consequence of the covalent character of the bonding is that magnesium tends to form either 4 -coordinate (tetrahedral) or
6-coordinate (octahedral) complexes with well-defined geom etries.
This page titled 4.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2+ st nd
2+

4.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126334.4: Organometallic Compounds of Magnesium
While beryllium makes a range of organometallic com pounds, their hazardous nature has limited their study. In contrast, the ionic
nature of calcium, strontium, and barium compounds li mits the number of stable organometallic derivative s. However, the
organometallic chemistry of magnesium is rich and ex tensive. The importance of Grignards (RMgX, where X = hali de) and dialkyl
magnesium compounds (R Mg) is due to their use in organic syn thesis and as synthons for a range of organometallic comp ounds.
Grignard reagents
Grignard reagents (and the Grignard reaction using th ese compounds) are named after Victor Grignard (Figure.45). After
studying mathematics at Lyon he transferred to chemi stry, becoming a professor at the University of Nancy i n 1910. During World
War I, he was involved in the eld of chemical warfare; however, it is for his major contribution to organi c chemistry he is
remembered.
Figure.45: French chemist and Nobel Prize winner Fran çois Auguste Victor Grignard (1871 1935).
Preparation
The general the synthesis of a Grignard reagent involv es the reaction of an alkyl halide (RX, where X = Cl, Br, I) with magnesium
metal in a suitable ether solvent, (4.4.1).
While diethyl ether (Et O) and tetrahydrofuran (THF) ar e commonly used as solvents, other polar nonprotic s olvents are suitable,
including: triethylamine (NEt), dimethylsulphide (Me S), dim ethylselenide (Me Se), and dimethyltelluride (Me Te).
In general the alkyl halide is added to an excess of magnesium suspended in the solvent. In most cases it is necessary to activate the
magnesium, by the addition of iodine (I), 1,2-dibrom oethane, or sonication. If the halide is very inert r eaction can be promoted by
the co-condensation of magnesium and THF under vacuum.
There is often an induction period after the initia l addition of alkyl halide. However, since the reactio n, (4.4.1), is highly
exothermic care should be taken to ensure that the r eaction does not run-away. For this reason it is normal to initially add a small
quantity of the alkyl halide to ensure the reaction initiates. Once reaction is initiated, the addition of alkyl halide is maintained at a
suitable rate to ensure the reaction is maintained u ntil all the alkyl halide is consumed. The excess rea ction magnesium is removed
from the reaction mixture by filtration.
It is not always necessary to use a liquid or solid ha lide dissolved in the solvent. Bubbling methyl chlori de (MeCl) through an Et O
suspension of magnesium yields MeMgCl. The advantage of a gaseous alkyl halide is that the reaction is very clean as all the
magnesium is consumed and the excess alkyl halide is bubble d away.2
3 2 2 2

4.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212633The purity of the magnesium is very important. For his original experiments Grignard used magnesium of a pu rity of 99.2%.
However, it is now more typical to use 99.8% pure magnes ium. It is important that the magnesium not be too pur e since it is
thought that the transition metal impurities catalyze t he reaction.
The relative order of reactivity of the alkyl halide fo llows the trend:
In fact alkyl uorides are suciently inert that high ly coordinating polar solvents such as THF or dimethyl formamide (DMF) must be
used.
If the reaction is allowed to get too hot then several possib le side reactions can occur. In THF reaction with the so lvent occurs:
Alternatively, a transition metal catalyzed radical c oupling between the Grignard and unreacted alkyl hali de is observed
irrespective of the identity of the solvent, (4.4.4).
The mechanism for Grignard formation is thought to be radical in nature; however, a study of the surface of the magnesium during
the reaction has shown the presence of corrosion pits. It is generally agreed that initiation occurs at surf ace dislocations, but the
major reaction occurs at a polished surface.
The kinetics of the reaction is 1 order with respect to the alkyl halide concentration, but it has also b een claimed to be 1 order
with respect to the solvent concentration. It has ther efore been concluded that the rate-determining step involves the metal solvent
interface.
The reaction of magnesium with aryl bromides has been studied and is proposed to occur by two reactions. Th e first involves
electron transfer between the aryl halide and the me tal, while the second involves aryl radical formation.
A number of alternative synthetic routes are used wit h polyhalogenated hydrocarbons, (4.4.5) and (4.4.6), a nd where the alkyl
radical is unstable, (4.4.7).
Structure
The solid state structure of Grignard reagents is co ntrolled by the presence and identity of the solven t used in the synthesis. In this
regard the size and the basicity of the solvent is i mportant. For example, the structure of EtMgBr crysta llized from diethyl ether
exists as a 4-ccordinate monomer (Figure.46a), while th e use of the sterically less demanding THF results in a 5-coordinate
monomeric structure (Figure.46b). In contrast, the u se of triethylamine yields a dimeric bromide bridged structure (Figure
.46c), and the use of a chelate bidentate amine giv es a structure (Figure.46d) similar to that observed with diethyl ether
(Figure.46a).st st

4.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212633
Figure.46: Molecular structure of EtMgBr in (a) diet hyl ether, (b) THF, (c) triethyl amine, and (d)
tetramethyletheylenediamine (TMED).
In solution, Grignards are fluxional such that no sin gle defined structure is present. The series of exchan ge reactions are known as
an extended Schlenk equilibrium (Figure.47).
Figure.47: Schematic representation of the extended Schlenk equilibrium observed for Grignard compounds i n solution.
It is observed that Grignard solutions are also slight ly conducting, and magnesium is deposited at both t he anode and cathode
suggesting the formation of RMg and [RMgX]. The alkyl /halide exchange is thought to occur through a brid ging intermediate
(Figure.48).
Figure.48: Proposed structure for the alkyl/halide ex change bridging intermediate.
Dialkyl magnesium (R Mg)
Dialkyl magnesium compounds are involatile white solids. Th ey generally have similar reactivity to their Grignard analogs.+22

4.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212633Synthesis
The most common synthesis of R2Mg is by the reaction of a Grignard with dioxane (C H O), (4.32), where the prec ipitation of
the dihalide is the reaction driving force.
This method is useful for the synthesis of cyclic compounds, (4.33).
An alternative synthesis that does not require dioxane involves the metal exchange reaction between magnesi um metal and a
dialkyl mercury compound.
Finally, in selected cases, magnesium will react with acidic hy drocarbons such as cyclopentadienyl at high temperature s (600 C).
Structure
In the vapor phase dialkyl magnesium compounds are ge nerally monomeric linear compounds. In solution, in th e absence of
coordinating solvents R Mg form a variety of oligomer s (Figure.49a-c) in solution as determined by molecul ar weight
measurements. In the presence of coordinating solvents 4-c oordinate monomers predominate (Figure.49d).
Figure.49: Solution structure of R Mg (R = Me, Et) in (a c) non-coordinating solvents, and (d) diethyl eth er.
As similar trend is observed in the solid state, where polymers have been characterized in the absence of coordinating solvents
(Figure.50a), while monomers or dimmers are generall y observed when crystallized from a coordinating solv ent (Figure
.50b and c).4 8 2

4.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212633
Figure.50: Solid state structure of R2Mg (R = Me, Et) crystallized in (a) the absence and (b and c) the pr esence of a
coordinating solvents.
The use of organomagnesium compounds in organic synthesis
Hydrolysis and related reactions
Grignard compounds react with water to give the hydroc arbon, (4.4.9), they also react with other hydroxylic compounds such as
alcohols and carboxylic acids. One important use of the hy drolysis reaction is specifically deuteration, (4.4.10).
The hydrogen atom on a terminal alkyne is suciently acidic that the reaction with Grignards occurs in an analogous manner to that
of hydrolysis.
Once formed the alkynyl Grignard undergoes the same hydroly sis reaction.
Reaction with CO
Grignards react readily with carbon dioxide to form t he carboxylate, which yields the associated carboxylic acid upon hydrolysis,
(4.4.13).
Reaction with carbonyls
Organomagnesium compounds react with organic carbonyls (aldehydes, ketones, and esters) to yield the alcohol on hydrolysis,
(4.4.14). This synthetic route is useful for the formation of primary, secondary and terminal alcohols.
Unfortunately, for some carbonyls there is a competin g side reaction of enolization, where the starting ke tone is reformed upon
hydrolysis.2

4.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212633
When the Grignard reagent has a β-hydrogen another side reaction occurs in which the carbonyl group is reduced and an alkene is
formed.
Both the enolization and reduction occur via similar 6-m embered cyclic transition states (Figure.51).
Figure.51: Representation of the 6-membered transitio n state reaction for enolization of a ketone.
Grignards react with α,β-unsaturated ketones to give either th e 1,2-addition product or the 1,4-addition product, or bot h.
Reaction with acyl halides
Acyl halides react with Grignards to give ketones (4.4.16). Best results are obtained if the reaction is carr ied out at low temperature
and in the presence of a Lewis acid catalysts (e.g., (FeCl).
Reaction with epoxides
Oxirane (epoxide) rings are opened by Grignards in a useful reaction that extends the carbon chain of the Grignard by two carbon
atoms. This reaction is best performed with ethylene o xide since the magnesium halide formed is a Lewis acid catalyst for further
reactions in the case of substituted oxiranes.
Reaction with salts
One of the most useful methods of preparing organome tallic compounds is the exchange reaction of one or ganometallic compound
with a salt of a different metal, Equation. This is an equilibrium process, whose equilibrium co nstant is defined by the reduction
potential of both metals. In general the reaction wi ll proceed so that the more electropositive metal wil l form the more ionic salt
(usually chloride).
Grignard reagents are particularly useful in this reg ard, and may be used to prepare a wide range of orga nometallic compounds. For
example:3

4.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212633The reaction with a Grignard is milder than the analo gous reaction with lithium reagents, and leads to a lowe r incident of sideproducts.
Bibliography
H. Bader and N. M. Smyth, J. Org. Chem., 1964, 29, 953.
C. L. Hill, J. B. Vander Sande, G. M. Whitesides, J. Org. Chem., 1980, 45, 1020.
E. Weiss, J. Organomet. Chem., 1964, 2, 314.
A. R. Barron, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1989, 1625.
This page titled 4.4: Organometallic Compounds of Magnesium is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Group 12
5.1: The Group 12 Elements
5.2: Cadmium Chalcogenide Nanoparticles
5.3: Organometallic Chemistry of Zinc
5.4: Organomercury Compounds
5.5: The Myth, Reality, and History of Mercury Toxicity
This page titled 5: Group 12 is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126375.1: The Group 12 Elements
Although the Group 12 metals (Table) are formally pa rt of the d-block elements from their position in the Periodic Table, their
electronic configuration in both their elemental fo rm (d s) and the vast majority of their compounds (d) is that of the main
group elements. The common oxidation state for all t he Group 12 elements is +2, and the chemistry of zinc and cadmium
compounds in particular is very similar to the analogous magne sium derivatives.
The IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemi stry) definition of a transition metal (or transiti on element) states
that a transition metal is "an element whose atom ha s an incomplete d sub-shell, or which can give rise to cations with an
incomplete d sub-shell." Thus, Group 12 elements are not transition metals.
Element Symbol Name
Zinc ZnFrom German zinke, meaning tooth-like,
pointed or jagged (metallic zinc crystals
have a needle-like appearance), or meaning
tin-like because of its relation to German
word zinn meaning tin, or from Persian
seng meaning stone.
Cadmium Cd From the Latin cadmia, meaning calamine
Mercury HgFrom the Latin hydrargyrum, meaning
watery or liquid silver
Table: Derivation of the names of the Group 12 metals.
Discovery
Zinc
Artifacts with a high zinc content (as much as 90%) ha ve been fond to be over 2500 years old, and possibly older. As such it is
clear that several cultures had the knowledge of work ing with zinc alloys, in particular brass (a zinc/cop per alloy). Zinc mines at
Zawar, near Udaipur in India, have been active since the late 1 millennium BC. However, the smelting of met allic zinc appears to
have begun around the 12 century AD.
The isolation of purified metallic zinc was reported concurrently by several people. The extraction of zi nc from its oxide (ZnO)
was reported as early as 1668, while John Lane is suppos ed to have smelted zinc in 1726. The first Patent for zinc smelting was
granted to English metallurgist William Champion in 1738; however, the credit for discovering pure metal lic zinc is often given to
Andreas Marggraf in 1746.10 2 10
Note
st
th

5.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212637
Engraving of German chemist Andreas Sigismund Marggraf (1709 –1782).
Cadmium
Cadmium was discovered in 1817 by Friedrich Stromeyer as an impurity in calamine (zinc carbonate, ZnCO). St romeyer observed
that impure samples of calamine changed color when h eated but pure calamine did not. Eventually he was ab le to isolate cadmium
metal by roasting and reduction of the sulfide.
German chemist Friedrich Stromeyer (1776 - 1835).
Mercury
Mercury was known to the ancient Chinese and was found in Egyptian tombs that date from 1500 BC. In China a nd Tibet, mercury
use was thought to prolong life, heal fractures, and m aintain generally good health. The ancient Greeks use d mercury in ointments;
the ancient Egyptians and the Romans used it in cosmetic s that sometimes deformed the face.
Abundance
The Group 12 elements mainly occur in sulfide ores, ho wever, as with their Group 2 analogs, carbonate are known, but not as
economically viable. The major zinc containing ore is zinc blende (also known as sphalerite), which is zi nc sulfide (ZnS). Other
important ores include, wurtzite (ZnS), smithsonite (zinc carbonate, ZnCO), and hemimorphite (calamine, Zn SiO). The basic
form of zinc carbonate (hydrozincite, Zn (CO) (OH)) is a lso mined where economically viable. The main source of cadmium is
as an impurity in zinc blende; however, there are sev eral other ores known, e.g., cadmoselite (cadmium seleni de, CdSe) and otavite
(CdCO). Mercury sulfide (cinnabar, HgS) is the major sou rce of mercury, and in fact metallic liquid mercury droplets are often
found in the ore. The terrestrial abundance of the Grou p 12 elements is given in Table.3
3 2 4
5 3 2 6

5.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212637
Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
Zn 75 (Earth’s crust), 64 (soil), 30 x 10 (sea water)
Cd 0.1 (Earth’s crust), 1 (soil), 1 x 10 (sea water)
Hg 50 x 10 (Earth’s crust), 2 x 10 (soil), 40 x 10 (sea wa ter)
Table: Abundance of Group 12 elements.
Isotopes
The naturally abundant isotopes of the Group 12 metals ar e listed in Table.

Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Zinc-64 48.6
Zinc-66 27.9
Zinc-67 4.1
Zinc-68 18.8
Zinc-70 0.6
Cadmium-106 * 1.25
Cadmium-108 * 0.89
Cadmium-110 12.49
Cadmium-111 12.8
Cadmium-112 24.13
Cadmium-113 * 12.22
Cadmium-114 * 28.73
Cadmium-116 * 7.49
Mercury-196 0.15
Mercury-198 9.97
Mercury-199 16.87
Mercury-200 23.1
Mercury-201 13.18
Mercury-202 29.86
Mercury-204 6.87
Table: Abundance of the major (non-synthetic) isotopes of the Gr oup 12 metals. Isotopes labeled with * are radioactive.
Many radioisotopes of zinc have been characterized. Zi nc-65 that has a half-life of 244 days, is the most long-lived isotope,
followed by Zn with a half-life of 46.5 hours. The mo st common decay mode of an isotope of zinc with a ma ss number lower
than 64 is electron capture, producing an isotope of co pper, (Equation 5.1.1).-6
-6
-6 -8 -12

5.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212637T he most common decay mode of an isotope of zinc wit h mass number higher than 64 is beta decay (β–), which produces an
isotope of gallium, (Equation 5.1.2).
Naturally occurring cadmium is composed of 8 isotope s. For two of them, natural radioactivity was observed, and three others are
predicted to be radioactive but their decay is not observed, due to extremely long half-life times. Th e two natural radioactive
isotopes are Cd (half-life = 7.7 x 10 years) and Cd (hal f-life = 2.9 x 10 years).
There are seven stable isotopes of mercury with the lo ngest-lived radioisotopes being Hg (half-life = 444 y ears) and Hg (halflife = 47 days). Hg and Hg are the most often studied NMR-acti ve nuclei, having spins of / and / respectively.
Properties
A summary of the physical properties of the Group 12 metals is given in Table. Because of the n s electron in the Group 12
metals are tightly bound, and hence relatively unavai lable for metallic bonding, the metals are volatile wi th low boiling points, as
compared to the Group 2 metals.

Element Mp (°C) Bp (°C) Density (g/cm)
Zn 419.53 907 7.14
Cd 321.07 767 8.65
Hg -38.83 356.73 13.534 (liquid)
Table: Selected physical properties of the Group 12 metals.
The most notable anomaly in the Group 12 metals is t he low melting point of mercury compared to zinc and cadmium. In order to
completely understand the reasons for mercury’s low m elting point quantum physics is required; however, th e key point is that
mercury has a unique electronic configuration, i.e., [Xe] 5 d 6s. The stability of the 6 s shell is due to the presence of a filled 4 f shell,
because an f shell poorly screens the nuclear charge that increa ses the attractive coulomb interaction of the 6 s shell and the nucleus.
Such a configuration strongly resists removal of an ele ctron and as such mercury behaves similarly to nobl e gas elements, which
form weakly bonded and thus easily melting solids.
Liquid mercury.
Industrial production
The vast majority (95%) of zinc is mined from of the zinc sulfide ores. The zinc is most often mixed with c opper, lead, and iron.
Zinc metal is produced by extraction, in which the o re is ground and then the minerals are separated fro m the gangue
(commercially worthless mineral matter) by froth flot ation (a process for selectively separating hydropho bic materials from
hydrophilic). Roasting converts the zinc sulfide conc entrate produced to zinc oxide (Equation 5.1.3). Redu ction of the zinc oxide
with carbon (5.1.4) or carbon monoxide (5.1.5) at 950 °C into the metal is followed by distillation of the metal. Since cadmium is a113 15 116 19
194 203
199 201 1232

5.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212637common impurity in zinc ores, it is most often isol ated during the production of zinc. Cadmium is isola ted from the zinc metal by
vacuum distillation if the zinc is smelted, or cadmium sulfa te is precipitated out of the electrolysis solution.
Mercury is extracted by heating cinnabar (HgS) in a curre nt of air, Equation, and condensing the vapor.
This page titled 5.1: The Group 12 Elements is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126385.2: Cadmium Chalcogenide Nanoparticles
The most studied non-oxide semiconductors are cadmi um chalcogenides (CdE, with E = sulfide, selenide and telluride). CdE
nanocrystals were probably the first material used to demonstrate quantum size effects corresponding to a change in the electronic
structure with size, i.e., the increase of the band gap energy with the decrease in size of particles. These semiconductors
nanocrystals are commonly synthesized by thermal dec omposition of an organometallic precursor dissolved in an anhydrous
solvent containing the source of chalcogenide and a stabilizing material (polymer or capping ligand). St abilizing molecules bound
to the surface of particles control their growth and prev ent particle aggregation.
Picture of cadmium selenide (CdSe) quantum dots, dissolve d in toluene, fluorescing brightly, as they are expose d to an ultraviolet
lamp, in three noticeable different colors (blue ~48 1 nm, green ~520 nm, and orange ~612 nm) due to the quantum dots' bandgap
(and thus the wavelength of emitted light) depends str ongly on the particle size; the smaller the dot, the shorter the emitted
wavelength of light. The "blue" quantum dots have the smallest particle size, the "green" dots are slightly lar ger, and the "orange"
dots are the largest.
Although cadmium chalcogenides are the most studies se miconducting nanoparticles, the methodology for the formation of
semiconducting nanoparticles was first demonstrated i ndependently for InP and GaAs, e.g. Equation 5.1.1. This method has been
adapted for a range of semiconductor nanoparticles.
In the case of CdE, dimethylcadmium Cd(CH) is used as a cadmium source and bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide, (Me Si) S,
trioctylphosphine selenide or telluride (TOPSe, TOPTe) se rve as sources of selenide in trioctylphosphine oxid e (TOPO) used as
solvent and capping molecule. The mixture is heated at 230-260 °C over a few hours while modulating the t emperature in response
to changes in the size distribution as estimated from the absorption spectra of aliquots removed at regula r intervals. These particles,
capped with TOP/TOPO molecules, are non-aggregated and eas ily dispersible in organic solvents forming optically clear
dispersions. When similar syntheses are performed in t he presence of surfactant, strongly anisotropic nanopa rticles are obtained,
e.g., rod-shaped CdSe nanoparticles can be obtained.
TEM image of CdSe nanoparticles.
Because Cd(CH) is extremely toxic, pyrophoric and ex plosive at elevated temperature, other Cd sources ha ve been used. CdO
appears to be an interesting precursor. CdO powder disso lves in TOPO and HPA or TDPA (tetradecylphosphonic acid) at about 300
°C giving a colorless homogeneous solution. By intr oducing selenium or tellurium dissolved in TOP, nanocr ystals grow to the
desired size.3 2 3 2
3 2

5.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212638Nanorods of CdSe or CdTe can also be produced by usin g a greater initial concentration of cadmium as com pared to reactions for
nanoparticles. This approach has been successfully ap plied for synthesis of numerous other metal chalcog enides including ZnS,
ZnSe, and Zn Cd S. Similar procedures enable the formation of MnS, PdS, NiS, Cu S nanoparticles, nano rods, and nano disks.
Bibliography
C. R. Berry, Phys. Rev., 1967, 161, 848.
M. D. Healy, P. E. Laibinis, P. D. Stupik, and A. R. Barron, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1989, 359.
L. Manna, E. C. Scher, and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12700.
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris, and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706.
Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 12, 3343.
R. L. Wells, C. G. Pitt, A. T. McPhail, A. P. Purdy, S. R. B. Shafieezad, and Hallock Chem. Mater., 1989, 1, 4.
X. Zong, Y. Feng, W. Knoll, and H. Man, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13559.
This page titled 5.2: Cadmium Chalcogenide Nanoparticles is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.1-x x 2

5.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126395.3: Organometallic Chemistry of Zinc
The first dialkyl zinc derivatives, Me Zn and Et Zn, were prepared in 1848 by Edward Franklin. He also prepared th e monoalkyl
derivatives, RZnX.
British chemist Sir Edward Franklin FRS (1825 –1899).
Initially alkyl zinc compounds were used in organic s ynthesis, however, their use diminished significantly onc e Grignard reagents
had been discovered. Little further was investigated o f their chemistry until their use in the growth of e lectronic materials
developed in the 1980’s.
RZnX
The monoalkyl derivatives are not widely used, but were hi storically the first to be prepared (Equation 5.3.1).
While the iodide derivatives can be isolated as unso lvated derivatives, the chloride and bromides need to be prepared in the
presence of dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethyl sulfo xide (DMSO). Alternative methods of synthesis involve the reaction with
a Grignard reagent, (Equation 5.3.2), or electrochemical s ynthesis with a zinc electrode.
In the solid state RZnI exists as cage oligomers or p olymeric chain structures. These structures are brok en by the addition of strong
Lewis bases to form Lewis acid-base complexes. In solution there exists a Schlenk equilibrium (equation 5.3.3) whose presence has
been determined by IR and Raman spectroscopy (Table).
Stretch IR (cm) Raman (cm)
symmetric C-Zn-C Not observed 477
asymmetric C-Zn-C 551 Not observed
C-Zn-I 510 510
Table: IR and Raman spectroscopic characterization of the compo nents of the Schlenk equilibrium,
R Zn
Dialkyl zinc compounds are prepared via the monoalkyl derivatives (Equation 5.3.4). The Schlenk equilibrium is shifted at high
temperatures by the distillation of the volatile R Z n derivative. The zinc is usually alloyed with copper (10%) to improve the2 2
-1 -1

5.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212639reaction rate.
Alternative preparation methods include the reaction of ZnX2 with a Grignard (Equation 5.3.5) or by metal-m etal exchange
(Equation 5.3.6).
Bibliography
E. von Frankland. Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1849, 71, 171.
J. J. Habeeb, A. Osman, and D. G. Tuck. J. Organomet. Chem., 1980, 185, 117
This page titled 5.3: Organometallic Chemistry of Zinc is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126405.4: Organomercury Compounds
Synthesis
The most common routes to organomercury compounds in volve the direct reaction of mercury with an alkyl i odide (Equation
5.4.1) to form the mercury analog of a Grignard reagent.
The subsequent reaction of RHgI with potassium cyanide y ields the appropriate dialkyl mercury derivative (Equa tion 5.4.2).
Solvomercuration
The general process of solvomercuration involves the addition of HgX across an alkene double (or alkyne t riple) bond in the
presence of a solvent. Solvomercuration applies where HY, from Equation 5.4.3, are part of the solvent syste m, e.g., in water the
process can be described as hydroxymercuration.
The addition to the alkene occurs with Markovnikoff a ddition, i.e., through the formation of the most stable carbonium ion
resulting with the mercury adding to the less substitu ted carbon. The Hg-C bond can be cleaved by the addi tion of NaBH to yield
the C-H bond. It is common to employ mercury acetate, Hg(OAc) (OAc = O CCH), with subsequent reaction with NaCl or NaI
to form the halide, rather than the mercury halide directly. However, the acetate can also act as a neucl eophile resulting in a mixture
of products. The order of reactivity for alkenes foll ows the trend:
This is due to a combination of steric and electronic ef fects. The addition occurs in a trans /anti fashion.
Mercury(II) halides dissociate in polar solvents (Equa tion 5.4.4) and this species is commonly associated with the initial reaction
step.
The mechanism of solvomercuration is best described by the reaction shown in.
Mechanism of solvomercuration.
Evidence for the mechanism is twofold:
1. The addition is exclusively trans.2
2 2 3

5.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126402. No rearrangement is observed even for Bu(H)C=C(H) Bu whose carbonium ion is known to undergo rearrangement.
Isotope studies indicate that the C-O bond formation is present in the transition state. The mercury brid ge in the transition state may
not be symmetrical, but the structure is similar to the addition of Br and AuX to alkenes.
Proposed transition state for the solvomercuration react ion where the solvent is methanol.
The actual reaction was originally carried out with Hg(OAc) in benzene at 110 °C for several hours in acetic acid solution. It was
found that the reaction was catalyzed by the presenc e of HClO, H SO, and HNO, which were found to replace the acetate ion.
The reaction rate is also increased by 690,000 times by the use of Hg(O CCF) in HO CCF.
The solvomercuration of alkynes gives alkenylmercury compounds, but the reaction is more sluggish than for the reaction with
alkenes, and the product is always the trans isomer.
Mercuration of aromatic compounds
Mercuration is an electrophilic aromatic substitution reaction t hat is possible for most 2n+2 π-electron species. Eviden ce for the πcomplex intermediate is indicated by UV spectroscopy, which shows an increase in the region 280 – 320 nm for the reaction of
aromatic compounds with Hg(O CCF) in HO CCF. The σ-comple x has detected in liquid SO.
As a preparative method mercuration suffers from alac k of selectivity, including an isomerization from para substitution at low
temperature to meta substitution at high temperatures.
Structure
Dialkyl mercury compounds, R Hg, are generally air sta ble and show little Lewis acid behavior. They are monom eric colorless
liquids or low melting solids, e.g., Bp = 92.5 °C for M e Hg. No solubility is observed in water, except for (F C) Hg (Equation
5.4.5).
The hybridization at mercury involves the 6s and 6p orbitals; however, the 5d may be involved. X-ray cryst al structures for both
R Hg and RHgX show linear structures. In general R Hg comp ounds are very weak Lewis acids, but adduct are formed if the alkyl
group is sufficiently electron withdrawing, e.g., (C F) Hg. The geometry of the Lewis acid-base complex is not triangular as
predicted from VSEPR theory, but a T-shape. The distortion from a linear C-Hg-C unit is minor. For example, in (C F) Hg the CHg-C angle is 176.2°, while in [(C F) Hg] (diars), where diars = Ph AsCH CH AsPh, the same angle is 173°. Furthermore, the
donor atom-Hg bond distance (e.g., As-Hg = 3.4 Å) is only sligh tly shorter than the sum of the van der Waal radii (e.g., 3.5 Å).
The structure of [(C F) Hg] (diars).t t
4 2 4 3
2 3 2 2 3
2 3 2 2 3 2
2 3 2
2 2
6 5 2
6 5 2
6 5 2 2 2 2 2 2
6 5 2 2

5.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212640Bibliography
L. C. Damude and P. A. W. Dean. J. Organomet. Chem., 1979, 181, 1.
L. C. Damude and P. A. W. Dean. J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1978, 1083.
J. L. Courtneidge, A. G. Davies, P. S. Gregory, D. C. McGuchan, and S. N. Ya zdi. J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1987, 1192.
P. B. Hitchcock, J. M. Keates, and G. A. Lawless, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 599.
This page titled 5.4: Organomercury Compounds is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126415.5: The Myth, Reality, and History of Mercury Toxicity
Mercury has a reputation for being a dangerous elemen t, but is its reputation deserved? Given the large-s cale use of mercury today
it is important to understand the risks and issues related to mercury exposure. Nowhere is this now import ant than with the use of
mercury for small low energy fluorescent lights that are being advocated by everyone from the electricit y companies to
Greenpeace.
An example of a modern low energy mercury vapor flu orescent light.
When considering the issue of mercury toxicity it is important to separate the effects of mercury metal (as a liquid or vapor) from
the compounds of mercury.
Mercury metal
It was found very early on that people who worked with mercury, in mining for example, had very bad health. Ot her jobs that
exposed people to mercury were mirror makers and hat ters (people who manufactured hats). The problems in t his latter occupation
will forever live on with one of the central characters in Lewis Carroll's Alice’ s Adventures in Wonderland; the Mad Hatter.
Hats were made from felt, which is a non-woven textile of animal hair. Wool interlocks naturally due to the surface texture of the
individual hairs, but rabbit and beaver have to be artificially roughened. This process was usually acc omplished with nitric acid
(HNO). It was found that if mercury was added to the nit ric acid, a better quality of felt was produced. Unfort unately, when the
felt was dried a fine dust was formed containing mercu ry. The hatters who shaped the felt inhaled large qua ntities of this dust were
found to suffer from excessive salivation, erethism (presenting with excessive shyness, timidity and social phobia), and shaking of
the limbs, which became known as hatter’ s shakes. The madness that was observed is the derivation of the phrase “mad as a
hatter”.
It is interesting that while Carroll's Mad Hatter is ma d, he does not show the classic symptoms of mercury poisoni ng. In
particular he can be in no way described as shy!
Hatters were not the only people that mercury caused a problem for. Chemists doing research using large quantities of mercury
were also affected. They were given to violent headach es, tremors of the hands, “socially troublesome inflam mation of the
bladder”, loss of memory, and slow mental processes. In 1926 Alfred Stock (Figure) and his research group all suffered from
symptoms. However, when the lab was cleaned of mercury the sym ptoms went away.3
Note

5.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212641
German chemist Alfred Stock (1876 –1946).
Many other notable scientists have also suffered from mercury poisoning. Faraday (Figure), Pascal (Figure), and most probably Sir
Isaac Newton (Figure) were affected. As part of his research studies, Newton boiled several pounds of mercury a day just before hi s
period of insanity between 1692 and 1693. It is likely that the mercury vapor was the cause of his malady. Howe ver, in each case,
the symptoms (and insanity) abated once the source of me rcury was removed.
An engraving by John Cochran of English chemist and ph ysicist Michael Faraday, FRS (1791 –1867).
French mathematician, physicist, and religious philosoph er Blaise Pascal (1623 – 1662).

5.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212641
English physicist, mathematician, astronomer, natural p hilosopher, alchemist, and theologian Sir Isaac Newton FRS (1643 –1727).
Portrait by Godfrey Kneller.
It is important to remember that in all the cases de scribed above it is the inhalation of the mercury va por that was the cause of
the trouble. Solid alloys of mercury such as those fou nd in dental fillings have never been shown to cause any medical issues
directly. Despite this the US banned the use of Cu/Hg de ntal amalgams until 1850! More recently, it has been s uggested that
dentists are exposed at higher levels during the pla cing and removal of fillings. Dentists as a group ha ve higher mercury levels
than those associated with people with amalgam restorati ons, but experience no increase in disease or death r ates, and in fact
tend to be healthier than the general population.
Although elemental mercury was clearly toxic, this did not stop its use in pharmacy for hundreds of years. In the 1500’s mercury
was used in the treatment (albeit ineffective) of sy philis. Syphilis was a new disease in Europe; it had b een brought back from
America by Columbus’ sailors, and was promptly spread t hrough Europe by the French army, amongst others! Syphil is was much
more fatal and had more dramatic symptoms than today.
Initially mercury was used as an ointment, but the pa tients often got worse. Then there was the tub, which was a mercury vapor
bath, and even calomel (Hg Cl) was used, but with little effect. These treatments were used for over four cent uries, but none
provided a cure, despite claims at the time. For exam ple, John Hunter, a doctor who gave himself syphilis by mistake (!) claimed he
had been cured, but he actually died of a heart att ack during an argument, so it is unlikely the mercur y worked. Despite this it
became known that “a night with Venus results in a lif etime with Mercury”.
The reasons that mercury was thought erroneously to cure syphilis are twofold:
1. Until 1906 it was difficult to diagnose syphilis. It was o ften confused with gonorrhea, and therefore it is likely that some people
did not have the far more deadly syphilis.
2. Syphilis occurs in three phases, each with remission between the phases. The period of remission between secondary and
tertiary phases can be two to three years, and therefore it may appear that a cure is found. Especially as may pat ients (like John
Hunter) died other deaths during this remission phase.
The prevalent use of mercury and its presence in man y cadavers, led some doctors to assume that mercury was a natural part of the
body. It was not just humans that were treated with me rcury, cattle were also treated, and one druggist sold 25 tons of mercury to a
single farmer in one year!
The density of mercury and its liquid state at room temperature led to another unusual application tha t was somewhat more
successful, although equally dangerous: constipation. In medical texts of the time it was noted that “merc ury is given in the disease
called Miserere, unto two or three pounds, and is voided again by sie ge to the same weight; it is better to take a great d eal of it that
a little, because a small quantity might be apt to st op in the circumvolutions of the guts, and if some acid humors should happen to
join with it, a sublimate corrosive would be made; but when a large quantity of it is ta ken, there’s no need to fearing this accident,
because it passes through by its own weight.”Note
2 2

5.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212641It is interesting that the mention of the corrosive sublimate; this is in fact mercury(II) dichloride (HgCl) which u nlike mercury(I)
chloride (Hg Cl), is a very violent poison. Death is cau sed by renal failure. So while there is no evidence fo r elemental mercury
itself causing fatalities, its compounds are another matt er to be considered.
Organomercury compounds
In 1953 it was noted that the fishing village of Mina mata in Japan had an epidemic in which a large numbe r of people died. Initial
thoughts of either an infectious disease or malnutriti on were discounted; then it was found that the fish ea ten by the villagers was
highly contaminated by mercury.
It was found that the mercury came from the Chisso C orporation chemical plant that made acetaldehyde fro m acetylene using a
mercury catalyst. The plant was loosing 1 Kg of mercur y metal for every ton of acetaldehyde being produce d. As a consequence it
was originally assumed that the poisoning of the vill age was due to inorganic mercury. Based upon prior i ncidents, an obvious
response was to ban consumption of all fish and shell fish. As a consequence no new cases were reported, howev er, people already
effected continued to die. This was unlike any previous mercury poisoning.
Further analysis showed small quantities of water solu ble methyl mercury (MeHg) was present and sequestered b y the shellfish to
give MeHgSMe. While the lethal effects of organomercur y compounds were known, the source of the methyl mercury was a
mystery. A group of Swedish researchers showed that the bacterial action in river sediment or rotting fish converted inorganic
mercury to either volatile Me Hg or water soluble MeHg. W ith this discovery, it was understood how the anaerob ic mud of the
estuary near Minamata could perform this methylation.
Of course Minamata was not the first report or an organ omercury compound, but it was the first time that it was shown that
mercury metal could be converted to a highly toxic organometallic derivative in the environment. The h azardous nature of
organomercurials was found almost as soon as the first com pounds were reported!
While working in Bunsen’s research group in Marburg, E dward Franklin discovered the synthesis of the zinc anal og of a Grignard
reagent. Subsequently, in 1851 Franklin moved to Owens C ollege in Manchester where he extended his work to me rcury. In his
publication he noted that these organomercury compoun ds had a “nauseous taste”, but didn’t realize they were tox ic.
British chemist Sir Edward Franklin FRS (1825 – 1899).
In 1858 George Buckton working at the then Royal Coll ege of Chemistry (now Imperial College) reported the synthesis of
dimethyl mercury as a volatile liquid.
\[2 \mathrm{MeHgl}+2 \mathrm{KCN} \rightarrow \mathrm{Me }_{2} \mathrm{Hg}+\mathrm{Hg}+2 \mathrm{KI}+
(\mathrm{NC})_{2}]2
2 2
2+

5.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212641
British chemist George Buckton (1818 - 1905).
When Frankland moved his research to St Bartholomew’s Hospital (“Barts”) London he started looking into th e chemistry of R Hg
with an assistant called Bill Odling in collaboration with Dr C arl Ulrich.
Ulrich died in 1865 as a consequence of exposure to Me Hg. In his own statement, he had inhaled a large quanti ty of the volatile
compound without having taken the proper precautions. The following day “his countenance had attained a dull, anxious, and
confused expression” and he was admitted to the hospit al in a weak condition on 3 February. On the 9 he beca me noisy and had
to be put under mechanical restraint. The next day h is breath and body began to smell offensively and he was in a coma. He would
rise from the coma periodically to utter incoherent howl s. He died on the 14 of February.
A technician from the same research group (who is onl y identified as ‘T. C.’) was also admitted to the hospi tal on 28 March of the
same year. His symptoms were initially milder than Ulric h’s, but soon developed. By that summer he was comple tely demented,
with no control over his body functions. He stayed in this state for many months, only dying on 7 April 18 66. Records indicate
that a third assistant was also taken ill, but there was no furt her mention of him, so it is unknown if he died.
Summary and the “green” future
Metallic mercury causes severe symptoms, but all reco rds show that if the patient is removed from the sour ce they recover. Thus,
short term exposure to metallic mercury, while dangero us, is not fatal if proper precautions are taken. In contrast, mercury
compounds offer different risks. As a general rule, inorg anic mercury(I) compounds are far less toxic than t heir mercury(II)
analogs, however, all should be treated with care.
Where mercury compounds offer the greatest risk of fatality is their organometallic derivatives. There is no known cure for
exposure to even modest doses of organomercury compoun ds. Furthermore, the ability of elemental mercury to be transformed into
water-soluble organomercury compounds such as MeHg, offers a fut ure threat to public health.
The new generation of low energy consumption light bul bs contain mercury vapor. While they last longer tha n a traditional
tungsten filament light bulb (Figure), they do have a lifetime. The presence of mercury means that they should be disposed-off
separately from household waste to ensure that when th e glass is broken the mercury is not released; however, this is unlikely. Most
will be disposed off along with household waste which m ay be subsequently land filled. The lesson from Minam ata should be that
the bacterial action under anaerobic condition allo ws for the formation of water soluble MeHg, that can di ffuse into the water
table. Although the amount of mercury in each bulb is very small, the highly lethal nature (low LD) of org naomercury
compounds should be considered in efforts to conserve energy by the use of the low energy light bulbs. At t he very minimum
protocols for their efficient disposal and recycling sho uld be in place.
Bibliography
S. Jensen and A. Jernelöv, Nature, 1969, 223, 753.
J. C. Clifton II, Pediatr. Clin. North Am., 2007, 54, 237.
H. A. Waldron, Br. Med. J., 1983, 287, 24:
C. Naleway, R. Sakaguchi, E. Mitchell, T. Muller, W. A. Ayer, and J. J. Hefferren, J. Amer. Dent. Assoc., 1985, 111, 37.2
rd th
th
th
th

5.5.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212641D. McComb, J. Can. Dent. Assoc., 1997, 63, 372.
T. G. Duplinsky1 and D. V. Cicchetti, Int. J. Stats. Med. Res., 2012, 1, 1.
M. Aucott, M. McLinden, and M. Winka, J. Air. Waste Manag. Assoc., 2003, 53, 143.
This page titled 5.5: The Myth, Reality, and History of Mercury Toxic ity is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: Group 13
6.1: The Group 13 Elements
6.2: Trends for the Group 13 Compounds
6.3: Borides
6.4: Boron Hydrides
6.5: Wade’s Rules
6.6: Trends for the Oxides of the Group 13 Elements
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
6.8: Aluminum Oxides, Hydroxides, and Hydrated Oxides
6.9: Ceramic Processing of Alumina
6.10: Boron Compounds with Nitrogen Donors
6.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide
6.12: Electronic Grade Gallium Arsenide
6.13: Chalcogenides of Aluminum, Gallium, and Indium
6.14: Group 13 Halides
Thumbnail: Crystals of 99.999% gallium. (CC-SA-BY 3.0; Foobar)
This page titled 6: Group 13 is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126446.1: The Group 13 Elements
Table lists the derivation of the names of the Group 13 (IIIA) elements.
Element Symbol Name
Boron BFrom the Arabic word buraq or the Persian
word burah for the mineral borax
Aluminium (Aluminum) Al From alum
Gallium GaFrom Named after the Latin word for
France (Gaul) Gallia
Indium In Latin rubidus meaning deepest red
Thalium TlFrom the Latin thallus meaning sprouting
green twig
Table: Derivation of the names of each of the alkali metal element s.
Aluminium is the international spelling standardized by the IUPAC, but in the United States it is more commo nly spelled as
aluminum.
Discovery
Boron
Borax (a mixture of Na B O.4H O and Na B O.10H O) was known for thousands of years. In Tibet it was known by the
Sanskrit name of tincal. Borax glazes were used in China in 300 AD, and the writ ings of the Arabic alchemist Geber appear to
mention it in 700 AD. However, it is known that Marco Polo brought some borax glazes back to Italy in the 13th century. In 1600
Agricola in his treatise De Re Metallica reported the use of borax as a flux in metallurgy.
A drawing of the father of chemistry Abu Musa Jābir ibn Hayyān al azdi known by Geber; th e Latinized form of Jabir (721 - 815).
Geber was a chemist and alchemist, astronomer and astrol oger, engineer, geologist, philosopher, physicist, and pharmacist and
physician.Note
2 4 7 2 2 4 7 2

6.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644
A painting of German author Georg Bauer (1494 - 155 5), whose pen-name was the Latinized Georgius Agricola, was most
probably the first person to be environmentally consci ous.
Boron was not recognized as an element until its isol ation by Sir Humphry Davy, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Lou is Jacques
Thénard in 1808 through the reaction of boric acid and potassium. Davy called the element boracium. Jöns Jakob Berzelius
identified boron as an element in 1824.
British chemist and inventor Sir Humphry Davy FRS (1778 - 1829).
French chemist and physicist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778 – 1850).

6.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644
French chemist Louis Jacques Thénard (1777 - 1857).
Swedish chemist Friherre Jöns Jacob Berzelius (1779 - 1848).
Aluminum
Ancient Greeks and Romans used aluminum salts as dyein g mordants and as astringents for dressing wounds; alu m
(KAl(SO).12H O) is still used as a styptic (an antihaemor rhagic agent). In 1808, Sir Humphry Davy identified the existence of a
metal base of alum, which he at first termed alumium and later aluminum.
The metal was first produced in 1825 (in an impure f orm) by Hans Christian Ørsted by the reaction of anhydr ous aluminum
chloride with potassium amalgam. Friedrich Wöhler repea ted the experiments of Ørsted but suggested that Ørsted had only isolated
potassium. By the use of potassium (Equation 6.1.1), he is credited with isolating aluminum in 1827. While Wöh ler is generally
credited with isolating aluminum, Ørsted should also be gi ven credit.4 2 2

6.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644
Danish physicist and chemist Hans Christian Ørsted (1777 - 1851).
German chemist Friedrich Wöhler (1800 - 1882) also kno wn for his synthesis of urea and, thus, the founding of the field of natural
products synthesis.
In 1846 Henri Deville improved Wöhler's method, and d escribed his improvements in particular the use of sodi um in place of the
expensive potassium
French chemist Henri Etienne Sainte-Claire Deville (18 18 - 1881).
Gallium
The element gallium was predicted, as eka-aluminum, by Mendeleev in 1870, and subsequently discovered by Lec oq de
Boisbaudran in 1875; in fact de Boisbaudran had been searching for the missing element for some years, ba sed on his own

6.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644independent theory. The first experimental indicatio n of gallium came with the observation of two new viol et lines in the spark
spectrum of a sample deposited on zinc. Within a mo nth of these initial results de Boisbaudran had isola ted 1 g of the metal starting
from several hundred kilograms of crude zinc blende o re. The new element was named in honor of France (Lati n Gallia), and the
striking similarity of its physical and chemical pr operties to those predicted by Mendeleev did much to establish the general
acceptance of the periodic Law; indeed, when de Boisba udran first stated that the density of Ga was 4.7 g cm rather than the
predicted 5.9 g/cm, Mendeleev wrote to him suggesting that h e redetermine the value (the correct value is 5.904 g/ cm).
Russian chemist and inventor Dmitri Ivanovich Mendelee v (1834 – 1907).
French chemist Paul Émile (François) Lecoq de Boisbaudra n (1838 – 1912).
Indium
While testing ores from the mines around Freiberg, Saxo ny, Ferdinand Reich and Hieronymous Theodor Richter whe n they
dissolved the minerals pyrite, arsenopyrite, galena an d sphalerite in hydrochloric acid, and since it was kn own that ores from that
region contained thallium they searched for the gre en emission lines by spectroscopy. Although the green lines were absent, a blue
line was present in the spectrum. As no element was known with a bright blue emission they concluded that a new element was
present in the minerals. They named the element with t he blue spectral line indium. Richter went on to isolate the metal in 1864.-3
3 3

6.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644
German chemist Ferdinand Reich (1799 - 1882).
German chemist Hieronymus Theodor Richter (1824 - 189 8).
Thallium
After the publication of their improved method of fl ame spectroscopy by Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff this method became
an accepted method to determine the composition of m inerals and chemical products. Two chemists, William Cr ookes and ClaudeAuguste Lamy, both started to use the new method and indepen dently employed it in their discovery of thallium.
German chemist Robert Wilhelm Eberhard Bunsen (1811 - 1899).

6.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644
German physicist Gustav Robert Kirchhoff (1824 - 1887).
English chemist and physicist Sir William Crookes, FRS (18 32 –1919) attended the Royal College of Chemistry (n ow Imperial
College) in London.
Crookes was making spectroscopic determinations on sel enium compounds deposited in the lead chamber of a sulfuric acid
production plant near Tilkerode in the Harz mountain s. Using a similar spectrometer to Crookes', Lamy was determining the
composition of a selenium-containing substance that wa s deposited during the production of sulfuric acid fr om pyrite. Using
spectroscopy both researchers both observed a new gre en line the atomic absorption spectrum and assigned i t to a new element.
Both set out to isolate the new element. Fortunately for Lamy, he had received his material in larger quanti ties and thus he was able
to isolate sufficient quantities of thallium to det ermine the properties of several compounds and prep are a small ingot of metallic
thallium. At the same time Crookes was able to isolate small quantities of elemental thallium and determine the properties of a few
compounds. The claim by both scientists resulted in si gnificant controversy during 1862 and 1863; interestin gly this ended when
Crookes was elected Fellow of the Royal Society in June 1863.
Abundance
The abundance of the Group 13 elements is given in Ta ble. Aluminum is the most abundant metal in the Eart h’s crust and is
found in a wide range of minerals. While boron is not as common it is also found in a range of borate mine rals. In contrast, gallium,
indium, and thallium are found as impurities in other minerals. In particular indium and thallium are fo und in sulfide or selenide
mineral rather than oxides, while gallium is found in both sulfides (ZnS) and oxides (bauxite). Although indi um and thallium
minerals are known, they are rare: indite (FeIn S), lorandit e (TlAsS), crookesite (Cu TlSe).2 4 2 7 4

6.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644Table: Abundance of Group 13 elements.
Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
B 10 (Earth’s crust), 20 (soil), 4 (sea water)
Al 82,000 (Earth’s crust), 100,000 (soil), 5 x 10 (sea wat er)
Ga 18 (Earth’s crust), 28 (soil), 30 x 10 (sea water)
In 0.1 (Earth’s crust), 0.01 (soil), 0.1 x 10 (sea water)
Tl 0.6 (Earth’s crust), 0.2 (soil), 10 x 10 (sea water)
Isotopes
The naturally abundant isotopes of the Group 13 eleme nts are listed in Table. Thallium has 25 isotopes that have atomic
masses that range from 184 to 210. Thallium-204 is the mo st stable radioisotope, with a half-life of 3.78 years.
Table: Abundance of the major isotopes of the Group 13 elements.
Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Boron-10 19.9
Boron-11 80.1
Aluminum-27 100
Gallium-69 60.11
Gallium-71 39.89
Indium-113 4.3
Indium-115 95.7
Thallium-203 29.52
Thallium-205 70.48
The Group 13 elements offer potential as NMR nuclei (T able). In particular B and Al show promise for charact erization in
both solution and solid state.
Table: Isotopes of Group 13 elements for NMR spectrosco py.
Isotope SpinNatural abundance
(%)Quadrupole
moment (10 m)NMR frequency
(MHz) at a field of
2.3488 TReference
Boron-10 3 19.58 8.459 -10.746 BF.Et O
Boron-11 / 80.42 4.059 -32.084 BF.Et O
Aluminum-27 / 100 14.66 -26.057 Al(NO)
Gallium-69 / 60.4 17.1 -24.003 Ga(NO)
Gallium-71 / 39.6 10.7 -30.495 Ga(NO)
Indium-113 / 4.28 79.9 -21.866 In(NO)
Indium-115 / 95.72 81.0 -21.914 In(NO)-4
-6
-6
-6
11 27
-30 2
3 2
32 3 2
52 3 3
32 3 3
32 3 3
92 3 3
92 3 3

6.1.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644Industrial production
Borax is mined as a mixture of Na B O.4H O and Na B O.10H O. Acidification gives boric acid, B(OH), which can be redu ced
with sodium amalgam (Na/Hg) to give amorphous boron. Pure boron can be prepared by reducing boron halides (e.g., BF and
BCl) with hydrogen at high temperatures. Ultrapure bo ron, for the use in semiconductor industry, is produ ced by the
decomposition of diborane (B H) and then further purifi ed with the zone melting or Czochralski processes.
The only two economic sources for gallium are as byproduct of al uminum and zinc production. Extraction during the Bayer proc ess
followed by mercury cell electrolysis and hydrolysis of the amalgam with sodium hydroxide leads to sodium g allate. Electrolysis
then gives gallium metal.
The lack of indium mineral deposits and the fact tha t indium is enriched in sulfides of lead, tin, copper, iron and zinc, makes the
zinc production the main source for indium. The indi um is leached from slag and dust of zinc production. Up until 1924, there was
only about a gram of isolated indium on the planet, however, today worldwide production is currently great er 476 tons per year
from mining and a 650 tons per year from recycling. This massive increase in demand is due to applicatio ns in LCD displays and
solar cell applications.
Aluminum
Due to aluminum’s position as the most abundant metall ic element in the Earth's crust (7.5 - 8.1%) and its e normous industrial
importance warrants detailed discussion of its indust rial production. Aluminum only appears in its elemen tal form in nature in
oxygen-deficient environments such as volcanic mud. Ordina rily, it is found in a variety of oxide minerals.
In comparison to other metals aluminum is difficult to extract from its ores. Unlike iron, aluminum oxide s cannot be reduced by
carbon, and so purification is only possible on an ec onomic scale using electrolysis. Prior to electrolysi s purified aluminum oxide is
obtained by refining bauxite in the process of developed by Karl Bayer.
Austrian chemist Karl Josef Bayer (1847 –1904) whose fat her, Friedrich, founded the Bayer chemical and pharm aceutical
company.
Bauxite, the most important ore of aluminum, contain s only 30-50% alumina, Al O, the rest being a mixture of silica, iron oxide,
and titanium dioxide. Thus, the alumina must be pur ified before it can be used as the oxide or refined into aluminum metal. In the
Bayer process, bauxite is digested in hot (175 °C) sod ium hydroxide (NaOH) solution (Figure). This converts the alumina to
aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH), which dissolves in the hydroxi de solution.
The other components do not dissolve and are filtere d off. The hydroxide solution is cooled, and the di ssolved aluminum hydroxide
precipitates, which when heated to 1050 °C is calcined into a lumina.2 4 7 2 2 4 7 2 3
2 6
2 3

6.1.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644
Schematic representation of the Bayer process. Copyrigh t: Andrew Perchard, Alcan Aluminium UK and courtesy of Glasgow
University Archives (2007).
Once a pure alumina is formed, it is dissolved in molt en cryolite (Na AlF) and reduced to the pure metal at elevated temperatures
(950 - 980 °C) using the Hall-Héroult process, developed i ndependently Charles Hall and Paul Héroult.
American inventor and engineer Charles Martin Hall (1863 – 1914).
French scientist Paul (Louis-Toussaint) Héroult (1863 – 19 14).
Both of the electrodes used in the electrolysis of alu minum oxide are carbon. The reaction at the cathode involves the reduction of
the Al. The aluminum metal then sinks to the bottom a nd is tapped off, where it is usually cast into large b locks called aluminum
billets.3 6
3+

6.1.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212644
Schematic of the Hall-Héroult cell.
At the anode oxygen is formed, (6.1.6), where it reac ts with the carbon anode is then oxidized to carbon d ioxide, (6.1.7). The
anodes must be replaced regularly, since they are con sumed. While the cathodes are not oxidized they do erode due to
electrochemical processes and metal movement.
Although the Hall-Héroult process consumes a lot of ene rgy, alternative processes have always found to be less economically and
ecologically viable.
Physical properties
Table summarizes the physical properties of the Group 13 elem ents. While, aluminum, indium, and thallium have typi cal metal
properties, gallium has the largest liquid range of any element. Boron exists as a molecular compound in the solid state, hence its
high melting point.
Element Mp (°C) Bp (°C) Density (g/cm)
B 2300 3658 2.3
Al 661 2467 2.7
Ga 30 2403 5.9 (solid), 6.1 (liquid)
In 156 2080 7.3
Tl 304 1457 11.9
Table: Selected physical properties of the Group 13 elements.
Bibliography
C. M. Hall. Process of reducing aluminum from its fluoride salts by el ectrolysis. US Patent 400,664 (1886).
L. B. Alemany, S. Steuernagel, J.-P. Amoureux, R. L. Callender, and A. R. Barron. Solid State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance,
1999, 14, 1.
L. B. Alemany, R. L. Callender, A. R. Barron, S. Steuernagel, D. Iu ga, and A. P. M. Kentgens, J. Phys. Chem., B., 2000, 104,
11612.
M. Bishop, N. Shahid, J. Yang, and A. R. Barron, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2621.
This page titled 6.1: The Group 13 Elements is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.3

6.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126456.2: Trends for the Group 13 Compounds
Boron is a non-metal with metalloidal tenancies. The h igher ionization energies for boron than for its oth er Group homologs are far
more than would be compensated by lattice energies, a nd thus, the B ion plays no part in the chemistry of boron, and its
chemistry is dominated by the formation of covalent compounds. In contrast, the elements aluminum through thallium each has a
low electronegativity and the chemistry of their comp ounds reflects this characteristic. Each of the Group 13 metals forms both
covalent compounds and ionic coordination complexes.
All of the Group 13 (IIIA) elements have a valence she ll electron configuration of nsnp. As a consequence all of the Group 13
elements for compounds in which they adopt a +3 oxid ation state. While the lighter elements do form comp ounds with lower
oxidation state, they are not the norm; however, the + 1 oxidation state is more prevalent for the heavier e lements in particular
thallium. The rational for this is described as the inert pair effect. The inert pair effect is usually explained by the e nergy of the ns
orbital is lower making it harder to ionize and stab ilizing a ns np valence shell. However, as may be seen from Table the sum
of the second and third ionization enthalpies is lowe r for indium (4501 kJ/mol), than for gallium (4916 k J/mol), but with thallium
intermediate (4820 kJ/mol). The true source of the inert pair effect is that the lower bond strengths ob served for the heavier
elements (due to more diffuse orbitals and therefore less efficient overlap) cannot compensate for the en ergy needed to promote the
ns electrons. For example, the bond energies for gall ium, indium, and thallium in MCl are 242, 206, and 153 kJ/mol, respectively.
It has also been suggested that relativistic effects ma ke a contribution to the inert pair effect.
Table: Summary of first three ionization enthalpies f or the Group 13 metals.
Ionization enthalpy
(kJ/mol)Al Ga In Tl
1 576.4 578.3 558.1 589.0
2 1814.1 1969.3 1811.2 1958.7
3 2741.4 2950.0 2689.3 2868.8
In summary, it may be stated that while the chemistr y of gallium, indium and thallium is very similar, th at of aluminum is slightly
different, while boron’s chemistry is very different from the rest of the Group.
A second effect is noticed in the transition from a luminum, to gallium, to indium. Based upon their posit ion in the Group it would
be expected that the ionic radius and associated latti ce parameters should follow the trend:
However, as may be seen from Table the values for galli um are either the same as, or smaller, than that of a luminum. In a
similar manner, the covalent radius and covalent bo nd lengths as determined by X-ray crystallography fo r a range of compounds
(Table).
Table: Lattice parameter (a) for zinc blende forms of the Group 13 phosphides and arsenides. Data from Semiconductors: Group IV Elements
and III-V Compounds, Ed. O. Madelung, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1991).
Element Phosphide lattice parameter (Å) Arsenide lattice paramet er (Å)
Al 5.4635 5.6600
Ga 5.4505 5.6532
In 5.8687 6.05833+
2 1
2 0

6.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212645Table: Comparative crystallographically determined bond lengths.
Element M-C (Å) M-N (Å) M-O (Å) M-Cl (Å)
Al 1.96 – 2.02 2.03 – 2.19 1.74 – 1.93 2.09 – 2.11
Ga 1.97 – 2.01 1.95 – 2.12 1.89 - 1.94 2.12 – 2.23
In 2.14 – 2.17 2.23 – 2.31 2.19 – 2.20 2.39 – 2.47
Gallium is significantly smaller than expected from i ts position within the Group 13 elements (Table). The rational for this
may be attributed to an analogous effect as seen in t he lanthanide contraction observed for the lanthanides and the 3 row of
transition elements. In multi-electron atoms, the decr ease in radius brought about by an increase in nucle ar charge is partially offset
by increasing electrostatic repulsion among electron s. In particular, a “shielding effect” results when electrons are added in outer
shells, electrons already present shield the outer elec trons from nuclear charge, making them experience a lower effective charge on
the nucleus. The shielding effect exerted by the in ner electrons decreases in the order s > p > d > f. As a sub-shell is filled in a
period the atomic radius decreases. This effect is parti cularly pronounced in the case of lanthanides, as th e 4f sub-shell is not very
effective at shielding the outer shell (n = 5 and n = 6) electrons. However, a similar, but smaller effect sh ould be observed with the
post-transition metal elements, i.e., gallium. This is indee d observed (Table).
Table: Comparison of the covalent and ionic radii o f Group 13 elements.
Element Covalent radius (Å) Ionic radius (Å)
Aluminum 1.21 0.53
Gallium 1.22 0.62
Indium 1.42 0.80
Iron (low spin) 1.32 0.55
Iron (high spin) 1.52 0.64
The anomalous size of gallium has two positive effects.
1. The similarity in size of aluminum and gallium means that their Group 15 derivatives have near identical lattice parameters
(Table). This allows for both epitaxial growth of one mate rial on the other, and also the formation of ternary mi xtures (i.e.,
Al Ga As) with matched lattice parameters. The ability to grow h etrojunction structures of Group 13-15 compounds (III-V) is
the basis for the fabrication of a wide range of importa nt optoelectronic devices, including: LEDs and laser di odes.
2. The similarity in size of gallium(III) to iron(III) (T able) means that gallium can substitute iron in a range o f coordination
compounds without alteration of the structure. Because of a si milar size and charge as Fe, Ga is widely used as a non-redoxactive Fe substitute for studying metal complexation in p roteins and bacterial populations.
Bibliography
K. S. Pitzer, Acc. Chem. Res., 1979, 12, 271.
K. D. Weaver, J. J. Heymann, A. Mehta, P. L. Roulhac, D. S. Anderson, A. J. Nowalk, P. Adhikari, T. A. Mietzner, M. C.
Fitzgerald, and A. L. Crumbliss, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 13, 887.
Semiconductors: Group IV Elements and III-V Compounds, Ed. O. Madelung, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1991).
This page titled 6.2: Trends for the Group 13 Compounds is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.rd
x 1-x
3+ 3+
3+

6.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126466.3: Borides
The non-metallic nature of boron means that it makes a number of binary compounds with elements more elec tropositive than itself
(i.e., metals). These compounds are called, borides, and some are also formed with metalloid elements as well (e.g., arsenic). In this
regard, borides may be considered similar to carbides, si licides, and some phosphides.
Borides are prepared in a number of ways, however, dir ect combination of the elements, (6.3.1), is the sim plest. Other routes
include, electrolysis of the fused salts, and the reducti on of the metal oxide with a mixture of carbon and boron carbide.
Metal borides are generally refractory in character and chemically inert, while they often have propertie s better that of the
constituent elements. For example, the thermal conduc tivity of TiB is about ten times greater than that of titanium, and the melting
point is significantly higher (Table).
Table: The melting points of Group 4 metals and thei r borides.
Element Melting point (°C) Boride Melting point (°C)
Ti 1725 TiB 3225
Zr 1855 ZrB 2990
Hf 2233 HfB 3100
The structures of metal borides depends on the M:B r atio. Borides with an isolated boron atom have a low B:M ratio: M B, M B,
M B, M B, and M B. In such compounds the boron atom is normally in a triangular-prismatic or square-antipri smatic hole in a
metal lattice. Borides with equal or near equal metal and boron ratio have structures with either pairs o f boron atoms (as in V B),
single boron chains (seen in all MB compounds), or dou ble boron chains (observed for many M B compounds). Increasing the
boron content results in two-dimensional structures. For example, MB usually consists of alternate hexagonal layers of metal and
boron (Figure). Finally, boron rich borides (e.g., MB, MB, and MB) all have three-dimensional structures.
Figure: Alternate layers of metal atoms (large circle s) and boron (small circles) in MB.
This page titled 6.3: Borides is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2
4 3
2 5 2 7 3
3 2
3 4
4 6 12

6.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126476.4: Boron Hydrides
Borane and diborane
Borane (BH) formed in the gaseous state from decomp osition of other compounds, (6.4.2) but cannot be isolat ed except as a
Lewis acid-base complex (6.4.1). As such many borane adducts ar e known.
In the absence of a Lewis base the dimeric diborane (B H) is formed. Diborane is generally synthesized by t he reaction if BF
with a hydride source, such as NaBH, (6.4.4), or LiAlH, (6.4.3).
The structure of diborane (Figure a) is considered t o be electron deficient, and has been confirmed by I R spectroscopy and
electron diffraction. The four terminal B-H bonds are normal covalent bonds, however, the bridging B-H-B uni t consists of two
three-centered two-electron bonds, each ordinarily con sidered to be formed by the combination of two boron sp orbitals and one
hydrogen s orbital (Figure b). However, a consideration of the H-B-H bond angle associated with the terminal hydrides (120°)
it is perhaps better to consider the BH fragment to be sp hybridized, and the B-H-B bridging unit to be a lin ear combination of
one sp orbital and one p orbital from each boron atom with the two hydrogen s orbitals. Diborane represents the archetypal
electron deficient dimeric compound, of which Al Me is al so a member of this class of electron deficient molecules.
Figure: The structure (a) and the typical view of th e three-centered two-electron bonds (b) in diborane, B H.
B H is spontaneously and highly exothermically inflam mable above 25 °C (ΔH = -2137.7 kJ/mol), (6.4.5). It is o ften used as one
of a range of solvate forms for safety for both its flam mability and toxicity.
Most reactions of diborane involve the cleavage of the dimeric structure. Hydrolysis of diborane yields bor ic acid, (6.4.6), while
alcoholysis yields the appropriate borate ester, (6. 4.7). Diborane reacts with Lewis bases to form the approp riate Lewis acid-base
complex, (6.4.8).

Borohydride
The borohydride anion (or more properly the tetrahy dridoborate anion), BH, can be considered as the Le wis acid-base complex
between borane and H. A typical synthesis involves the rea ction of a borate ester with a hydride source, (6.4.9).
Sodium borohydride is a stable white crystalline solid that is stable in dry air and is non-volatile. The bo ron in borohydride (BH)
is tetrahedral. Although it is insoluble in Et O, it i s soluble in water (in which it reacts slowly), THF, eth ylene glycol, and pyridine.
Interestingly, NaBH reacts rapidly with MeOH, but dissol ves in EtOH. Sodium borohydride has extensive uses in or ganic
chemistry as a useful reducing agent in which it donat es a hydride (H).3
2 6 3
4 4
2 3
2 6
2 6

6.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212647Higher Boranes
Higher boron hydrides contain, in addition to the br idging B-H-B unit, one or more B-B bonds. The higher b oranes are usually
formed by the thermal decomposition of diborane, (6.4.10) and (6.4.11).
These higher boranes have ‘open’ cluster structures, e.g., Figure - Figure. Tetraborane, or to be more prec ise
tetraborane(10) or arachno -B H, is a foul-smelling toxic gas. Pentaborane (9) is a toxic liquid (with a distinctive garlic odor) that
can detonate in air, and like decaborane(14) was at one time considered as a potential rocket fuel. Beca use simple boron
compounds burn with a characteristic green flame, the n ickname for these fuels in the US military was Green Dragon. Problems
with using boranes as a fuel included their toxicity and the characteristic of bursting into flame on con tact with the air; furthermore,
the exhaust would also be toxic. The US program resulte d in a stockpile of borane fuels, in particular pen taborane(9), which was
not destroyed until 2000. The system for the destroying th e boranes was appropriately known as Dragon Slayer.
Figure: The molecular structure of tetraborane(10), B H pentaborane(9), B H, and decaborane(14), B H Boron atoms
are represented by pink spheres, and hydrogen by white spheres.
Bibliography
D. F. Gaines, Acc. Chem. Res., 1973, 6, 416.
C. E. Housecroft, Boranes and metalloboranes: structure, bonding and reac tivity, Ellis Horwood, Chichester (1990).
C. F. Lane, Chem. Rev., 1976, 76, 773.
This page titled 6.4: Boron Hydrides is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX)
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.4 10
4 10, 5 9 10 14

6.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126486.5: Wade’s Rules
Ken Wade (Figure) developed a method for the predict ion of shapes of borane clusters; however, it may be us ed for a wide
range of substituted boranes (such as carboranes) as well as other classes of cluster compounds.
Figure: Chemist Ken Wade FRS.
Wade’s rules are used to rationalize the shape of bo rane clusters by calculating the total number of skeletal electron pairs (SEP)
available for cluster bonding. In using Wade’s rules it i s key to understand structural relationship of variou s boranes (Figure).
Figure: Structural relationship between closo, nido, and arachno boranes (and hetero-substituted boranes). The diagonal lines
connect species that have the same number of skeletal e lectron pairs (SEP). Hydrogen atoms except those of the B-H framework
are omitted. The red atom is omitted first, the green atom removed second. Adapted from R. W. Rudolph, Acc. Chem. Res., 1976, 9,
446.
The general methodology to be followed when applying Wade ’s rules is as follows:
1. Determine the total number of valence electrons fro m the chemical formula, i.e., 3 electrons per B, and 1 e lectron per H.

6.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126482. Subtract 2 electrons for each B-H unit (or C-H in a carbo rane).
3. Divide the number of remaining electrons by 2 to get the number of skeletal electron pairs (SEP).
4. A cluster with n vertices (i.e., n boron atoms) and n+1 SEP for bonding has a closo structure.
5. A cluster with n-1 vertices (i.e., n-1 boron atoms) and n+1 SEP for bonding has a nido structure.
6. A cluster with n-2 vertices (i.e., n-2 boron atoms) and n+1 SEP for bonding has an arachno structure.
7. A cluster with n-3 vertices (i.e., n-3 boron atoms) and n+1 SEP for bonding has an hypho structure.
8. If the number of boron atoms (i.e., n) is larger than n+1 SEP then the extra boron occupies a capping position o n a triangular
phase.
What is the structure of B H?
1. Total number of valence electrons = (5 x B) + (11 x H) = (5 x 3) + (11 x 1) = 26
2. Number of electrons for each B-H unit = (5 x 2) = 10
3. Number of skeletal electrons = 26 – 10 = 16
4. Number SEP = 16/2 = 8
5. If n+1 = 8 and n-2 = 5 boron atoms, then n = 7
6. Structure of n = 7 is pentagonal bipyramid (Figure), therefore B H is an arachno based upon a pentagonal bipyramid
with two apexes missing (Figure).
Figure: Ball and stick representation of the structure of B H.
What is the structure of B H?
1. Total number of valence electrons = (5 x B) + (9 x H) = (5 x 3) + (9 x 1) = 24
2. Number of electrons for each B-H unit = (5 x 2) = 10
3. Number of skeletal electrons = 24 – 10 = 14
4. Number SEP = 14/2 = 7
5. If n+1 = 7 and n-1 = 5 boron atoms, then n = 6
6. Structure of n = 6 is octahedral (Figure), therefore B H is a nido structure based upon an octahedral structure with one
apex missing (Figure).
Figure: Ball and stick representation of the structure of B H.
What is the structure of B H?
Solution
1. Total number of valence electrons = (6 x B) + (3 x H) = (6 x 3) + (6 x 1) + 2 = 265 11
5 11
5 11
5 9
5 9
5 9
Example
6 62-

6.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126482. Number of electrons for each B-H unit = (6 x 2) = 12
3. Number of skeletal electrons = 26 – 12 = 14
4. Number SEP = 14/2 = 7
5. If n+1 = 7 and n boron atoms, then n = 6
6. Structure of n = 6 is octahedral (Figure), therefore B H is a closo structure based upon an octahedral structure
(Figure).
Figure: Ball and stick representation of the structure of B H.

Table provides a summary of borane cluster with the gene ral formula B H and their structures as defined by Wade’ s rules.
Table: Wade’s rules for boranes.
Type Basic formula Example # of verticies # of vacancies# of e- in B +
charge# of bonding
MOs
Closo B H B H n 0 3n + 2 n + 1
Nido B H B H n + 1 1 3n + 4 n + 2
Arachno B H B H n + 2 2 3n + 6 n + 3
Hypho B H B H n + 3 3 3n + 8 n + 4
Bibliography
R. W. Rudolph, Acc. Chem. Res., 1976, 9, 446.
K. Wade, Adv. Inorg. Chem. Radiochem., 1976, 18, 1.
This page titled 6.5: Wade’s Rules is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX)
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.6 626 62n nxn n2-6 62n n4-5 9
n n6-4 10
n n8-5 112-

6.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126496.6: Trends for the Oxides of the Group 13 Elements
All of the Group 13 elements form a trivalent oxide (M O). The chemical properties of the oxides follow the trend acidic to basic
going down the Group (Table). The physical propertie s are consistent with the electronegativities and coval ent character in the
M-O bonds. Thallium oxide is unique in that it decomp oses above 100 °C to yield the thalium(I) oxide, Tl O. The other oxides are
all stable to high temperatures.
Table: Properties of the Group 13 oxides.
Oxide Color Chemical property Melting point (°C)
B O White/colorless Weak acid 450 (trigonal), 510 (tetra hedral)
Al O White/colorless Amphoteric 2072 (α)
Ga O White/colorless Amphoteric 1900 (α), 1725 (β)
In O Yellow Weakly basic 1910
Tl O Brown-black Basic, oxidizing 100 (decomposes)
Bibliography
G. E. Jellison, Jr., L. W. Panek, P. J. Bray, and G. B. Rouse, Jr., J. Chem. Phys., 1977, 66, 802.
This page titled 6.6: Trends for the Oxides of the Group 13 Elements is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2 3
2 3
2 3
2 3
2 3
2 3

6.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128836.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
Oxides
Boron oxide, B O, is made by the dehydration of boric acid, (6.7.1). It is a glassy solid with no regular stru cture, but can be
crystallized with extreme difficulty. The structure c onsists of infinite chains of triangular BO unit (Fi gure). Boron oxide is
acidic and reacts with water to reform boric acid, (6.7.1).
Figure: Glassy structure of B O.
The reaction of B O with hydroxide yields the metabora te ion, (6.7.2), whose planar structure (Figure) is rel ated to metaboric
acid. Boron oxide fuses with a wide range of metal and non-meta l oxides to give borate glasses.
Figure: Structure of the metaborate anion, [B O].
Boric acid
Boric acid, B(OH), usually obtained from the dissolutio n of borax, Na [B O (OH)], is a planar solid with intermolec ular
hydrogen bonding forming a near hexagonal layered st ructure, broadly similar to graphite (Figure). The i nter layer distance is
3.18 Å.
Figure: The hydrogen bonded structure of boric acid.
A summary of reactions of the reactivity of boric acid is shown in Figure.2 3
2 3
2 3
3 633 2 4 5 4

6.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212883
Figure: Selected reactions of boric acid. Adapted fro m F. A. Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 4 Ed.
Wiley Interscience (1980).
Upon dissolution of boric acid in water, boric acid does no t act as a proton acid, but instead reacts as a Lewis acid, (6.7.3).
The reaction may be followed by B NMR spectroscopy from t he change in the chemical shift (Figure).
Figure: The B NMR chemical shift (ppm) of boric acid as a function of pH. Adapted from M. Bishop, N. Shah id, J. Yang,
and A. R. Barron, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2621.
Since the B NMR shift is directly proportional to the m ole fraction of the total species present as the bor ate anion (e.g.,
[B(OH)]) the B NMR chemical shift at a given temperatur e, δ, may be used to calculate both the mole fracti on of boric acid
and the borate anion, i.e., (6.7.4) and (6.7.5), respecti vely. Using these equations the relative speciation as a function of pH may be
calculated for both boric acid (Figure). The pH at which a 50:50 mixture of acid and anion for boric acid is ca. 9.4.
Figure: The mole fraction of acid (black squares) and anion (white squares) forms of boric acid as a functio n of pH. Adapted
from M. Bishop, N. Shahid, J. Yang, and A. R. Barron, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2621.
In concentrated solutions, the borate ion reacts fu rther to form polyborate ions. The identity of the polyborate is dependent on the
pH. With increasing pH, B O (OH), (6.7.5), B O (OH), (6.7.6), and B O (OH), (6.7.7), are formed. The structure of each
borate is shown in Figure. Once the ratio of B(OH) to B(OH) is greater than 50%, only the mono-borate is observed.th
4- 11(obs)
5 6 4-3 3 4-4 5 423 4-

6.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212883
Figure: The structures of the borate anions (a) B O (OH), (b) B O (OH), and (c) B O (OH).
Borax, the usual mineral form of boric acid, is the sodium salt, Na [B O (OH)], which upon dissolution in water r e-equilibrates to
B(OH).
Enough to make your hair curl
In 1906, a German hairdresser, Charles Nessler who was livi ng in London, decided to help his sister who was fed-up with having to
put her straight hair in curlers. While looking for a solution, Nessler noticed that a clothesline contract ed in a wavy shape when it
was wet. Nessler wound his sister’s hair on cardboard tu bes; then he covered the hair with borax paste. After wr apping the tubes
with paper (to exclude air) he heated the entire mas s for several hours. Removing the paper and tubes res ulted in curly hair. After
much trial and error (presumably at his sisters discom fort) Nessler perfected the method by 1911, and calle d the process a
permanent wave (or perm). The process involved the alkaline borax softening the hair sufficiently to be remodeled, whil e the
heating stiffened the borax to hold the hair into s hape. The low cost of borax meant that Nessler’s methods was an immediate
success.
Metaboric acid
Heating boric acid results in the partial dehydration to yield metaboric acid, HBO, (6.7.8). Metaboric acid is also formed from the
partial hydrolysis of B O.
If the heating is carried out below 130 °C, HBO -III is formed in which B O rings are joined by hydrogen bon ding to the
hydroxide on each boron atom (Figure). Continued he ating to 150 °C results in HBO -II, whose structure cons ists of BO
tetrahedra and B O groups chain linked by hydrogen bo nding. Finally, heating above 150 °C yields cubic HBO -I with all the
boron atoms tetrahedral.5 6 4-3 3 4-4 5 422 4 5 4
2 3
2 3 3
2 4
2 5 2

6.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212883
Figure: Structure of the layered structure of HBO -III.
Borate esters
Boric acid reacts with alcohols in the presence of su lfuric acid to form B(OR) (Figure). This is the basis for a simple flame
test for boron. Treatment of a compounds with methanol /sulfuric acid, followed by placing the reaction prod uct in a flame results in
a green flame due to B(OMe).
In the presence of diols, polyols, or polysaccharid es, boric acid reacts to form alkoxide complexes. In the case of diols, the monodiol [B(OH) L] (Figure a) and the bis-diol [BL] (Figure b) complexes.
Figure: Structure of (a) the [B(OH) L] and (b) the [B L] anions formed by the reaction of boric acid (or b orate) with a diol.
Originally it was proposed that diols react with the ani on rather than boric acid, (6.7.9). In contrast, it was s uggested that the
optimum pH for the formation of carboxylic acid comp lexes is under the condition where pK (carboxylic ac id) < pH < pK (boric
acid). Under these conditions it is the boric acid, B(OH), no t the borate anion, [B(OH)], that reacts to form the complex.
The conversion of boric acid to borate (6.7.3) must occur through attack of hydroxide or the deprotonat ion of a coordinated water
ligand, either of which is related to the pKa of water. The formation of [B(OH) L] from B(OH) would be expected th erefore to
occur via a similar initial reaction (attack by RO or deprotonation of coordinated ROH) followed by a sub sequent elimination of
H O and the formation of a chelate coordination, and would therefore be related to the pKa of the alcohol. Thus the pH at which
[B(OH) L] is formed relative to [B(OH)] will depend on th e relative acidity of the alcohol. The pK of a simpl e alcohol (e.g.,
MeOH = 15.5, EtOH = 15.9) are close to the value for water (15.7) and the lowest pH at which [B(OH) L] is formed shoul d be
comparable to that at which [B(OH)] forms. Thus, the for mation of [B(OH) L] as compared to [B(OH)] is a competit ion
between the reaction of B(OH) with RO and OH (Figure), an d as with carboxylic acids it is boric acid not bora te that reacts
with the alcohol, (6.7.10).
Figure: Competition between hydroxide and 1,2-diol for complexation to boron in the aqueous boric acid/ diol system.
A key issue in the structural characterization and understanding of the diol/boric acid system is the assignment of the B NMR
spectral shifts associated with various complexes. A g raphical representation of the observed shift ranges for boric acid chelate
systems is shown in Figure.2
2-22-2a a
3 42-3
2-4-a
24243- 11

6.7.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212883
Figure: B NMR spectroscopic shifts of chelate alkoxide c ompounds in comparison with boric acid and borate ani on. The
acronyms [B5] and [B6] are used to denote a borate co mplex of a 1,2-diol and 1,3-diol forming a chelate 5-membered and 6membered ring cycle, respectively. Similarly, [B5] a nd [B6] denotes a borate complex of two 1,2-diols or 1,3-diols both forming
[BL]. Adapted from M. Bishop, N. Shahid, J. Yang, and A. R. Barron, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2621.
Boric acid cross-linking of guar gum for hydraulic fracturing fluids
Thick gels of guar gum cross-linked with borax or a t ransition metal complex are used in the oil well dri lling industry as hydraulic
fracturing fluids. The polysaccharide guaran (M ≈ 10 Da) is the major (>85 wt%) component of guar gum, and c onsists of a
(1→4)- β-D-mannopyranosyl backbone with α-D-galactopyranosyl side chain units attached via (1→ 6) linkages. Although the exact
ratio varies between different crops of guar gum the general structure is consistent with about one galactos e to every other mannose
(Figure).
Figure: The repeat unit of guaran, a naturally occu rring polysaccharide, consisting of (1→4)- β-D-mannopyranosyl units with
α-D-galactopyranosyl side chains attached to about eve ry other mannose via (1→6) linkages.
The synthesis of a typical boric acid cross-linked gu ar gel, with viscosity properties suitable for use as a fracturing fluid, involves
mixing guar gum, water and boric acid, B(OH), in a 10:2 000:1 wt/wt ratio. Adjusting the pH to between 8.5 and 9 r esults in a
viscous gel. The boron:guaran ratio corresponds to a lmost 2 boron centers per 3 monosaccharide repeat un its. Such a large excess
of boric acid clearly indicates that the system is no t optimized for cross-linking, i.e., a significant frac tion of the boric acid is
ineffective as a cross-linking agent.
The reasons for the inefficiency of boric acid to c ross-link guaran (almost 2 borate ions per 3 monosac charide repeat unit are
required for a viscous gel suitable as a fracturing fluid): the most reactive sites on the component sacc harides (mannose and
galactose) are precluded from reaction by the nature of the guar structure; the comparable acidity (pK) of the remaining guaran
alcohol substituents and the water solvent, results i n a competition between cross-linking and borate forma tion; a significant
fraction of the boric acid is ineffective in cross-linking g uar due to the modest equilibrium (K).
Bibliography
F. A. Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 4 Ed. Wiley Interscience (1980).
M. Bishop, N. Shahid, J. Yang, and A. R. Barron, Dalton Trans., 2004, 2621.
M. Van Duin, J. A. Peters, A. P. G. Kieboom, and H. Van Bekkum, Tetrahedron, 1984, 40, 2901.
Zonal Isolation, “Borate Crosslinked Fluids,” by R. J. Powell and J. M Terraci na, Halliburton, Duncan, OK (1998).
R. Schechter, Oil Well Stimulation, Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1992).
S. Kesavan and R. K. Prud'homme, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 2026.
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts. 11
2 2
2w6
a
eq
th

6.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128846.8: Aluminum Oxides, Hydroxides, and Hydrated Oxides
The many forms of aluminum oxides and hydroxides ar e linked by complex structural relationships. Bauxite has the formula
Al (OH) (0 < x < 1) and is thus a mixture of Al O (α-alumin a), Al(OH) (gibbsite), and AlO(OH) (boehmite). The latter is an
industrially important compound that is used in the form of a gel as a pre-ceramic in the production of fibers and coatings, and as a
fire-retarding agent in plastics.
Knowledge of microstructural evolution in ceramic syste ms is important in determining their end-use applic ation. In this regard
alumina has been the subject of many studies in which the phase, morphology, porosity and crystallinity are controlled by physical
and chemical processing. The transformation from boe hmite [γ-Al(O)(OH)] o corundum (α-Al O) has been well char acterized and
is known to go through the following sequence:
The phase changes from boehmite through θ-Al O are kno wn to be topotactic (i.e., changes in crystal structur e are accomplished
without changes in crystalline morphology), however, ea ch phase change is accompanied by a change in porosi ty. The θ- to αAl O phase transition occurs through nucleation and g rowth of the θ-Al O crystallites. The α-Al O phase transit ion temperature
can be altered by the addition of certain additives. For example, because the α-Al O phase occurs by nucleat ion, the addition of
small seed crystals can lower the transition temperat ure between 100 and 200 °C. The addition of certain transition metals
(chromium, manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel, and copper) has also been shown to decrease the transition tempe rature, while
lanthanum or rare earth metals tend to increase the temperature. Finally, the addition of metal oxides h as also shown to affect the
growth rate in α-Al O.
A third form of Al O forms on the surface of the clea n aluminum metal, (6.8.2). This oxide skin is rapidly s elf-repairing because
its heat of formation is so large (ΔH = 3351 kJ/mol). The thin, tough, transparent oxide layer is the reaso n for much of the
usefulness of aluminum.
Bibliography
K. Wefers and C. Misra, Oxides and Hydroxides of Aluminum, Alcoa Laboratories (1987).
H. L. Wen and F. S. Yen, J. Cryst. Growth, 2000, 208, 696.
G. K Priya, P. Padmaja, K. G. K. Warrier, A. D. Damodaran, and G. Aruldhas, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1997, 16, 1584.
E. Prouzet, D. Fargeot, and J. F. Baumard, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1990, 9, 779.
6.8: Aluminum Oxides, Hydroxides, and Hydrated Oxides is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.x 3-2x 2 3 3
2 3
2 3
2 3 2 3 2 3
2 3
2 3
2 3

6.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128856.9: Ceramic Processing of Alumina
Introduction
While aluminum is the most abundant metal in the ea rth's crust (ca. 8%) and aluminum compounds such as alum,
K[Al(SO)].12(H O), were known throughout the world in ancient times, it was not until the isolation of aluminum in th e late
eighteenth century by the Danish scientist H. C. Öersted that research into the chemistry of the Group 13 eleme nts began in earnest.
Initially, metallic aluminum was isolated by the reduc tion of aluminum trichloride with potassium or sodium; however, with the
advent of inexpensive electric power in the late 180 0's, it became economically feasible to extract the metal via the electrolyis of
alumina (Al O) dissolved in cryolite, Na AlF, (the Hall-Her oult process). Today, alumina is prepared by the Baye r process, in
which the mineral bauxite (named for Les Baux, France, where it was first discovered) is dissolved with aqueous hydroxides, and
the solution is filtered and treated with CO to precip itate alumina. With availability of both the minera l and cheap electric power
being the major considerations in the economical pro duction of aluminum, it is not surprising that the le ading producers of
aluminum are the United States, Japan, Australia, Canada, and the former Soviet Union.
Aluminum oxides and hydroxides
The many forms of aluminum oxides and hydroxides ar e linked by complex structural relationships. Bauxite has the formula
Al (OH) (0 < x < 1) and is thus a mixture of Al O (α-alumin a), Al(OH) (gibbsite), and AlO(OH) (boehmite). The latter is an
industrially important compound which is used in the f orm of a gel as a pre-ceramic in the production of f ibers and coatings, and as
a fire retarding agent in plastics.
Heating boehmite and diaspore to 450 °C causes dehydra tion to yield forms of alumina which have structures related to their oxidehydroxide precursors. Thus, boehmite produces the lo w-temperature form γ-alumina, while heating diaspore wi ll give α-alumina
(corundum). γ-alumina converts to the hcp structure at 1100 °C. A third form of Al O forms on the surface of the clean aluminum
metal. The thin, tough, transparent oxide layer is t he reason for much of the usefulness of aluminum. Th is oxide skin is rapidly selfrepairing because its heat of formation is so large (ΔH = -3351 kJ/mol).
Ternary and mixed-metal oxides
A further consequence of the stability of alumina i s that most if not all of the naturally occurring al uminum compounds are oxides.
Indeed, many precious gemstones are actually corundu m doped with impurities. Replacement of aluminum ion s with trace amounts
of transition-metal ions transforms the formerly col orless mineral into ruby (red, Cr), sapphire (blue, Fe, Ti), or topaz
(yellow, Fe). The addition of stoichiometric amounts of metal ions causes a shift from the α-Al O hcp structu re to the other
common oxide structures found in nature. Examples in clude the perovskite structure for ABO type minerals (e.g., CeTiO or
LaAlO) and the spinel structure for AB O minerals (e.g., ber yl, BeAl O).
Aluminum oxide also forms ternary and mixed-metal oxi de phases. Ternary systems such as mullite (Al Si O), yttriu m aluminum
garnet (YAG, Y Al O), the β-aluminas (e.g., NaAl O) and aluminates such as hibonite (C aAl O) possessing β-alumina or
magnetoplumbite-type structures can offer advantages ov er those of the binary aluminum oxides.
Applications of these materials are found in areas suc h as engineering composite materials, coatings, technic al and electronic
ceramics, and catalysts. For example, mullite has exc eptional high temperature shock resistance and is wid ely used as an infraredtransparent window for high temperature applications, as a substrate in multilayer electronic device packagi ng, and in high
temperature structural applications. Hibonite and other hexaluminates with similar structures are being eval uated as interfacial
coatings for ceramic matrix composites due to their high thermal stability and unique crystallographic structures. Furthermore,
aluminum oxides doped with an alkali, alkaline earth, rare earth, or transition metal are of interest fo r their enhanced chemical and
physical properties in applications utilizing their un ique optoelectronic properties.
Synthesis of aluminum oxide ceramics
In common with the majority of oxide ceramics, two prim ary synthetic processes are employed for the produc tion of aluminum
oxide and mixed metal oxide materials:
1 The traditional ceramic powder process4 2 2
2 3 3 6
x 3-2x 2 3 3
2 3
3+ 2+/3+ 4+
3+2 3
3 7
3 2 4 2 4
6 2 13
3 5 12 11 17 12 19

6.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128851. The traditional ceramic powder process.2. The solution-gelation, or "sol-gel" process.
The environmental impact of alumina and alumina-bas ed ceramics is in general negligible; however, the sa me cannot be said for
these methods of preparation. As practiced commercially, both of the above processes can have a significant detrimental
environmental impact.
Traditional ceramic processing
Traditional ceramic processing involves three basic st eps generally referred to as powder-processing, shape- forming, and
densification, often with a final mechanical finishing step. Although several steps may be energy intensive, the most direct
environmental impact arises from the shape-forming process where various binders, solvents, and other potent ially toxic agents are
added to form and stabilize a solid ("green") body (Tab le).
Table: Typical composition of alumina green body
Function Composition Volume (%)
Powder alumina (Al O) 27
Solvent 1,1,1-trichloroethane/ethanol 58
Deflocculant menhaden oil 1.8
Binder poly(vinyl butyrol) 4.4
Plasticizer poly(ethylene glycol)/octyl phthalate 8.8
The component chemicals are mixed to a slurry, cast, then dried and fired. In addition to any innate heal th risk associated with the
chemical processing these agents are subsequently r emoved in gaseous form by direct evaporation or pyrol ysis. The replacement of
chlorinated solvents such as 1,1,1-trichloroethylene (TCE) must be regarded as a high priority for limit ing environmental pollution.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) included TCE on its 1991 list of 17 high-priority to xic chemicals
targeted for source reduction. The plasticizers, bin ders, and alcohols used in the process present a numbe r of potential
environmental impacts associated with the release of combustion products during firing of the ceramics, an d the need to recycle or
discharge alcohols which, in the case of discharge to waterways, may exert high biological oxygen demands in the receiving
communities. It would be desirable, therefore, to be ab le to use aqueous processing; however, this has previou sly been unsuccessful
due to problems associated with batching, milling, and forming. Nevertheless, with a suitable choice of binder s, etc., aqueous
processing is possible. Unfortunately, in many cast-pa rts formed by green body processing the liquid solven t alone consists of over
50 % of the initial volume, and while this is not dir ectly of an environmental concern, the resultant sh rinkage makes near net shape
processing difficult.
Sol-gel
Whereas the traditional sintering process is used pri marily for the manufacture of dense parts, the solut ion-gelation (sol-gel)
process has been applied industrially primarily for the production of porous materials and coatings.
Sol-gel involves a four stage process: dispersion, gel ation, drying, and firing. A stable liquid dispersio n or sol of the colloidal
ceramic precursor is initially formed in a solvent wit h appropriate additives. By changing the concentrat ion (aging) or pH, the
dispersion is "polymerized" to form a solid dispersion or gel. The excess liquid is removed from this gel by dryi ng and the final
ceramic is formed by firing the gel at higher temperatu res.
The common sol-gel route to aluminum oxides employs aluminum hydroxide or hydroxide-based material as the solid colloid, the
second phase being water and/or an organic solvent, however, the strong interactions of the freshly prec ipitated alumina gels with
ions from the precursor solutions makes it difficul t to prepare these gels in pure form. To avoid this complication, alumina gels are
also prepared from the hydrolysis of aluminum alkoxides, Al(OR).2 3

6.9.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212885The exact composition of the gel in commercial system s is ordinarily proprietary, however, a typical compo sition will include an
aluminum compound, a mineral acid, and a complexing agent to inhibit premature precipitation of the gel, e.g., Ta ble.
Table: Typical composition of an alumina sol-gel for slipcast ceramics.
Function Composition
Boehmite precursor ASB [aluminum sec-butoxide, Al(OC H)]
Electrolyte HNO 0.07 mole/mole ASB
Complexing agent glycerol ca. 10 wt.%
The principal environmental consequences arising from the sol-gel process are those associated with the use of strong acids,
plasticizers, binders, solvents, and sec-butanol formed during the reaction. Depending on th e firing conditions, variable amounts of
organic materials such as binders and plasticizers ma y be released as combustion products. NO ’s may also be produced in the offgas from residual nitric acid or nitrate salts. More over, acids and solvents must be recycled or disposed of. Energy consumption in
the process entails “upstream” environmental emissions assoc iated with the production of that energy.
Bibliography
Advances in Ceramics, Eds. J. A. Mangels and G. L. Messing, American Ceramic Societ y, Westville, OH, 1984, V ol. 9.
Adkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1922, 44, 2175.
A. R. Barron, Comm. Inorg. Chem., 1993, 14, 123.
M. K. Cinibulk, Ceram. Eng. Sci., Proc., 1994, 15, 721.
F. A. Cotton and G. Wilkinson, Advanced Inorganic Chemistry, 5th Ed., John Wiley and Sons, New York (1988).
N. N. Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, Chemistry of the Elements, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1984).
P. H. Hsu and T. F. Bates, Mineral Mag., 1964, 33, 749.
W. D. Kingery, H. K. Bowen, and D. R. Uhlmann, Introduction to Ceramics, 2nd Ed. Wiley, New York (1976).
H. Schneider, K. Okada, and J. Pask, Mullite and Mullite Ceramics, Wiley (1994).
R. V. Thomas, Systems Analysis and Water Quality Management, McGraw-Hill, New York (1972).
J. C. Williams, in Treatise on Materials Science and Technology, Ed. F. F. Y. Wang, Academic Press, New York (1976).
6.9: Ceramic Processing of Alumina is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.4 9 3
x

6.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128866.10: Boron Compounds with Nitrogen Donors
The “B-N” unit is isoelectronic (3 + 5 valence elect rons) to the “C-C” unit (4 + 4 valence electrons). The two moieties are also
isolobal, and as such there are many of the compound types formed by carbon have analogous derivatives in the chemistry of
boron-nitrogen.
Lewis acid-base addition compounds
Boron compounds, BX, are strong Lewis acids and as such form stable addition compounds with Lewis bases, in p articular those
with nitrogen donor ligands.
In principle these Lewis acid-base complexes should be similar to their isolobal hydrocarbon analogs, howev er, whereas the dipole
in ethane is zero (by symmetry) the dipole in H NBH i s 5.2 D as a consequence of the difference in the Paul ing electronegativities
(i.e., B = 2.04 and N = 3.04). It is this dipole that genera lly differentiates the B-N compounds from their C-C analogs.
Homolytic cleavage of the C-C bond in ethane will yie ld two neutral methyl radicals, (6.7.2). In contrast, h eterolytic cleavage will
result in the formation of two charged species, (6.7.3). Thus, the products either have a net spin, (6.7.2), o r a net charge, (6.7.3). By
contrast, cleavage of the B-N bond in H N-BH either yie lds products with both spin and charge, (6.7.5), or neit her, (6.7.4).
Heterolytic cleavage of the B-N bond yields neutral c ompounds, (6.7.4), while hemolytic cleavage results in the formation of
radical ions, (6.7.5).
The difference in bond strength between H N-BH and ethane is reflected in the difference in bond lengths (Table).
Table: A comparison of bonding in H E-E’H.
Compound Bond length (Å) Bond strength (kcal/mol)
H C-CH 1.533 89
H N-BH 1.658 31
Aminoboranes
The group R’ N-BR is isoelectronic and isolobal to the olefin sub-unit R’ C=CR, and there is even appreciabl e π-bonding
character (Figure). A measure of the multiple bond c haracter can be seen from a comparison of the calcul ated B-N bond in
H NBN (1.391 Å) as compared to a typical olefin (1.33 Å). It is interesting that a consideration of the possib le resonance form
(Figure) suggest the dipole in the σ-bond is in the opposi te direction of that of the π-bond.
Figure: Resonance forms for X N-BX'.
Unlike olefins, borazines oligomerize to form dimmers and trimers (Figure) in the absence of significant ste ric hindrance.
Analogous structures are also observed for the other Group 13- 15 homologs (R AlNR’, R GaPR’, etc.).3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
2 2 2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2 2 2

6.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212886
Figure: Typical structures of aminoboranes.
Borazines
The condensation of boron hydride with ammonia resul ts in the formation of a benzene analog: borazine, (6.7.6). Substituted
derivatives are formed by the reaction with primary ami nes.
Despite the cyclic structure (Figure), borazine is no t a true analog of benzene. Despite all the B-N bond d istances being equal
(1.44 Å) consistent with a delocalized structure, the di fference in electronegativity of boron and nitrogen (2.04 and 3.04,
respectively) results in a polarization of the bond s (i.e., B -N) and hence a limit to the delocalization. The molecular orbitals of
the π-system in borazine are lumpy in appearance (Fig ure a) compared to benzene (Figure b). This uneven d istribution
makes borazine prone to addition reactions, making it as a molecule less stable than benzene.
Figure: Structure of borazine, the inorganic analog to benzene.
Figure: Probability distributions for the π-bond orbit als in (a) borazine and (b) benzene.
Iminoboranes: analogs of acetylene
Iminoboranes, RB=NR’, are analogs of alkynes, but like a minoboranes are only isolated as monomers with sterical ly hindered
subsistent. In the absence of sufficient steric bulk oligo merization occurs, forming substituted benzene analogs.
Boron nitrides: analogs of elemental carbon
The fusion of borax, Na [B O (OH)] with ammonium chloride (NH Cl) results in the formation of hexagonal boron n itride (hBN). Although h-BN has a planar, layered structure cons isting of six-member rings similar to graphite (Figur e), it is a white
solid. The difference in color is symptomatic of the more l ocalized bonding in BN than in graphite.
Figure: Structure of h-BN.δ+ δ2 4 5 4 4

6.10.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212886As is found for its carbon analog, hexagonal boron nit ride (h-BN or α-BN) is converted at high temperatures (600 – 2000 °C) and
pressures (50 – 200 kbar) to a cubic phase (c-BN or β -BN). In a similar manner to diamond, cubic-BN is very h ard being actually
able to cut diamond, and as a consequence its main u se is as an industrial grinding agent. The cubic form has the sphalerite crystal
structure (Figure). Finally, a wurtzite form of boron n itride (w-BN) is known that has similar structure as lon sdaleite, rare
hexagonal polymorph of carbon. Table shows a comparis on of the properties of the hexagonal and cubic phas es of BN with
their carbon analogs.
Figure: Structure of c-BN.
Table: Comparison of structural and physical properti es of carbon and boron nitride analogs.
Phase Carbon Boron nitride
CubicColorless, hard, mp = 3550 °C. C-C =
1.514 ÅColorless, hard, B-N = 1.56 Å
HexagonalBlack solid, planar layers, conductor, mp =
3652 – 3697 °C (sublimes), C-C = 1.415 ÅWhite solid, planar layers, semiconductor
(Eg = 5.2 eV), mp = 2973 °C (sublimes), BN = 1.45 Å
The partly ionic structure of BN layers in h-BN reduce s covalency and electrical conductivity, whereas the interlayer interaction
increases resulting in higher hardness of h-BN relative to graphite.
Bibliography
K. M. Bissett and T. M. Gilbert, Organometallics, 2004, 23, 850.
P. Paetzold, Adv. Inorg. Chem., 1987, 31, 123.
L. R. Thorne, R. D. Suenram, and F. J. Lovas, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 78, 167.
6.10: Boron Compounds with Nitrogen Donors is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128876.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide
Gallium: the element
The element gallium was predicted, as eka-aluminum, by Mendeleev in 1870, and subsequently discovered by Lec oq de
Boisbaudran in 1875; in fact de Boisbaudran had been searching for the missing element for some years, ba sed on his own
independent theory. The first experimental indicatio n of gallium came with the observation of two new viol et lines in the spark
spectrum of a sample deposited on zinc. Within a mo nth of these initial results de Boisbaudran had isola ted 1 g of the metal starting
from several hundred kilograms of crude zinc blende o re. The new element was named in honor of France (Lati n Gallia), and the
striking similarity of its physical and chemical pr operties to those predicted by Mendeleev (Table) di d much to establish the
general acceptance of the periodic Law; indeed, when d e Boisbaudran first stated that the density of Ga was 4.7 g/cm rather than
the predicted 5.9 g/cm, Mendeleev wrote to him suggesting th at he redetermine the value (the correct value is 5.90 4 g/cm).
Table: Comparison of predicted and observed properti es of gallium.
PropertyMendeleev's prediction (1871) for ekaaluminum, MObserved properties of gallium
(discovered 1875)
Atomic weight ca. 68 69.72
Density, g.cm 5.9 5.904
Melting point Low 29.78
Vapor pressure Non-volatile 10 mmHg, 1000 °C
Valence 3 3
Oxide M O Ga O
Density of oxide (g/cm) 5.5 5.88
Properties of metalM should dissolve slowly in acids and
alkalis and be stable in airGa metal dissolves slowly in acids and
alkalis and is stable in air
Properties of hydroxideM(OH) should dissolve in both acids and
alkalisGa(OH) dissolves in both acids and alkalis
Properties of saltsM salts will tend to form basic salts; the
sulfate should form alums; M S should be
precipitated by H S or (NH) S; anhydrous
MCl should be more volatile than ZnClGa salts readily hydrolyze and form basic
salts; alums are known; Ga S can be
precipitated under special conditions by
H S or (NH) S, anhydrous GaCl is more
volatile than ZnCl.
Gallium has a beautiful silvery blue appearance; it we ts glass, porcelain, and most other surfaces (excep t quartz, graphite, and
Teflon) and forms a brilliant mirror when painted on to glass. The atomic radius and first ionization poten tial of gallium are
almost identical with those of aluminum and the two el ements frequently resemble each other in chemical pr operties. Both are
amphoteric, but gallium is less electropositive as in dicated by its lower electrode potential. Differences in the chemistry of the two
elements can be related to the presence of a filled set of 3d orbitals in gallium.
Gallium is very much less abundant than aluminum and tends to occur at low concentrations in sulfide mine rals rather than as
oxides, although gallium is also found associated with aluminum in bauxite. The main source of gallium is a s a by-product of
aluminum refining. At 19 ppm of the earth's crust, gal lium is about as abundant as nitrogen, lithium and lead; it is twice as
abundant as boron (9 ppm), but is more difficult to extract due to the lack of any major gallium-conta ining ore. Gallium always
occurs in association either with zinc or germanium, it s neighbors in the periodic table, or with aluminum i n the same group. Thus,
the highest concentrations (0.1 - 1%) are in the ra re mineral germanite (a complex sulfide of Zn, Cu, Ge, and As); concentrations in
sphalerite (ZnS), bauxite, or coal, are a hundred-fold l ess.3
3 3
-3
-3
2 3 2 3
2 3
2 4 2
3 22 3
2 4 2 3

6.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212887Gallium pnictides
Gallium's main use is in semiconductor technology. For example, GaAs and related compounds can convert elect ricity directly into
coherent light (laser diodes) and is employed in el ectroluminescent light-emitting diodes (LED's); it i s also used for doping other
semiconductors and in solid-state devices such as hete rojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs) and high power hig h speed metal
semiconductor field effect transistors (MESFETs). The c ompound MgGa O is used in ultraviolet-activated powders as a brilliant
green phosphor used in Xerox copying machines. Minor use s are as high-temperature liquid seals, manometric fluids and heattransfer media, and for low-temperature solders.
Undoubtedly the binary compounds of gallium with the m ost industrial interest are those of the Group 15 (V) e lements, GaE (E =
N, P, As, Sb). The compounds which gallium forms with nitrog en, phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony are isoelectro nic with the
Group 14 elements. There has been considerable inter est, particularly in the physical properties of the se compounds, since 1952
when Welker first showed that they had semiconducting pr operties analogous to those of silicon and germanium.
Gallium phosphide, arsenide, and antimonide can all be prepared by direct reaction of the elements; this is normally done in sealed
silica tubes or in a graphite crucible under hydrog en. Phase diagram data is hard to obtain in the galli um-phosphorus system
because of loss of phosphorus from the bulk material at elevated temperatures. Thus, GaP has a vapor press ure of more than 13.5
atm at its melting point; as compared to 0.89 atm f or GaAs. The physical properties of these three compoun ds are compared with
those of the nitride in Table. All three adopt the zinc blende crystal structure and are more highly c onducting than gallium
nitride.
Table: Physical properties of 13-15 compound semicondu ctors. Values given for 300 K. Dependent on photon energy; values given for
1.5 eV incident photons. Dependent on temperature; values given for 300 K.
Property GaN GaP GaAs GaSb
Melting point (°C) > 1250 (dec) 1350 1240 712
Density (g/cm) ca. 6.1 4.138 5.3176 5.6137
Crystal structure Würtzite zinc blende zinc blende zinc b lende
Cell dimen. (Å) a = 3.187, c = 5.186 a = 5.4505 a = 5.6532 a = 6.0959
Refractive index 2.35 3.178 3.666 4.388
k (ohm cm) 10 - 10 10 - 10 10 - 10 6 - 13
Band gap (eV) 3.44 2.24 1.424 0.71
Gallium arsenide versus silicon
Gallium arsenide is a compound semiconductor with a comb ination of physical properties that has made it an at tractive candidate
for many electronic applications. From a comparison o f various physical and electronic properties of GaAs with those of Si (Table
) the advantages of GaAs over Si can be readily ascert ained. Unfortunately, the many desirable properties of gallium arsenide
are offset to a great extent by a number of undesira ble properties, which have limited the applications o f GaAs based devices to
date.
Table: Comparison of physical and semiconductor prope rties of GaAs and Si.2 4
a b
c
a
b
-1 -1 -9 -7 -2 2 -6 3
c

6.11.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212887Properties GaAs Si
Formula weight 144.63 28.09
Crystal structure zinc blende diamond
Lattice constant 5.6532 5.43095
Melting point (°C) 1238 1415
Density (g/cm) 5.32 2.328
Thermal conductivity (W/cm.K) 0.46 1.5
Band gap (eV) at 300 K 1.424 1.12
Intrinsic carrier conc. (cm) 1.79 x 10 1.45 x 10
Intrinsic resistivity (ohm.cm) 10 2.3 x 10
Breakdown field (V/cm) 4 x 10 3 x 10
Minority carrier lifetime (s) 10 2.5 x 10
Mobility (cm /V.s) 8500 1500
Band gap
The band gap of GaAs is 1.42 eV; resulting in photon e mission in the infra-red range. Alloying GaAs with Al to gi ve Al Ga As
can extend the band gap into the visible red range. Unlike Si, the band gap of GaAs is direct, i.e., the transit ion between the valence
band maximum and conduction band minimum involves n o momentum change and hence does not require a colla borative particle
interaction to occur. Photon generation by inter-ban d radiative recombination is therefore possible in Ga As. Whereas in Si, with an
indirect band-gap, this process is too inefficient to be of use. The ability to convert electrical energ y into light forms the basis of the
use of GaAs, and its alloys, in optoelectronics; for e xample in light emitting diodes (LEDs), solid state l asers (light amplification
by the stimulated emission of radiation).
A significant drawback of small band gap semiconductors, such as Si, is that electrons may be thermally promoted f rom the valence
band to the conduction band. Thus, with increasing temp erature the thermal generation of carriers eventual ly becomes dominant
over the intentionally doped level of carriers. The wi der band gap of GaAs gives it the ability to remain 'i ntentionally'
semiconducting at higher temperatures; GaAs devices are gen erally more stable to high temperatures than a similar Si devices.
Carrier density
The low intrinsic carrier density of GaAs in a pure (un doped) form indicates that GaAs is intrinsically a ver y poor conductor and is
commonly referred to as being semi-insulating. This p roperty is usually altered by adding dopants of eith er the p- (positive) or n(negative) type. This semi-insulating property allows many active devices to be grown on a single substrat e, where the semiinsulating GaAs provides the electrical isolation of e ach device; an important feature in the miniaturiza tion of electronic circuitry,
i.e., VLSI (very-large-scale-integration) involving ove r 100,000 components per chip (one chip is typicall y between 1 and 10 mm
square).
Electron mobility
The higher electron mobility in GaAs than in Si potent ially means that in devices where electron transit t ime is the critical
performance parameter, GaAs devices will operate with h igher response times than equivalent Si devices. However, the fact that
hole mobility is similar for both GaAs and Si means tha t devices relying on cooperative electron and hole movement, or hole
movement alone, show no improvement in response time when GaAs based.
Crystal growth
The bulk crystal growth of GaAs presents a problem of st oichiometric control due the loss, by evaporation, of arsenic both in the
melt and the growing crystal (> ca. 600 °C). Melt growth techniques are, therefore, desig ned to enable an overpressure of arsenic3
-3 6 10
8 5
5 5
-8 -3
x 1-x

6.11.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212887above the melt to be maintained, thus preventing eva porative losses. The loss of arsenic also negates di ffusion techniques
commonly used for wafer doping in Si technology; since the diffusion temperatures required exceed that of arsenic loss.
Crystal Stress
The thermal gradient and, hence, stress generated in melt grown crystals have limited the maximum diameter of GaAs wafers
(currently 6" diameter compared to over 12" for Si), because with increased wafer diameters the thermal stre ss generated
dislocation (crystal imperfections) densities eventual ly becomes unacceptable for device applications.
Physical strength
Gallium arsenide single crystals are very brittle, requirin g that considerably thicker substrates than those employed for Si devices.
Native oxide
Gallium arsenide's native oxide is found to be a mixt ure of non-stoichiometric gallium and arsenic oxide s and elemental arsenic.
Thus, the electronic band structure is found to be se verely disrupted causing a breakdown in 'normal' sem iconductor behavior on
the GaAs surface. As a consequence, the GaAs MISFET (metal- insulator-semiconductor-field-effect-transistor) eq uivalent to the
technologically important Si based MOSFET (metal-oxide-s emiconductor-field-effect-transistor) is, therefore, presently
unavailable.
The passivation of the surface of GaAs is therefore a k ey issue when endeavoring to utilize the FET technolog y using GaAs.
Passivation in this discussion means the reduction in m id-gap band states which destroy the semiconducting pr operties of the
material. Additionally, this also means the production of a chemically inert coating which prevents the for mation of additional
reactive states, which can effect the properties of the dev ice.
Bibliography
S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles: Silicon and Gallium Arsenide. Wiley-Interscience, New York, (1994).
Properties of Gallium Arsenide. Ed. M. R. Brozel and G. E. Stillman. 3rd Ed. Institution of El ectrical Engineers, London
(1996).
6.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128886.12: Electronic Grade Gallium Arsenide
Introduction
The synthesis and purification of bulk polycrystallin e semiconductor material represents the first step towar ds the commercial
fabrication of an electronic device. This polycrysta lline material is then used as the raw material for t he formation of single crystal
material that is processed to semiconductor wafers.
In contrast to electronic grade silicon (EGS), whose use i s a minor fraction of the global production of elem ental silicon, gallium
arsenide (GaAs) is produced exclusively for use in th e semiconductor industry. However, arsenic and its comp ounds have
significant commercial applications. The main use of e lemental arsenic is in alloys of Pb, and to a lesser e xtent Cu, while arsenic
compounds are widely used in pesticides and wood preserv atives and the production of bottle glass. Thus, the electronics industry
represents a minor user of arsenic. In contrast, alth ough gallium has minor uses as a high-temperature liq uid seal, manometric
fluids and heat transfer media, and for low temperature sold ers, its main use is in semiconductor technology.
Isolation and purification of gallium metal
At 19 ppm gallium (L. Gallia, France) is about as abund ant as nitrogen, lithium and lead; it is twice as abu ndant as boron (9 ppm),
but is more difficult to extract due to the lack of any major gallium-containing ore. Gallium always occ urs in association either with
zinc or germanium, its neighbors in the periodic ta ble, or with aluminum in the same group. Thus, the h ighest concentrations (0.11%) are in the rare mineral germanite (a complex sul fide of Zn, Cu, Ge, and As), while concentrations in sphale rite (ZnS), diaspore
[AlO(OH)], bauxite, or coal, are a hundred-fold less. Indust rially, gallium was originally recovered from the flu e dust emitted
during sulfide roasting or coal burning (up to 1.5% Ga), however, it is now obtained as side product of vas t aluminum industry and
in particular from the Bayer process for obtaining alum ina from bauxite.
The Bayer process involves dissolution of bauxite, AlO OH, in aqueous NaOH, separation of insoluble impurities, par tial
precipitation of the trihydrate, Al(OH), and calcinati on at 1,200 °C. During processing the alkaline solution is gradually enriched
in gallium from an initial weight ratio Ga/Al of about 1/5000 to about 1/300. Electrolysis of these extra cts with a Hg cathode
results in further concentration, and the solution o f sodium gallate thus formed is then electrolyzed wit h a stainless steel cathode to
give Ga metal. Since bauxite contains 0.003-0.01% gall ium, complete recovery would yield some 500-1000 ton s per annum,
however present consumption is only 0.1% of this about 10 tons per annum.
A typical analysis of the 98-99% pure gallium obtaine d as a side product from the Bayer process is shown in Table. This
material is further purified to 99.99% by chemical t reatment with acids and O at high temperatures follo wed by crystallization.
This chemical process results in the reduction of the majority of metal impurities at the ppm level, see Table. Purification to
seven nines 99.9999% is possible through zone refinin g, however, since the equilibrium distribution coeffi cient of the residual
impurities k ≈ 1, multiple passes are required, typi cally > 500. The low melting point of gallium ensure s that contamination from
the container wall (which is significant in silicon zo ne refining) is minimized. In order to facilitate th e multiple zone refining in a
suitable time, a simple modification of zone refinin g is employed shown in Figure. The gallium is contain ed in a plastic tube
wrapped around a rotating cylinder that is half imme rsed in a cooling bath. A heater is positioned above the gallium plastic coil.
Thus, establishing a series of molten zones that pass upon rotation of the drum by one helical segment pe r revolution. In this
manner, 500 passes may be made in relatively short t ime periods. The typical impurity levels of gallium z one refined in this manner
are given in Table.
Table: Typical analysis of gallium obtained as a side product from the Bayer process.x 3-2x

6.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212888Element Bayer process (ppm)After acid/base leaching
(ppm)500 zone passes (ppm)
aluminum 100-1,000 7 < 1
calcium 10-100 not detected not detected
copper 100-1,000 2 < 1
iron 100-1,000 7 < 1
lead < 2000 30 not detected
magnesium 10-100 1 not detected
mercury 10-100 not detected not detected
nickel 10-100 not detected not detected
silicon 10-100 ≈ 1 not detected
tin 10-100 ≈ 1 not detected
titanium 10-100 1 < 1
zinc 30,000 ≈ 1 not detected
Figure: Schematic representation of a zone refining a pparatus.
Isolation and purification of elemental arsenic
Elemental arsenic (L. arsenicum, yellow orpiment) exi sts in two forms: yellow (cubic, As) and gray or metalli c (rhombohedral). At
a natural abundance of 1.8 ppm arsenic is relatively r are, however, this is offset by its presence in a num ber of common minerals
and the relative ease of isolation. Arsenic containin g minerals are grouped into three main classes: the sulfides realgar (As S) and
orpiment (As S), the oxide arsenolite (As O), and the ar senides and sulfaresenides of the iron, cobalt, and ni ckel. Minerals in this
latter class include: loellinginite (FeAs), safforlit e (CoAs), niccolite (NiAs), rammelsbergite (NiAs), ansenopyr ite or mispickel
(FeAsS), cobaltite (CoAsS), enargite (Cu AsS), gerdsorfite (NiAsS), and the quarturnary sulfide glaucodot [(Co,Fe)AsS]. Tab le
shows the typical impurities in arsenopyrite.
Table: Typical impurities in arsenopyrite.
Element Concentration (ppm) Element Concentration (ppm)
silver 90 nickel < 3,000
gold 8 lead 50
cobalt 30,000 platinum 0.4
copper 200 rhenium 50
germanium 30 selenium 50
manganese 3,000 vanadium 300
molybdenum 60 zinc 4004
4 4
2 3 2 3
2 2
3 4

6.12.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212888Arsenic is obtained commercially by smelting either Fe As or FeAsS at 650-700 °C in the absence of air and conde nsing the
sublimed element (T = 613 °C), (6.12.1).
The arsenic thus obtained is combined with lead and th en sublimed (T = 614 °C) which binds any sulfur impu rities more
strongly than arsenic. Any residual arsenic that remai ns trapped in the iron sulfide is separated by forming the oxide (As O) by
roasting the sulfide in air. The oxide is sublimed into the flue system during roasting from where it is col lected and reduced with
charcoal at 700-800 °C to give elemental arsenic. Semico nductor grade arsenic (> 99.9999%) is formed by zone refi ning.
Synthesis and purification of gallium arsenide.
Gallium arsenide can be prepared by the direct reacti on of the elements, (6.12.2). However, while conceptually simple the synthesis
of GaAs is complicated by the different vapor pressure s of the reagents and the highly exothermic nature of the reaction.
Furthermore, since the synthesis of GaAs at atmospheric pressure is accompanied by its simultaneous decomposes due to the loss
by sublimation, of arsenic, the synthesis must be ca rried out under an overpressure of arsenic in order t o maintain a stoichiometric
composition of the synthesized GaAs.
In order to overcome the problems associated with arse nic loss, the reaction is usually carried out in a se aled reaction tube.
However, if a stoichiometric quantity of arsenic is used in the reaction a constant temperature of 1238 °C must be employed in
order to maintain the desired arsenic overpressure of 1 atm. Practically, it is easier to use a large excess of arsenic heated to a lower
temperature. In this situation the pressure in the tub e is approximately equal to the equilibrium vapor pr essure of the volatile
component (arsenic) at the lower temperature. Thus, a n over pressure of 1 atm arsenic may be maintained i f within a sealed tube
elemental arsenic is heated to 600-620 °C while the GaAs is maintained at 1240-1250 °C.
Figure shows the sealed tube configuration that is typi cally used for the synthesis of GaAs. The tube is heat ed within a twozone furnace. The boats holding the reactants are us ually made of quartz, however, graphite is also used sin ce the latter has a closer
thermal expansion match to the GaAs product. If higher p urity is required then pyrolytic boron nitride (PBN) is used. One of the
boats is loaded with pure gallium the other with arseni c. A plug of quartz wool may be placed between the boa ts to act as a diffuser.
The tube is then evacuated and sealed. Once brought to the correct reaction temperatures (Figure), the a rsenic vapor is
transported to the gallium, and they react to form Ga As in a controlled manner. Table gives the typical im purity
concentrations found in polycrystalline GaAs.
Figure: Schematic representation of a sealed tube synth esis of GaAs.
Table: Impurity concentrations found in polycrystall ine GaAs.
Element Concentration (ppm) Element Concentration (ppm)
boron 0.1 silicon 0.02
carbon 0.7 phosphorus 0.1
nitrogen 0.1 sulfur 0.01
oxygen 0.5 chlorine 0.08
fluorine 0.2 nickel 0.04
magnesium 0.02 copper 0.01
aluminum 0.02 zinc 0.052
sub
sub
2 3

6.12.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212888Polycrystalline GaAs, formed in from the direct reactio n of the elements is often used as the starting mate rial for single crystal
growth via Bridgeman or Czochralski crystal growth. I t is also possible to prepare single crystals of GaAs d irectly from the
elements using in-situ, or direct, compounding within a high-pressure liquid encapsulated Czochralski (HPLEC) techn ique.
Growth of gallium arsenide crystals
When considering the synthesis of Group 13-15 compound s for electronic applications, the very nature of s emiconductor behavior
demands the use of high purity single crystal mater ials. The polycrystalline materials synthesized above are, therefore, of little use
for 13-15 semiconductors but may, however, serve as t he starting material for melt grown single crystals. Fo r GaAs, undoubtedly
the most important 13-15 (III - V) semiconductor, melt grown single crystals are achieved by one of two tech niques: the Bridgman
technique, and the Czochralski technique.
Bridgman growth
The Bridgman technique requires a two-zone furnace, o f the type shown in Figure. The left hand zone is ma intained at a
temperature of ca. 610 °C, allowing sufficient overpressure of arsenic wi thin the sealed system to prevent arsenic loss from t he
gallium arsenide. The right hand side of the furnace c ontains the polycrystalline GaAs raw material held at a temperature just above
its melting point (ca. 1240 °C). As the furnace moves from left to right, the melt cools and solidifies.
Figure: A schematic diagram of a Bridgman two-zone f urnace used for melt growths of single crystal GaAs.
If a seed crystal is placed at the left hand side o f the melt (at a point where the temperature gradien t is such that only the end melts),
a specific orientation of single crystal may be propagate d at the liquid-solid interface eventually to produce a single crystal.
Czochralski growth
The Czochralski technique, which is the most commonly us ed technique in industry, is shown in Figure. The pro cess relies
on the controlled withdrawal of a seed crystal from a liquid melt. As the seed is lowered into the melt, parti al melting of the tip
occurs creating the liquid solid interface required for crystal growth. As the seed is withdrawn, solidificatio n occurs and the seed
orientation is propagated into the grown material. T he variable parameters of rate of withdrawal and rotat ion rate can control
crystal diameter and purity. As shown in Figure the GaAs melt is capped by boron trioxide (B O). The capping l ayer, which
is inert to GaAs, prevents arsenic loss when the pressur e on the surface is above atmospheric pressure. The gr owth of GaAs by this
technique is thus termed liquid encapsulated Czochralski (LEC) growth.2 3

6.12.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212888
Figure: A schematic diagram of the Czochralski techni que as used for growth of GaAs single crystal bond.
While the Bridgman technique is largely favored for GaAs growth, larger diameter wafers can be obtained by th e Czochralski
method. Both of these melt techniques produce materi als heavily contaminated by the crucible, making the m suitable almost
exclusively as substrate material. Another disadvantage of these techniques is the production of defects in t he material caused by
the melt process.
Bibliography
S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles: Silicon and Gallium Arsenide. Wiley-Interscience, New York, (1994).
J. Krauskopf, J. D. Meyer, B. Wiedemann, M. Waldschmidt, K. Bethg e, G. Wolf, and W. Schültze, 5th Conference on Semiinsulating III-V Materials, Malmo, Sweden, 1988, Eds. G. Grossman and L. Ledebo, Adam-Hilger, Ne w York (1988).
W. G. Pfann, Zone Melting, John Wiley & Sons, New York (1966).
R. E. Williams, Gallium Arsenide Processing Techniques. Artech House (1984).
Properties of Gallium Arsenide. Ed. M. R. Brozel and G. E. Stillman. 3rd Ed. Institution of El ectrical Engineers, London
(1996).
6.12: Electronic Grade Gallium Arsenide is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128896.13: Chalcogenides of Aluminum, Gallium, and Indium
The only stable chalcogenides of aluminum are Al S (wh ite), Al Se (grey), and Al Te (dark grey). They are each prepared by the
direct reaction of the elements (100 °C) and hydrol yze rapidly in aqueous solution, (6.13.1). All the chal cogenides have a
hexagonal ZnS structure in which / of the metal sites ar e occupied.
The chalcogenides of gallium and indium are more num erous than those of aluminum, and are listed in Tabl e and Table
along with selected physical properties.
Table: Stoichiometries, structures and selected physical properties of the crystalline chalcogenides of galliu m. dir = direct, ind = indirect,
opt = optical.
Compound Structural typeCrystallographic
systemCell parameters (Å, °) Band Gap (eV)
GaS Hexagonal a = 3.587, c = 15.492 3.05 (dir.), 2.593 (ind.)
GaS ZnS or NaCl Cubic a = 5.5 4.0 (opt.)
β-GaSe GaS Hexagonal a = 3.742, c = 15.919 2.103 (dir.), 2.127 (ind.)
γ-GaSe GaS Rhombohedral a = 3.755, c = 23.92
δ-GaSe GaS Hexagonal a = 3.755, c = 31.99
β-GaTe GaS Hexagonal a = 4.06, c = 16.96
GaTe GaS Monoclinica = 17.44, b = 4.077, c =
10.456, β = 104.41.799 (dir.)
α-Ga S Wurtzite Cubic a = 5.181
α-Ga S Wurtzite Monoclinica = 12.637, b = 6.41, c =
7.03, β = 131.083.438 (opt.)
β-Ga S Defect wurtzite Hexagonal a = 3.685, c = 6.028 2.5 - 2.7 (opt.)
α-Ga Se Sphalerite Cubic a = 5.429 2.1 (dir.), 2.04 (ind.)
α-Ga Te Sphalerite Cubic a = 5.886 1.22 (opt.)
Table: Stoichiometries, structures and selected physical properties of the crystalline chalcogenides of indium. dir = direct, ind = indirect,2 3 2 3 2 3
a
a
2 3
2 3
2 3
2 3
2 3
a

6.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212889opt = optical. High pressure phase.
Compound Structural typeCrystallographic
systemCell parameters (Å, °) Band gap (eV)
β-InS GaS Orthorhombica = 3.944, b = 4.447, c =
10.6482.58 (dir.), 2.067 (ind.)
InS Hg Cl Tetragonal
InSe GaS Rhombohedral a = 4.00, c = 25.32 1.3525 (dir.), 1.32 (ind.)
β-InSe GaS Hexagonal a = 4.05, c = 16.93
InTe TlSe Tetragonal a = 8.437, c = 7.139 Metallic
InTe NaCl Cubic a = 6.18
α-In S γ-Al O Cubic a = 5.36
β-In S Spinel Tetragonal a = 7.618, c = 32.33 2.03 (dir.), 1.1 (ind.)
α-In Se Defect wurtzite Hexagonal a = 16.00, c = 19.24
β-In Se Defect wurtzite Rhombohedral a = 4.025, c = 19.222 1.2 - 1.5 (ind.)
α-In Te Sphalerite Cubic a = 6.158 0.92 - 1.15 (opt.)
In S Monoclinica = 9.090, b = 3.887, c =
17.705, β = 108.200.89 (dir.), 0.7 (ind.)
In Se In S Monoclinica = 9.430, b = 4.063, c =
18.378, β = 109.340.86 (dir.), 0.34 (ind.)
In Se Orthorhombica = 15.297, b = 12.308, c
= 4.0810.64 (dir.)
In Te In Se Orthorhombica = 15.630, b = 12.756, c
= 4.4410.48 (dir.)
The hexagonal β-form of Ga S is isostructural with the aluminum analogu e; however, while the α-phase was proposed to be
hexagonal it was later shown to be monoclinic. A cubi c α-phase has been reported. Cubic Sphalerite struct ures are found for
Ga Se, Ga Te, and In Te, in which the structure is based on a cubic close packing of the chalcogenides and the m etal atoms
occupying / of the tetrahedral sites. These structure s are all formed with rapid crystallization; slow cryst allization and/or thermal
annealing leads to ordering and the formation of mo re complex structures. The indium sulfides, and selen ides derivatives are spinel
(γ-Al O), and defect Würtzite, respectively.
Unlike the chalcogenides of aluminum, those of galliu m and indium also form subvalent compounds, i.e., those in which the metal
is formally of an oxidation state less than +3. Of the se subvalent chalcogenides the (formally) divalent m aterials are of the most
interest. The thermodynamically stable phase of GaS has a hexagonal layer structure (Figure) with Ga-Ga bonds (2.48 Å).
The compound can, therefore, be considered as an exam ple of Ga(II). Each Ga is coordinated by three sulfur a toms and one
gallium, and the sequence of layers along the z-axis is S-Ga-Ga-S S-Ga-Ga-S.b
a
b2 2
b
2 3 2 3
2 3
2 3
2 3
2 3
6 7
6 7 6 7
4 3
4 3 4 3
2 3
2 3 2 3 2 3
2 3
.........

6.13.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212889
Figure: The S-Ga-Ga-S S-Ga-Ga-S structure of hexagonal GaS. Gallium atoms are shown shaded.
The structures of β-GaSe, and β-InSe are similar to hexa gonal GaS. The layered structure of GaTe is similar in t hat it consists of
TeGaGaTe layers, but is monoclinic, while InS is found in both a (high pressure) tetragonal phase (Figure a) as well as an
orthorhombic phase (Figure b). By contrast to these M- M bonded layered compounds InTe (Figure) has a struct ure
formalized as In(I)[In(III)Te]; each In(III) is tet rahedrally coordinated to four Te and these tetrahe dra are linked via shared edges;
the In(I) centers lying between these chains.
Figure: Unit cell of (a) tetragonal InS and (b) orth orhombic InS. Indium atoms are shown shaded, and the sol id bonds
represent the smallest cyclic structural fragment.
Figure: Unit cell of tetragonal InTe. Indium atoms a re shown shaded, and the solid bonds represent the [InTe] chains.
Further sub-chalcogenides are known for indium, e.g.; I n Se, which contains [In(III) Se] groups (Figure). While the
formally In(I) molecule In S has been detected in the gas ph ase, it is actually a mixture of In and InS in the solid state.
Figure: Structure of [In(III) Se] groups in In Se..........
2 ∞
4 3 3 25+
3 25+
4 3

6.13.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212889Bibliography
W. J. Duffin and J. H. C. Hogg, Acta Crystallogr., 1966, 20, 566.
J. Goodyear and G. Steigman, Acta Crystallogr. 1963, 16, 946.
H. Hahn and G. Frank, Z. Anorg. Allgem. Chem., 1955, 278, 340.
S. Kabalkina, V. G. Losev, and N. M. Gasanly, Solid State Commun., 1982, 44, 1383.
A. Keys, S. G. Bott, and A. R. Barron, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3578.
A. N. MacInnes, M. B. Power, and A. R. Barron, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 11.
A. N. MacInnes, W. M. Cleaver, A. R. Barron, M. B. Power, and A. F. Hepp, Adv. Mater. Optics. Electron., 1992, 1, 229.
K. Schubert, E. Dörre, and E. Günzel, Naturwissenschaften, 1954, 41, 488.
6.13: Chalcogenides of Aluminum, Gallium, and Indium is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

6.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128906.14: Group 13 Halides
Trihalides, MX
As shown in Table all the combinations of Group 13 ele ment (M) and halogen (X) exist for the trihalides (MX), except
thallium(III) iodide. It should be noted that while there is a compound with the general formula TlI, it is actually a thallium(I)
compound of I.
Table: Selected physical properties of the Group 13 t rihalides, MX.
Element Mp (°C) Bp (°C)
BF -126.8 -100.3
BCl -107.3 12.6
BBr -46.3 91.3
BI 49.9 210
AlF 1291 AlCl 192.4 (anhydrous), 0.0 (hexahydrate) 120 (hexahydrate)
AlBr 97.8 265
AlI 189.4 (anhydrous) 185 dec. (hexahydrate) 300 subl.
GaF 800 1000
GaCl 77.9 201
GaBr 121.5 278.8
GaI 212 345
InF 1172 InCl 586 800
InBr 220 InI 210 subl. TlF 300 dec. TlCl 40 dec. TlBr 40 dec. The trihalides of boron are all monomers with a coor dination number of 3 (Table), as evidence from thei r low melting points
(Table). In contrast, the fluorides and chlorides of the heavier Group 13 elements (except GaCl) are gene rally ionic or have a
high ionic character, with a coordination number of 6 (Table, Figure and Figure). The bromides and iodide s
(except InBr) are generally dimeric with a coordinat ion number of 4 (Table) and have molecular structu res involving halide
bridging ligands (Figure and Table). AlCl is unusual in that in the solid state it has an ionic structur e, but it is readily
sublimed, and in the vapor phase (and liquid phase) it has a dimeric structure (Figure).3

6.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212890Table: The Group 13 element coordination numbers fo r the trihalides, MX.
Element Fluoride Chloride Bromide Iodide
B 3 3 3 3
Al 6 6 (4) 4 4
Ga 6 4 4 4
In 6 6 6 4
Tl 6 6 4 Figure: Solid state structure of MF (M = Al, Ga, In). Grey spheres represent the metal, while pale blue sphe res represent
fluorine.
Figure: Solid state structure of MCl (M = Al, In, Tl) and MBr (M = In). Grey spheres represent the metal, wh ile green
spheres represent the halogen.
Figure: Structure of GaCl, MBr (M = Al, Ga, Tl), an d MI (M = Al, Ga, In). Grey spheres represent the meta l, while green
spheres represent the halogen.
Table: Selected bond lengths and angles for dimeric M X compounds. X and X indicate terminal and bridging halides, respectfully.
Compound M-X (Å) M-X (Å) X -M-X (°) X -M-X (°) M-X-M (°)
Al Br 2.21 2.33 115 93 87
In I 2.64 2.84 125.1 93.7 86.3
Synthesis
Boron trifluoride (BF) is manufactured commercially by the reaction of boron oxides with hydrogen fluori de, (6.14.1). The HF is
produced in-situ from sulfuric acid and fluorite (CaF). On smaller scal es, BF is prepared by the thermal decomposition of
diazonium salts, (6.14.2).3
3 3
3 3 3
2 6at b
tabat tab ba
2 6
2 6
2 3

6.14.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212890Boron trichloride is also made from boron oxide, but in the presence of carbon, (6.14.3).
Many of the trihalides are readily prepared by either the direct reaction of the metal with the appropria te halogen, (6.14.4) (6.14.6), or the acid, (6.14.7) and (6.14.8). Thallium tribromide can be prepared in CH CN by treating a sol ution of the
monobromide with bromine gas, (6.14.9).
Reactivity
The reaction chemistry of the Group 13 trihalides tend s to fall into two categories:
Lewis acid-base complex formation.
Hydrolysis.
There are, however, a number of reactions involving h alide exchange reactions. Aluminum tribromide reacts with carbon
tetrachloride at 100 °C to form carbon tetrabromide, (6.14.10), and with phosgene yields carbonyl bromide and aluminum
chlorobromide, (6.14.11).
Group 13 halides are used as synthons for their organometal lic derivatives, (6.14.12) and (6.14.13).
Lewis acid-base complexes
All of the trihalides are strong Lewis acids, and as such react with Lewis base compounds to form Lewis acid-bas e complexes,
(6.14.12). The extent of the equilibrium is dependan t on the Lewis acidity of the trihalide and the basic ity of the Lewis base. For
example, with BCl, oxygen donor ligands result in ap proximately 50:50 ratio of BCl and BCl L, while for ni trogen donor ligands
the equilibrium is shifted to the formation of the comp lex.
The general structure of the Lewis acid-base complexes is such that the Group 13 element is close to tetra hedral (Figure).
However, for aluminum and the heavier Group 13 elements, more than one ligand can coordinate (Figure) up to a maximum
of six.3
3 3 3

6.14.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212890
Figure: Molecular structure of a typical Group 13 me tal trihalide Lewis acid-base complex: AlBr (9-fluoren one). Adapted
from C. S. Branch, S. G. Bott, and A. R. Barron, J. Organomet. Chem., 2003, 666, 23.
Figure: Molecular structure of AlBr (9-fluorenone). A dapted from C. S. Branch, S. G. Bott, and A. R. Barro n, J. Organomet.
Chem., 2003, 666, 23.
It should be noted that the dimeric form of MX (Figure) can be thought of as mutual Lewis acid-base comple xes, in which a
Lewis basic lone pair of a halide on one MX unit donates to th e Lewis acidic metal on another MX unit.
Hydrolysis
Generally the fluorides are insoluble in water while th e heavier halides are more soluble. However, BF, BCl, and BBr all
decompose in the presence of water, (6.14.13). In the case of the fluoride, the HF formed reacts with BF to f orm fluoroboric acid,
(6.14.14). However, there is also a minor equilibrium (2-3%) resulting in the formation of the BF complex of OH and H O,
(6.14.15).
While the boron compounds (and AlBr) decompose even i n moist air, AlCl reacts more slowly to make aluminum ch lorohydrate
(ACH) which has the general formula Al Cl (OH). While ACH has been proposed to exist as a number of cluster species, it is
actually a range of nanoparticles.
ACH is also known as polyaluminum chloride (PAC). The la tter name is often used in water purification, where AC H is preferred
over alum derivatives (Al (SO)). The combination of ACH and a high molecular weight quaternized ammonium pol ymer (e.g.,
dially dimethyl ammonium chloride (DADMAC)), has been known as an effective combination as a flocculant in water treatment
process to remove dissolved organic matter and colloidal particles present in suspension.
Aluminum chlorohydrate (ACH) and aluminum-zirconium co mpounds, are frequently used as the active ingredient in
antiperspirants. The mode of action of most aluminu m-based compounds involves the dramatic change in the particle size from
nano to micro as a function of pH and electrolyte cha nges on the skin (as compared to the antiperspirant stick or suspension) and
hence forming a gel plug in the duct of the sweat gl and. The plugs prevent the gland from excreting liqu id and are removed over
time by the natural sloughing of the skin. A further mechanism of action involves the absorption of 3-m ethyl-2-hexenoic acid
(Figure). Human perspiration is odorless until bacte ria ferment it. Bacteria thrive in hot, humid environ ments such as the
underarm. When adult armpits are washed with alkaline pH soaps, the skin loses its acid mantel (pH = 4.5 - 6), rai sing the skin pH
and disrupting the skin barrier. The bacteria thrive in the basic environment, and feed on the sweat from th e apocrine glands and on
dead skin and hair cells, releasing 3-methyl-2-hexeno ic acid, which is the primary cause of body odor. As wit h all carboxylic acids,3
3 2
3 3
3 3 3
3-3+
3 3
n 3n-m m
2 4 3

6.14.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128903-methyl-2-hexenoic acid, reacts in a facile manner with the surface of the alumina nanoparticles. Aluminum chloride salts also
have a slight astringent effect on the pores; causing th em to contract, further preventing sweat from reachin g the surface of the skin.
Figure: The structure of 3-methyl-2-hexenoic acid.
Boron trihalides: a special case
The three lighter boron trihalides, BX (X = F, Cl, B r) form stable adducts with common Lewis bases. Their relative Lewis acidities
can be evaluated in terms of the relative exothermicit y of the adduct-forming reaction:
This trend is opposite to that expected based upon th e electronegativity of the halogens. The best explan ation of this trend takes
into account the extent of π-donation that occurs b etween the filled lone pair orbital on the halogens and the empty p-orbital on the
planar boron (Figure). As such, the greater the π-bo nding the more stable the planar BX configuration a s opposed to the
pyramidalization of the BX moiety upon formation of a L ewis acid-base complex, (6.4.12).
Figure: Schematic representation of π-donation from f illed halogen p-orbitals into empty p-orbital in the halides BX.
The criteria for evaluating the relative strength of π-bonding are not clear, however, one suggestion is that the F atom is small
compared to the Cl atom, and the lone pair electron in p of F is readily and easily donated and overlapped to empty p orbital of
boron (Figure a). In contrast, the overlap for the la rge (diffuse) p-orbitals on the chlorine is poorer (Figure b). As a
result, the π-donation of F is greater than that of C l. Interestingly, as may be seen from Table, any diff erence in B-X bond
length does not follow the expected trend associated with shortening of the B-X bond with stronger π-bondin g. In fact the B-Br
distance is the most shortened as compared to that expect ed from the covalent radii (Table).
Table: The B-X bond distances in the boron trihalide s, BX, as compared to the sum of the covalent radii. C ovalent radius of B = 0.84(3)
Å.
Compound B-X (Å) X covalent radius (Å)Sum of covalent radii
(Å)Δ (Å)
BF 1.313 0.57(3) 1.41 0.097
BCl 1.75 1.02(4) 1.86 0.11
BBr 1.898 1.20(3) 2.04 0.142
BI 2.125 1.39(3) 2.23 0.105
At the simplest level the requirements for bonding to occur based upon the molecular or atomic orbital are:
Directional relationship of the orbitals.
Relative symmetry of the orbitals.
Relative energy of the orbitals.
Extent of orbital overlap
In the case of the boron trihalides, the direction (parallel) and symmetry (p-orbitals) are the same, and the only significant
difference will be the relative energy of the donor orbitals (i.e., the lone pair on the halogen) and th e extent of the overlap. The
latter will be dependant on the B-X bond length (the shorter the bond the greater the potential overlap) and the diffusion of the3
z z
3a
a

6.14.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212890orbitals (the less diffuse the orbitals the better th e overlap). Both of these factors will benefit B-F ove r B-Cl and B-Br. Thus, the
extent of potential overlap would follow the order: (6.14.16). Despite these considerations, it is still unclea r of the exact details of
the rationalization of the low Lewis basicity of BF as co mpared to BCl and BBr.
Anionic halides
The trihalides all form Lewis acid-base complexes with halide anions, (6.14.17), and as such salts of BF, AlCl, GaCl, and
InCl are common.
In the case of gallium the Ga Cl anion (Figure) is formed f rom the equilibrium:
Figure: Structures of the (a) M X and (b) M X anions.
As a consequence of its larger size indium forms a wide range of anionic halides addition compounds with trig onal bipyramidal,
square pyramidal, and octahedral coordination geomet ries. For example, salts of InCl, InBr, InF, InCl and InBr have
all been made. The InCl ion has been found to be sq uare pyramidal in the salt [NEt] InCl, but is trigonal bipyramidal in the
acetonitrile solvate of [Ph P] InCl. The oligomeric anio nic halides In X and In X (X = Cl and Br) contain binuc lear anions
with tetrahedral and octahedrally coordinated indium atom s, respectively (Figure).
Low valent halides
Oxidation state +2
Boron forms a series of low oxidation halides contain ing B-B bonds a formal oxidation state of +2. Passing a n electric discharge
through BCl using mercury electrodes results in the s ynthesis of B Cl, (6.14.19). An alternative route is by t he co-condensation of
copper as a reducing agent with BCl, (6.14.20).
B F has a planar structure (Figure) with D2h symmetry, while B Cl has the same basic structure it has a stagg ered
geometry (Figure). The energy for bond rotation abo ut the B-B bond is very low (5 kJ/mol) that can be c ompared to ethane
(12.5 kJ/mol). The bromide, B Br, is also observed t o be staggered in the solid state. The staggered confor mation is favorable on
steric grounds, however, for B F the planar geometry is stabilized by the smaller size of the halide, and mo re importantly the
presence of strong delocalized π-bonding.
Figure: The planar structure of B F.3 3 3
4-4-442 72 72 9352-52-63-63-6352-4 2 5
4 2 5 2 7-2 933 2 4
2 4 2 4
2 4
2 4
2 4

6.14.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212890
Figure: The staggered structure of B Cl.
Oxidation state +1
Boron forms a number of halides with cluster structures, B Cl where n = 4 (Figure), 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. Each co mpound is
made by the decomposition of B Cl. For gallium, none of the monohalides are stable at room temperature, b ut GaCl and GaBr
have been produced in the gas form from the reaction of HX and molten gallium. The stability of thallium(I) as compared to
thallium(III) results in the monohalides, TlCl, TlBr, an d TlI being stable. Each compound is insoluble in water, and photosensitive.
Figure: Structure of B Cl.
Intermediate halides
The dihalides (MX) of gallium, indium, and thallium do not actually contain the metal in the +2 oxidati on state. Instead they are
actually mixed valence compound, i.e., M [MX]. The diha lides of gallium are unstable in the presence of wat er
disproportionating to gallium metal and gallium(III) entities. They are soluble in aromatic solvents, where arene complexes have
been isolated and the arene is η -coordinated to the Ga ion. InBr and InI are greenish and yellow crystalli ne solids, respectively,
which are formulated In(I)[In(III)X]. TlCl and TlBr b oth are of similar formulations.
Ga X (X = Br, I) and In Br are formulated M(I) [M(II) X]. Bo th anions contain a M-M bond where the metal has a fo rmal
oxidation state of +2. The Ga Br anion is eclipsed lik e the In2Br6 anion, whereas the Ga I anion is isostructu ral with Si Cl
with a staggered conformation. In Cl is colorless and is f ormulated In(I) [In(III)Cl].
Ga Cl contains the Ga Cl ion, which has a structure similar to the dichromate, Cr O, ion with two tetrahedrally c oordinated
gallium atoms sharing a corner (Figure). The compound can be formulated as gallium(I) hep tachlorodigallate(III), Ga(I)
[Ga(III) Cl].
Figure: The crystal structure of Ga Cl, better describe d as gallium(I) heptachlorodigallate(III), Ga(I)[Ga(III) Cl]. Grey
spheres represent the gallium, while green spheres repre sent the chlorine.
In Br is light sensitive (like TlCl and TlBr) decayi ng to InBr and In metal. It is a mixed salt containi ng the InBr and InBr
anions balanced by In cations. It is formulated In(I) [In(III)Br] [In(III)Br]. In Br is a pale yellow solid form ulated as
In(I) [In(II) Br]Br. The In(II) Br anion has an eclipse d ethane like structure with an In-In bond length of 2.70 Å. In Cl is2 4
n n
2 4
4 4
+46 +2 2
4 2 2
2 3 2 3 2 2 6
2 62- 2-2 62-2 6
2 3 3 6
3 7 2 7-2 722 7
3 7 2 7
4 7 2 4-63+
5 4 2 6 5 7
3 2 6 2 625 9

6.14.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212890formulated In(I) [In(III) Cl], with the In Cl anion hav ing two 6 coordinate indium atoms with 3 bridging chl orine atoms, face
sharing bioctahedra. Finally, In Cl and In Br have a structu re formulated as InX [In(III)X]X.
Bibliography
P. M. Boorman and D. Potts, Can. J. Chem., 1974, 52, 2016.
A. Borovik and A. R. Barron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3743.
A. Borovik, S. G. Bott, and A. R. Barron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11219.
C. S. Branch, S. G. Bott, and A. R. Barron, J. Organomet. Chem., 2003, 666, 23.
W. M. Brown and M. Trevino, US Patent 5,395,536 (1995).
S. K. Dentel, CRC Critical Reviews in Environmental Control, 1991, 21, 41.
D. E. Hassick and J. P. Miknevich, US Patent 4,800,039 (1989).
M. D. Healy, P. E. Laibinis, P. D. Stupik and A. R. Barron, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1989, 359.
K. Hedberg and R. Ryan, J. Chem. Phys., 1964, 41, 2214.
Y. Koide and A. R. Barron, Organometallics, 1995, 14, 4026.
G. Santiso-Quiñones and I. Krossing, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2008, 634, 704.
6.14: Group 13 Halides is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.3 2 9 2 927 9 7 9 6 6 3

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Group 14
7.1: The Group 14 Elements
7.2: Carbon Black- From Copying to Communication
7.3: Carbon Nanomaterials
7.4: Nitrogen Compounds of Carbon
7.5: Carbon Monoxide
7.6: Carbon Dioxide
7.7: Suboxides of Carbon
7.8: Carbon Halides
7.9: Comparison Between Silicon and Carbon
7.10: Semiconductor Grade Silicon
7.11: Oxidation of Silicon
7.12: Applications for Silica Thin Films
This page titled 7: Group 14 is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126517.1: The Group 14 Elements
The group was once also known as the tetrels (from Greek tetra meaning four), stemming from the earlier naming convention of
this group as Group IV A. Table lists the derivation of the names of the Group 14 element s.
Table: Derivation of the names of each of the Group 14 elements.
Element Symbol Name
Carbon C From the Latin carbo meaning coal
Silicon Si From the Latin silicis meaning flints
Germanium Ge From the Latin Germania for Germany
Tin SnFrom the Anglo-Saxon and from the Latin
stannum meaning melts easily
Lead PbFrom the Anglo-Saxon, and from the Latin
plumbum meaning soft metal
Discovery
Carbon
Carbon was known in prehistory in the form of soot; whil e charcoal was made in Roman times (by heating wood wh ile exclude air)
and diamonds were known as early as 2500 BC in China. In 1772, Antoine Lavoisier (Figure) showed that diamo nds were a
form of carbon, when he burned samples of carbon and diamond and showed that both formed the same amount o f carbon dioxide
per gram of material. Carl Scheele (Figure) showed that gra phite was a form of carbon rather a form of lead.
Figure: French chemist and biologist Antoine-Laurent d e Lavoisier (1743 – 1794).
Figure: German-Swedish pharmaceutical chemist Carl Wil helm Scheele (1742 - 1786). Author Isaac Asimov has ca lled him
"hard-luck Scheele" because he made a number of chemica l discoveries before others who are generally given th e credit.

7.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212651A new allotrope of carbon, fullerene, was discovered in 1985 by Robert Curl, Harry Kroto, and Richard Smalley (Figure) who
subsequently shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 19 96. Fullerenes have been reveled to include nanostruc tured forms such as
buckyballs and nanotubes. The renewed interest in new forms lead to the discovery of further exotic allot ropes, including glassy
carbon, and the realization that amorphous carbon is not amorphous.
Figure: Rice University chemists Richard E. Smalley (1 943 - 2005) and Robert F. Curl (1933 -).
Silicon
Silicon was first identified by Antoine Lavoisier (Figu re) in 1787 as a component of flints, and was later m istaken by
Humphry Davy (Figure) for a compound rather than an e lement. In 1824, Berzelius (Figure) prepared amorphou s silicon
by the reaction of potassium with silicon tetrafluoride, (7.1.1).
Figure: British chemist and inventor Sir Humphry Davy FRS (1778 - 1829).

7.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212651
Figure: Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius (1779 – 1848).
Germanium
In 1869 Dmitri Mendeleev (Figure) predicted the existe nce of several unknown elements, including ekasilicon (Es) between
silicon and tin.
Figure: Russian chemist and inventor Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev (1834 – 1907).
In 1885 a new mineral (named argyrodite because of its high silver content) was found in a min e near Freiberg, Saxony. Clemens
Winkler (Figure) isolated Mendeleev’s missing elemen t. He originally was going to name neptunium because like this
element, because like ekasilicon, the planet Neptune h ad been preceded by mathematical prediction of its existence. However, the
name neptunium had already been given to an element an d so Winkler named the new metal germanium in honor of his fatherland.

7.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212651
Figure: German chemist Clemens Alexander Winkler (183 8 –1904).
Winkler was able to isolate sufficient germanium fro m 500 kg of ore to determine a number properties, inc luding an atomic weight
of 72.32 g/mol by analyzing pure germanium tetrachl oride (GeCl). Winkler prepared several new compounds of germanium,
including the fluorides, chlorides, sulfides, germani um dioxide, and tetraethylgermane (Ge(C H)). The physi cal data from these
compounds, corresponded with Mendeleev's predictions (Tabl e).
Table: Properties predicted for ekasilicon compared t hose determined for germanium.
Property Ekasilicon Germanium
Atomic mass 72 72.59
Density (g/cm) 5.5 5.35
Melting point (°C) High 947
Color Gray Gray
Oxide type Refractory dioxide Refractory dioxide
Oxide density (g/cm) 4.7 4.7
Oxide activity Feebly basic Feebly basic
Chloride boiling point (°C) Under 100 86 (GeCl)
Chloride density (g/cm) 1.9 1.9
Tin
Tin is one of the earliest metals known. When the ad dition of about 5% tim to molten copper produced an alloy (bronze) that was
easier to work and much harder than copper, it revolut ionized civilization. The widespread use of bronze to make tools and
weapons became part of what archaeologists call the B ronze Age. The Bronze Age arrived in Egypt, Mesopotamia and the Indus
Valley culture by around 3000 BC.
Lead
Lead has been commonly used for thousands of years because of its ease of extraction, and its ease of sm elting. Lead beads dating
back to 6400 BC have been found in Çatalhöyük in modern- day Turkey, while lead was used during the Bronze Age.
Abundance
Carbon and silicon are amongst the most abundant el ements (Table). Silicon is the second most abundant e lement (after
oxygen) in the Earth’s crust, making up 28% of the crust. C arbon is the fourth most abundant chemical element in th e universe after
hydrogen, helium, and oxygen. In combination with oxy gen in carbon dioxide, carbon is found in the Earth's atmosphere (in4
2 5 4

7.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212651quantities of approximately 810 gigatonnes) and disso lved in all water bodies (approximately 36,000 gigato ns). Around 1,900
gigatons are present in the biosphere. Hydrocarbons (su ch as coal, petroleum, and natural gas) contain carbon amounts to around
900 gigatons. Natural diamonds occur in the rock kim berlite, found in ancient volcanic "necks," or "pip es". Most diamond deposits
are in Africa but there are also deposits in Canada, the Russ ian Arctic, Brazil, and Australia.
Table: Abundance of Group 14 elements.
Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
C480 (Earth’s crust), 28 (sea water), 350 (atmosphere CO), 1.6
(atmosphere, CH), 0.25 (atmosphere, CO)
Si 28,000 (Earth’s crust), 2 (sea water)
Ge 2 (Earth’s crust), 1 (soil), 5 x 10 (sea water)
Sn 2 (Earth’s crust), 1 (soil), 4 x 10 (sea water)
Pb 14 (Earth’s crust), 23 (soil), 2 x 10 (sea water)
Isotopes
Table summarizes the naturally occurring isotopes of t he Group 14 elements.2
-7
-6
-6

7.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212651Table: Abundance of the major isotopes of the Group 14 elements.
Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Carbon-12 98.9
Carbon-13 1.1
Carbon-14 trace
Silicon-28 92.23
Silicon-29 4.67
Silicon -30 3.1
Germanium-70 21.23
Germanium-72 27.66
Germanium-73 7.73
Germanium-74 35.94
Germanium-76 7.44
Tin-112 0.97
Tin-114 0.66
Tin-115 0.34
Tin-116 14.54
Tin-117 7.68
Tin-118 24.22
Tin-119 8.59
Tin-120 32.58
Tin-122 4.63
Tin-124 5.79
Lead-204 1.4
Lead-24.1 24.1
Lead-207 22.1
Lead-208 52.4
Although radioactive, carbon-14 is formed in upper lay ers of the troposphere and the stratosphere, at altit udes of 9–15 km. Thermal
neutrons produced by cosmic rays collide with the nuc lei of nitrogen-14, forming carbon-14 and a proton. B ecause of its relatively
short half-life of 5730 years, carbon-14 is absent in anci ent rocks, but is incorporated in living organisms.
Carbon dating
Carbon dating is a process whereby the age of a mater ial that contains carbon can be determined by compa ring the decay rate of
that material with that of living material.
Carbon-14 has a half life (t) of 5.73 x 10 years for its de cay to nitrogen-14 by the loss of a β particle, (7.1.2).1/23

7.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212651The rate of radioactive decay can be expressed as a rate c onstant (k):
For carbon-14, using (7.1.3),
In 1947 samples of the Dead Sea Scrolls were analyzed b y carbon dating. It was found that the carbon-14 pre sent had an activity of
d/min.g (where d = disintegration); by contrast in living material the activity is 14 d/min.g. Thus,
From the measurement performed in 1947 the Dead Sea Scro lls were determined to be 2000 years old giving them a date of 53 BC,
and confirming their authenticity. This discovery is i n contrast to the carbon dating results for the Turin Shroud that was supposed
to have wrapped Jesus’ body. Carbon dating has shown t hat the cloth was made between 1260 and 1390 AD. Thus, t he Turin
Shroud is clearly a fake having been made over a thousand ye ars after its supposed manufacture.
Industrial production
Due to the industrial importance of carbon and silic on, as well as the wide range of fullerene materials, the production of these
elements is discussed elsewhere. However, the diamond sup ply chain is controlled by a limited number of comm ercial concerns,
the largest of which is DeBeers in London (Figure). Diamonds make up only a very small fraction of ore bearing rock. The ore is
crushed and subsequently the particles are sorted by density. Diamonds are located in the diamond-rich fra ction by X-ray
fluorescence, after which the final sorting steps are don e by hand.
Figure: The Charterhouse Street Entrance of the offi ces of De Beers in London, are the venue for the 10 si ghts that are held
during the year. Sightholders, both manufacturers (of polished diamonds) and dealers (in rough diamonds), me et in London, once
every 5 weeks, 10 times a year, to inspect their diamo nd allocations.
Germanium ore concentrates are mostly sulfidic, e.g., a s an impurity in zinc blende. They are converted to the oxides by heating
under air (roasting), (7.1.7).
Part of the germanium ends up in the dust produced d uring this process, while the rest is converted to g ermanates which are
leached together with the zinc by sulfuric acid. Afte r neutralisation the germanium and other metals are precipitated (leaving the
Zn in solution). Germanium dioxide is obtained as a pr ecipitate and converted with chlorine gas or hydroch loric acid to
germanium tetrachloride,(7.1.8) (7.1.9), which has a low boi ling point and can be purified by distillation.
The germanium tetrachloride is hydrolyzed to the gi ve pure oxide (GeO), which is then converted to germani um glass for the
semiconductor industry, (7.1.10). Germanium used in st eel production and other applications that do not re quire the high purity is2+

7.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212651produced by reduction with carbon, (7.1.11).
Tin is mined and subsequently smelted, and its producti on has changed little. In contrast, lead-rich ores c ontain less than 10% lead,
but ores containing as little as 3% lead can be econ omically exploited. Ores are crushed and concentrated to 70%. Sulfide ores are
roasted, producing lead oxide and a mixture of sulfa tes and silicates of lead. Lead oxide from the roast ing process is reduced in a
coke-fired blast furnace. This converts most of the lead to its metallic form. Metallic lead that results from the roasting and blast
furnace processes still contains significant contami nants of arsenic, antimony, bismuth, zinc, copper, sil ver, and gold. The melt is
treated in a reverberatory furnace (Figure) with air, steam, and sulfur, which oxidizes the contaminants exc ept silver, gold, and
bismuth.
Figure: Schematic of a reverberatory furnace.
Physical properties
Table provides a summary of the physical properties o f the Group 14 elements.
Table: Selected physical properties of the Group 14 e lements.
Element Mp (°C) Bp (°C) Density (g/cm)
C 642 (sublimes) 2.267 (graphite), 3.515
(diamond), 1.8 - 2.1
(amorphous)
Si 1414 3265 2.3290
Ge 938 2833 5.323
Sn 232 2602 7.365 (white), 5.769 (gray)
Pb 327 1749 11.34
Cubic structure
The elements carbon through tin (in its α form) all exist in diamond cubic structure (Figure a), while le ad crystallizes in a
cubic close packed structure (Figure b). As expected t he lattice parameter (a) increases with increased atomic radius (Table
). The switch from diamond cubic to close packed cub ic may be rationalized by the relative atomic sizes. The diamond cubic
structure comprises of two interpenetrating cubic cl ose packed lattices. As the atomic size increases lar ge interstitial vacancies
would result, resulting in an unfavorable low-density structu re.3

7.1.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212651
Figure: Unit cell structure of (a) the diamond cubic lattice showing the two interpenetrating face-cente red cubic lattices, and
(b) the cell of cubic close packed structure for comp arison.
Table: Lattice parameter and crystal density for Gro up 14 elements.
Element Structure a (Å) Atomic radius (Å)
C diamond cubic 3.566 0.70
Si diamond cubic 5.431 1.10
Ge diamond cubic 5.657 1.25
α-Sn (gray) diamond cubic 6.489 1.45
Pb cubic close packed 4.951 1.80
This page titled 7.1: The Group 14 Elements is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126527.2: Carbon Black- From Copying to Communication
It is a commonly held fallacy that James Watt (Figur e) was the inventor of the steam engine. This actual ly honor belongs to
Thomas Newcomen (Figure). Watt’s actual achievement was to improve Newcomen’s design of a steam pump. While Wa tt
was working in the repair shop at the University of Gla sgow he was fixing a Newcomen pump when he developed seve ral key
improvements on the original design.
Figure: Scottish inventor and mechanical engineer Jame s Watt FRS (1736 –1819).
Figure: English ironmonger and inventor of the steam engine Thomas Newcomen (1664 - 1729).
The reason for Watt’s success was that Britain was goin g through a major industrial boom and was in need of significant quantities
of raw material including coal. Many of the coalmines, especially those in Devon were prone to flooding. Unf ortunately,
Newcomen’s engine (which was actually a steam pump) could not pump the water out fast enough, whereas Watt’s eng ine was
powerful enough to drain the mines. As a result Watt’s c areer as a manufacturer was assured. However, Watt did no t see the full
potential of his invention, this was left to an employ ee of his, William Murdock (Figure), whose invention of the gearing to
allow the steam engine to be used for powering machiner y.

7.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212652
Figure: Scottish engineer and inventor William Murdoc k (1754 - 1839).
One outcome that Watt found from his increased busines s was an increase in paperwork! While he was living in Redruth, Cornwall,
close to where many of the mines were situated he told a friend that he was having “excessive difficulty i n finding intelligent
managing clerks”. In 1780 Watt solved his paperwork p roblems by inventing the first method of making copi es. This was the
subject of a Patent entitled “A new method of copying letters and writing expeditiously”. Watt’s invention involved making ink out
of gum Arabic and carbon black.
Gum arabic, also known as gum acacia, is a natural gum made of the hardened sap taken fro m two species of the acacia tree;
acacia senegal and acacia seyal. Carbon black is a form of amorphous carbon that h as a high surface area to volume ratio it is
commonly produced by the incomplete combustion of heavy petroleum products such as coal tar.
Watt’s ink would stay wet for 24 hours. Writing with t he ink and then pressing the result against another piece of paper created a
copy. Initially there was great resistance to the copy paper. In particular banks believed that this form o f copying could result in
forgeries. However, by the end of its first year on sal e, Watt sold over 200 examples. The real commercial push came after Watt
demonstrated his process to the House of Parliament. The resultant consternation amongst the Members of Parliam ent resulted in
their having to be reminded that Parliament was still in session! By 1785 copies were in general use, however, Cyrus P. Dalkin
made the biggest advance in 1823. By using a mixture of carbon black and hot paraffin wax the back of a p iece of paper was
coated. The carbon black was transferred to another p iece of paper underneath by the pressure of the pen. Dalkin had created
carbon copies. Both Ralph Wedgwood in England and Pellegrino Turri in Italy had developed forms of carbon paper between 1806
and 1808, but it was Dalkin’s version of carbon copy paper tha t found usage.
Figure: Modern carbon paper.
Initially there was almost no market for this new carbo n copy paper, until in 1868 when American Lebbeus Roge rs was talking part
in a balloon ascent. Rogers was an owner of biscuit an d greengrocer companies, and was intrigued when a repo rter for the
Associated Press who was interviewing him used Dalkin’s ca rbon paper. Rogers gave up his biscuit business and founded a firm toNote

7.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212652sell carbon paper. In 1873 he talked with E. Remington and Sons the typewriter manufacturer, and it was this application that
created a success out of the carbon paper business.
The term “CC” commonly used in e-mail programs today gr ew from the use of carbon paper and means carbon copy.
Interestingly, carbon black is still used today in modern photocopiers and laser printers. One of the att ributes that allow its use is
the ability for carbon black particles to become cha rged. This is related to another application of carb on black in early
communications: its ability to conduct electric, and t he changes that occur as a function of external pressure.
While Alexander Graham Bell was the first to be awarded a US patent for the electric telephone in March 1876, it was an invention
by Thomas Edison (Figure) that provided significant improvements. Early telephones relied on a metal dia phragm that was
attached to an electromagnet. Speaking into the metal diaphragm caused its vibration, which in tern vibrate d the electromagnetic
and hence created a current. Unfortunately, the current was very low and subsequent clarity was poor. Between 1877 and 1878
Edison investigated methods to improve the clarity of the signal. The key development was the carbon microphone (Fi gure).
Figure: American inventor, scientist and businessman Tho mas Alva Edison (1847 –1931).
Figure: A schematic of a simple carbon “button” micro phone.
The carbon microphone, also known as a carbon button microphone consisting of two metal plates separated by granules of carbon.
One plate faces outward and acts as a diaphragm. When sound waves strike this plate, the pressure on the gra nules changes, which
in turn changes the electrical resistance between the plates. A direct current is passed from one plate to the other, and the changing
resistance results in a changing current, which can b e passed through a telephone system. The carbon microph one was used in all
telephones until the 1980s.
It was one of Edison’s researchers, Edward Acheson (Figu re) whose discovery allowed for the extension of commu nication on
a global scale. While trying to make artificial diam onds, Acheson began mixing clay and coke (carbon) at very high temperatures.
In an electric furnace at high temperatures he foun d hexagonal crystals of silicon carbide (SiC) attache d to the carbon electrode. HeNote

7.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212652called this material carborundum. When, by mistake, he overheated the mixture to 4150 °C he found that the silicon evaporated
(boiling point 3265 °C) leaving pure and highly crysta lline carbon: graphite.
Figure: American chemist Edward Goodrich Acheson (185 6 – 1931).
Graphite is a natural mineral normally associated with other minerals, although an enormous deposit of graphi te was discovered in
Cumbria, England, which the locals found very useful f or marking sheep! Graphite was named by Abraham Werner (Figure)
in 1789 from the Greek graphein meaning to draw/write due to its use in pencils. However, its use was limited d ue to the cost. The
ability to manufacture high purity graphite resulte d in its use in electrodes, dynamo brushes, and batt eries. The most terrifying
application of graphite was as a result of a material problem associated with the V-2 rocket built by German y during the Second
World War.
Figure: German geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner (174 9 –1817).
The V-2 rockets or Vergeltungswaffen-2 (vengeance wea pon-2) was 47 feet long, and reached 3,600 mph with an altitude of
300,000 feet (Figure). In order to control the dire ction of flight the V-2 was guided by four external r udders on the tail fins,
and four internal vanes at the exit of the jet (Figu re). These vanes were made of graphite, it being the only material that
would survive the extreme temperatures.

7.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212652
Figure: A V-2 rocket at the Peenemünde Museum.
Figure: View of the V-2 rocket showing the graphite vanes for directional control.
Of course it was as a result of the same German scientist s who worked on the V-2, working for NASA, that allowed rock ets of
sufficient power to escape the Earth’s gravitational pull and send man to the moon, and position many of the satellites that are now
vital for global communication.
This page titled 7.2: Carbon Black- From Copying to Communication is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126537.3: Carbon Nanomaterials
Fullerenes and Nanotubes
Introduction
Although nanomaterials had been known for many years p rior to the report of C the field of nanoscale scie nce was undoubtedly
founded upon this seminal discovery. Part of the reas on for this explosion in nanochemistry is that while carbon materials range
from well-defined nano sized molecules (i.e., C) to t ubes with lengths of hundreds of microns, they do not exhibit the instabilities
of other nanomaterials as a result of the very high activation barriers to their structural rearrangeme nt. As a consequence they are
highly stable even in their unfunctionalized forms. Despite this range of carbon nanomaterials possible th ey exhibit common
reaction chemistry: that of organic chemistry.
The previously unknown allotrope of carbon: C, was di scovered in 1985, and in 1996, Curl, Kroto, and Smalley were awarded
the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery. The ot her allotropes of carbon are graphite (sp) and diamo nd (sp). C, commonly
known as the “buckyball” or “Buckminsterfullerene”, ha s a spherical shape comprising of highly pyramidali zed sp carbon atoms.
The C variant is often compared to the typical socc er football, hence buckyball. However, confusingly, thi s term is commonly
used for higher derivatives. Fullerenes are similar in sheet structure to graphite but they contain pen tagonal (or sometimes
heptagonal) rings that prevent the sheet from being planar. The unusual structure of C led to the intro duction of a new class of
molecules known as fullerenes, which now constitute th e third allotrope of carbon. Fullerenes are commonly defined as “any of a
class of closed hollow aromatic carbon compounds that are made up of twelve pentagonal and differing numb ers of hexagonal
faces.”
The number of carbon atoms in a fullerene range fro m C to C, C, and higher. Higher order fullerenes incl ude carbon
nanotubes that can be described as fullerenes that have been stretched along a rotational axis to form a tube. As a consequence of
differences in the chemistry of fullerenes such as C an d C as compared to nanotubes, these will be dealt with se parately herein.
In addition there have also been reports of nanohorn s and nanofibers, however, these may be considered as variations on the
general theme. It should be noted that fullerenes and nanotubes have been shown to be in flames produced by hydrocarbon
combustion. Unfortunately, these naturally occurring va rieties can be highly irregular in size and quality, as well as being formed in
mixtures, making them unsuitable for both research and in dustrial applications.
Fullerenes
Carbon-60 (C) is probably the most studied individu al type of nanomaterial. The spherical shape of C is constructed from
twelve pentagons and twenty hexagons and resembles a soc cer ball (Figure a). The next stable higher fullerene is C (Figure
b) that is shaped like a rugby or American football. T he progression of higher fullerenes continues in the sequence C, C,
C, etc. The structural relationship between each invo lves the addition of six membered rings. Mathematica lly (and chemically)
two principles define the existence of a stable fuller ene, i.e., Euler’s theorem and isolated pentagon rule (IPR). Euler’s theorem
states that for the closure of each spherical network, n (n ≥ 2) hexagons and 12 pentagons are required whi le the IPR says no two
pentagons may be connected directly with each other as de stabilization is caused by two adjacent pentagons.
Figure: Molecular structures of (a) C and (b) C.
Although fullerenes are composed of sp carbons in a sim ilar manner to graphite, fullerenes are soluble in v arious common organic
solvents. Due to their hydrophobic nature, fullerenes are most soluble in CS (C = 7.9 mg/mL) and toluene (C = 2.8 mg/mL).
Although fullerenes have a conjugated system, their ar omaticity is distinctive from benzene that has all C- C bonds of equal lengths,
in fullerenes two distinct classes of bonds exist. Th e shorter bonds are at the junctions of two hexagons ([6, 6] bonds) and the60
2 360
60 70 76
60 70
60 60
74 76
60 70
2 60 60

7.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653longer bonds at the junctions of a hexagon and a pen tagon ([5,6] bonds). This difference in bonding is resp onsible for some of the
observed reactivity of fullerenes.
Synthesis of fullerenes
The first observation of fullerenes was in molecular beam experiments at Rice University. Subsequent studies demonstrated that
C it was relatively easy to produce grams of fullere nes. Although the synthesis is relatively straightfo rward fullerene purification
remains a challenge and determines fullerene’s comme rcial price. The first method of production of measu rable quantities of
fullerenes used laser vaporization of carbon in an i nert atmosphere, but this produced microscopic amounts of fullerenes.
Laboratory scales of fullerene are prepared by the vaporization of carbon rods in a helium atmosphere. Commercial production
ordinarily employs a simple ac or dc arc. The fuller enes in the black soot collected are extracted in tol uene and purified by liquid
chromatography. The magenta C comes off the column first, followed by the red C, and other higher fulle renes. Even though
the mechanism of a carbon arc differs from that of a resistively heated carbon rod (because it involves a plasma) the He pressure
for optimum C formation is very similar.
A ratio between the mass of fullerenes and the total m ass of carbon soot defines fullerene yield. The yiel ds determined by UV-Vis
absorption are approximately 40%, 10-15%, and 15% in laser, electric arc, and solar processes. Interestingl y, the laser ablation
technique has both the highest yield and the lowest p roductivity and, therefore, a scale-up to a higher po wer is costly. Thus,
fullerene commercial production is a challenging tas k. The world's first computer controlled fullerene pr oduction plant is now
operational at the MER Corporation, who pioneered the first co mmercial production of fullerene and fullerene produc ts.
Endohedral fullerenes
Endohedral fullerenes are fullerenes that have inco rporated in their inner sphere atoms, ions or cluster s. Endohedral fullerenes are
generally divided into two groups: endohedral metallo fullerenes and non-metal doped fullerenes. The firs t endohedral
metallofullerenes was called La@C. The @ sign in the na me reflects the notion of a small molecule trapped ins ide a shell.
Doping fullerenes with metals takes place in-situ during the fullerene synthesis in an arc reactor o r via laser evaporation. A wide
range of metals have been encased inside a fulleren e, i.e., Sc, Y, La, Ce, Ba, Sr, K, U, Zr, and Hf. Unfortunately, the synthesis of
endohedral metallofullerenes is unspecific because in addition a high yield of unfilled fullerenes, co mpounds with different cage
sizes are prepared (e.g., La@C or La@C). A characteri stic of endohedral metallofullerenes is that electro ns will transfer from
the metal atom to the fullerene cage and that the m etal atom takes a position off-center in the cage. T he size of the charge transfer is
not always simple to determine, but it is usually bet ween 2 and 3 units (e.g., La @C) but can be as high as 6 electrons (e.g.,
Sc N@C). These anionic fullerene cages are very stable m olecules and do not have the reactivity associated wi th ordinary empty
fullerenes (see below). This lack of reactivity is utilize d in a method to purify endohedral metallofullerenes from empty fullerenes.
The endohedral He@C and Ne@C form when C is exposed to a pressure of around 3 bar of the appropriate noble ga ses.
Under these conditions it was possible to dope 1 in ev ery 650,000 C cages with a helium atom. Endohedral co mplexes with He,
Ne, Ar, Kr and Xe as well as numerous adducts of the He@C compound have also been proven with operating pressu res of 3000
bars and incorporation of up to 0.1 % of the noble g ases. The isolation of N@C, N@C and P@C is very unusual and unlike
the metal derivatives no charge transfer of the pnictide atom in the center to the carbon atoms of the cage takes p lace.
Chemically functionalized fullerenes
Although fullerenes have a conjugated aromatic system all the carbons are quaternary (i.e., containing no hydrogen), which results
in making many of the characteristic substitution rea ctions of planar aromatics impossible. Thus, only two t ypes of chemical
transformations exist: redox reactions and addition r eactions. Of these, addition reactions have the larges t synthetic value. Another
remarkable feature of fullerene addition chemistry is the thermodymics of the process. Since the sp carbo n atoms in a fullerene are
paramidalized there is significant strain energy. For example, the strain energy in C is ca 8 kcal/mol, which is 80% of its heat of
formation. So the relief of this strain energy leadin g to sp hybridized C atoms is the major driving forc e for addition reactions
(Figure). As a consequence, most additions to fullerenes a re exothermic reactions.
Figure: Strain release after addition of reagent A to a pyramidalize carbon of C.60
60 70
60 82
2 80
3 80
60 60 60
60 70 60

7.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653Cyclic voltammetry (CV) studies show that C can be red uced and oxidized reversibly up to 6 electrons with on e-electron transfer
processes. Fulleride anions can be generated by electr ochemical method and then be used to synthesize cova lent organofullerene
derivatives. Alkali metals can chemically reduce ful lerene in solution and solid state to form M C (x = 3 - 6). C can also be
reduced by less electropositive metals like mercury t o form C and C. In addition, salts can also be synthes ized with organic
molecules, for example [TDAE][C] possesses interesting e lectronic and magnetic behavior.
Geometric and electronic analysis predicted that ful lerene behaves live an electro-poor conjugated poly olefin. Indeed C and C
undergo a range of nucleophilic reactions with carbo n, nitrogen, phosphorous and oxygen nucleophiles. C6 0 reacts readily with
organolithium and Grignard compounds to form alkyl, phenyl or alkanyl fullerenes. Possibly the most widely u sed additions to
fullerene is the Bingel reaction (Figure), where a c arbon nucleophile, generated by deprotonation of α- halo malonate esters or
ketones, is added to form a cyclopropanation produc t. The α-halo esters and ketones can also be generate d in situ with I or CBr
and a weak base as 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]unde-7ene (DBU). The Bingel reaction is considered one of the most versatile and
efficient methods to functionalize C.
Figure: Bingel reaction of C with 2-bromoethylmalon ate.
Cycloaddition is another powerful tool to functional ize fullerenes, in particular because of its selecti vity with the 6,6 bonds,
limiting the possible isomers (Figure). The dienophil ic feature of the [6,6] double bonds of C enables th e molecule to
undergo various cycloaddition reactions in which the m onoadducts can be generated in high yields. The best studies cycloadditon
reactions of fullerene are [3+2] additions with diazo derivatives and azomethine ylides (Prato reactions). In this reaction,
azomethine ylides can be generated in situ from condensation of α-amino acids with aldehydes or ketones, which produce 1,3
dipoles to further react with C in good yields (Figure). Hundreds of useful building blocks have been genera ted by those two
methods. The Prato reactions have also been successfully app lied to carbon nanotubes.
Figure: Geometrical shapes built onto a [6,6] ring ju nction: a) open, b) four-membered ring, c) five-mem bered ring, and d)
six-membered ring.
Figure: Prato reaction of C with N-methyglycine and paraformaldehyde.
The oxidation of fullerenes, such as C, has been of i ncreasing interest with regard to applications in pho toelectric devices,
biological systems, and possible remediation of fuller enes. The oxidation of C to C O (n = 1, 2) may be acco mplished by
photooxidation, ozonolysis, and epoxidation. With ea ch of these methods, there is a limit to the isolable oxygenated product, C O
with n < 3. Highly oxygenated fullerenes, C O with 3 ≤ n ≤ 9, have been prepared by the catalytic oxidation of C with
ReMeO /H O.
Carbon nanotubes
A key breakthrough in carbon nanochemistry came in 1993 with the report of needle-like tubes made exclusi vely of carbon. This
material became known as carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Ther e are several types of nanotubes. The first discovery was of multi walled
tubes (MWNTs) resembling many pipes nested within each other. Shortly after MWNTs were discovered single walled n anotubes
(SWNTs) were observed. Single walled tubes resemble a si ngle pipe that is potentially capped at each end. T he properties of single60
x 60 60
60-602+6060 70
2 4
60 60 n
60 n
60 n 60
3 2 2

7.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653walled and multi walled tubes are generally the same, although single walled tubes are believed to have su perior mechanical
strength and thermal and electrical conductivity; it i s also more difficult to manufacture them.
Single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) are by definition fullerene materials. Their structure consists of a g raphene sheet rolled
into a tube and capped by half a fullerene (Figure). The carbon atoms in a SWNT, like those in a fulleren e, are sp2 hybridized.
The structure of a nanotube is analogous to taking this graphene sheet and rolling it into a seamless cylinder. The different types of
SWNTs are defined by their diameter and chirality. Mos t of the presently used single-wall carbon nanotubes have been synthesized
by the pulsed laser vaporization method, however, increas ingly SWNTs are prepared by vapor liquid solid catalyzed growth.
Figure: Structure of single walled carbon nanotubes (SW NTs) with (a) armchair, (b) zig-zag, and (c) chiral chirality.
The physical properties of SWNTs have made them an ext remely attractive material for the manufacturing of nano devices. SWNTs
have been shown to be stronger than steel as estimate s for the Young’s modulus approaches 1 Tpa. Their el ectrical conductance is
comparable to copper with anticipate current densitie s of up to 10 A/cm and a resistivity as low as 0.34 x 10 Ω.cm at room
temperatures. Finally, they have a high thermal conducti vity (3000 - 6000 W.m/K).
The electronic properties of a particular SWNT struct ure are based on its chirality or twist in the struct ure of the tube which is
defined by its n,m value. The values of n and m determine the chirality, or "twist" of the nanotube. The chirality in turn affects the
conductance of the nanotube, its density, its lattice structure, and other properties. A SWNT is considered m etallic if the value n-m
is divisible by three. Otherwise, the nanotube is semi- conducting. The external environment also has an ef fect on the conductance
of a tube, thus molecules such as O and NH can change t he overall conductance of a tube, while the presence of metals have been
shown to significantly effect the opto-electronic proper ties of SWNTs.
Multi walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) range from double walled NTs, through many-walled NTs (Figure) to carbon
nanofibers. Carbon nanofibers are the extreme of mu lti walled tubes (Figure) and they are thicker and l onger than either
SWNTs or MWNTs, having a cross-sectional of ca. 500 Å and are between 10 to 100 μm in length. They have been used
extensively in the construction of high strength composit es.
Figure: TEM image of an individual multi walled car bon nanotube (MWNTs). Copyright of Nanotech Innovati ons.13 2 -4
2 3

7.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653
Figure: SEM image of vapor grown carbon nanofibers.
Synthesis of carbon nanotubes
A range of methodologies have been developed to prod uce nanotubes in sizeable quantities, including arc discharge, laser ablation,
high pressure carbon monoxide (HiPco), and vapor liquid solid (VLS) growth. All these processes take place in vac uum or at low
pressure with a process gases, although VLS growth can t ake place at atmospheric pressure. Large quantities o f nanotubes can be
synthesized by these methods; advances in catalysis and continuous growth processes are making SWNTs more c ommercially
viable.
The first observation of nanotubes was in the carbon soot formed during the arc discharge production of fullerenes. The high
temperatures caused by the discharge caused the car bon contained in the negative electrode to sublime a nd the CNTs are deposited
on the opposing electrode. Tubes produced by this meth od were initially multi walled tubes (MWNTs). However, with the addition
of cobalt to the vaporized carbon, it is possible to grow single walled nanotubes. This method it produce s a mixture of components,
and requires further purification to separate the C NTs from the soot and the residual catalytic metals. Producing CNTs in high yield
depends on the uniformity of the plasma arc, and the tempe rature of the deposit forming on the carbon electrode.
Higher yield and purity of SWNTs may be prepared by the use of a dual-pulsed laser. SWNTs can be grown in a 50 % yield through
direct vaporization of a Co/Ni doped graphite rod wit h a high-powered laser in a tube furnace operating a t 1200 °C. The material
produced by this method appears as a mat of “ropes”, 10 - 20 nm in diameter and up to 100 μm or more in length. Each rope
consists of a bundle of SWNTs, aligned along a common a xis. By varying the process parameters such as catalyst composition and
the growth temperature, the average nanotube diamete r and size distribution can be varied. Although arc-di scharge and laser
vaporization are currently the principal methods fo r obtaining small quantities of high quality SWNTs, bo th methods suffer from
drawbacks. The first is that they involve evaporating t he carbon source, making scale-up on an industrial level difficult and
energetically expensive. The second issue relates t o the fact that vaporization methods grow SWNTs in high ly tangled forms,
mixed with unwanted forms of carbon and/or metal speci es. The SWNTs thus produced are difficult to purify, ma nipulate, and
assemble for building nanotube-device architectures for practical applications.
In order to overcome some of the difficulties of th ese high-energy processes, the chemical catalysis met hod was developed in
which a hydrocarbon feedstock is used in combination with a metal catalyst. The catalyst is typically, but n ot limited to iron,
colbalt, or iron/molybdenum, it is heated under red ucing conditions in the presence of a suitable carbo n feedstock, e.g., ethylene.
This method can be used for both SWNTs and MWNTs; the fo rmation of each is controlled by the identity of the catalyst and the
reaction conditions. A convenient laboratory scale app aratus is available from Nanotech Innovations, Inc., for the synthesis of
highly uniform, consistent, research sample that uses pr e-weighed catalyst/carbon source ampoules. This system, allows for 200 mg
samples of MWNTs to be prepared for research and test ing. The use of CO as a feedstock, in place of a hydroc arbon, led to the
development of the high-pressure carbon monoxide (HiPc o) procedure for SWNT synthesis. By this method, it is possible to
produce gram quantities of SWNTs, unfortunately, efforts to scale beyond that have not met with complete success.
Initially developed for small-scale investigations o f catalyst activity, vapor liquid solid (VLS) growth of nanotubes has been highly
studied, and now shows promise for large-scale product ion of nanotubes. Recent approaches have involved the use of well-defined
nanoparticle or molecular precursors and many diffe rent transition metals have been employed, but iron, nickel, and cobalt remain
to be the focus of most research. The nanotubes grow at the sites of the metal catalyst; the carbon-conta ining gas is broken apart at
the surface of the catalyst particle, and the carbon is transported to the edges of the particle, where it forms the nanotube. The
length of the tube grown in surface supported catalys t VLS systems appears to be dependent on the orientati on of the growing tube
with the surface. By properly adjusting the surface conce ntration and aggregation of the catalyst particles it is possible to synthesize
vertically aligned carbon nanotubes, i.e., as a carpet per pendicular to the substrate.

7.3.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653Of the various means for nanotube synthesis, the chem ical processes show the greatest promise for industri al scale deposition in
terms of its price/unit ratio. There are additional advantages to the VLS growth, which unlike the other me thods is capable of
growing nanotubes directly on a desired substrate. The growth sites are controllable by careful deposition of the catalyst.
Additionally, no other growth methods have been develope d to produce vertically aligned SWNTs.
Chemical functionalization of carbon nanotubes
The limitation of using carbon nanotubes in any pra ctical applications has been its solubility; for examp le SWNTs have little to no
solubility in most solvent due to the aggregation of the tubes. Aggregation/roping of nanotubes occurs as a result of the high van
der Waals binding energy of ca. 500 eV per mm of tube contact. The van der Waals for ce between the tubes is so great, that it take
tremendous energy to pry them apart, making it very to make combination of nanotubes with other material s such as in composite
applications. The functionalization of nanotubes, i. e., the attachment of “chemical functional groups” pr ovides the path to
overcome these barriers. Functionalization can impro ve solubility as well as processibility, and has been used to align the properties
of nanotubes to those of other materials. The cleares t example of this is the ability to solubilize nano tubes in a variety of solvents,
including water. It is important when discussing funct ionalization that a distinction is made between coval ent and non-covalent
functionalization.
Current methods for solubilizing nanotubes without c ovalent functionalization include highly aromatic s olvents, super acids,
polymers, or surfactants. Non-covalent “functionaliza tion” is generally on the concept of supramolecular interactions between the
SWNT and some macromolecule as a result of various adso rption forces, such as van der Waals’ and π-stacking i nteractions. The
chemical speciation of the nanotube itself is not al tered as a result of the interaction. In contrast, co valent functionalization relies on
the chemical reaction at either the sidewall or end of the SWNT. As may be expected the high aspect ratio o f nanotubes means that
sidewall functionalization is much more important th an the functionalization of the cap. Direct covalent sidewall functionalization
is associated with a change of hybridization from sp to sp and a simultaneous loss of conjugation. An alter native approach to
covalent functionalization involves the reaction of defects present (or generated) in the structure of the nanotube. Defect sites can
be the open ends and holes in the sidewalls, and pen tagon and heptagon irregularities in the hexagon gra phene framework (often
associated with bends in the tubes). All these function alizations are exohedral derivatizations. Taking the hollow structure of
nanotubes into consideration, endohedral functional ization of SWNTs is possible, i.e., the filling of the tub es with atoms or small
molecules. It is important to note that covalent fu nctionalization methods have one problem in common: extensive covalent
functionalization modifies SWNT properties by disrupting t he continuous π–system of SWNTs.
Various applications of nanotubes require different, specific modification to achieve desirable physical and chemical properties of
nanotubes. In this regard, covalent functionalizati on provides a higher degree of fine-tuning the chemi stry and physics of SWNTs
than non-covalent functionalization. Until now, a vari ety of methods have been used to achieve the functio nalization of nanotubes
(Figure).
Figure: Schematic description of various covalent func tionalization strategies for SWNTs.
Taking chemistry developed for C, SWNTs may be functi onalized using 1,3 dipolar addition of azomethine yl ides. The
functionalized SWNTs are soluble in most common organi c solvents. The azomethine ylide functionalization me thod was also used
for the purification of SWNTs. Under electrochemical c onditions, aryl diazonium salts react with SWNTs to ac hieve functionalized
SWNTs, alternatively the diazonium ions may be generat ed in-situ from the corresponding aniline, while a solvent free reaction
provides the best chance for large-scale functionali zation this way. In each of these methods it is possible to control the amount of
functionalization on the tube by varying reaction t imes and the reagents used; functionalization as hi gh as 1 group per every 10 - 25
carbon atoms is possible.
Organic functionalization through the use of alkyl h alides, a radical pathway, on tubes treated with lithium in liquid ammonia offers
a simple and flexible route to a range of functiona l groups. In this reaction, functionalization occurs on every 17 carbons. Most
success has been found when the tubes are dodecylated. Th ese tubes are soluble in chloroform, DMF, and THF.2 2

7.3.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653The addition of oxygen moieties to SWNT sidewalls can be achieved by treatment with acid or wet air oxidation, and ozonolysis.
The direct epoxidation of SWNTs may be accomplished b y the direct reaction with a peroxide reagent, or cat alytically. Catalytic
de-epoxidation (Figure) allows for the quantitative analysis of sidewall epoxide and led to the surprising result that
previously assumed “pure” SWNTs actually contain ca. 1 oxygen per 250 carbon atoms.
Figure: Catalytic oxidation and de-epoxidation of SW NTs.
One of the easiest functionalization routes, and a u seful synthon for subsequent conversions, is the fluor ination of SWNTs, using
elemental fluorine. Importantly, a C:F ratios of up to 2:1 can be achieved without disruption of the tubul ar structure. The
fluorinated SWNTs (F-SWNTs) proved to be much more soluble than pristine SWNTs in alcohols (1 mg/mL in iso-propanol), DMF
and other selected organic solvents. Scanning tunnelin g microscopy (STM) revealed that the fluorine formed bands of
approximately 20 nm, while calculations using DFT revea led 1,2 addition is more energetically preferable th an 1,4 addition, which
has been confirmed by solid state C NMR. F-SWNTs make high ly flexible synthons and subsequent elaboration has been
performed with organo lithium, Grignard reagents, and amin es.
Functionalized nanotubes can be characterized by a v ariety of techniques, such as atomic force microscop y (AFM), transmission
electron microscopy (TEM), UV-vis spectroscopy, and Ram an spectroscopy. Changes in the Raman spectrum of a nanotube sample
can indicate if functionalization has occurred. Prist ine tubes exhibit two distinct bands. They are the rad ial breathing mode (230
cm) and the tangential mode (1590 cm). When functio nalized, a new band, called the disorder band, appears at ca.1350 cm.
This band is attributed to sp -hybridized carbons in t he tube. Unfortunately, while the presence of a signif icant D mode is
consistent with sidewall functionalization and the re lative intensity of D (disorder) mode versus the tang ential G mode (1550 –
1600 cm) is often used as a measure of the level of substitution. However, it has been shown that Raman is a n unreliable method
for determination of the extent of functionalizatio n since the relative intensity of the D band is also a function of the substituents
distribution as well as concentration. Recent studies suggest that solid state C NMR are possibly the only d efinitive method of
demonstrating covalent attachment of particular functio nal groups.
Coating carbon nanotubes: creating inorganic nanostructures
Fullerenes, nanotubes and nanofibers represent suitable substrates for the seeding other materials such as o xides and other minerals,
as well as semiconductors. In this regard, the carbon na nomaterial acts as a seed point for the growth as well as a method of
defining unusual aspect ratios. For example, silica fi bers can be prepared by a number of methods, but it i s only through coating
SWNTs that silica nano-fibers with of micron lengths with tens of nanometers in diameter may be prepared.
While C itself does not readily seed the growth of i norganic materials, liquid phase deposition of oxides, such as silica, in the
presence of fullerenol, C (OH), results in the formati on of uniform oxide spheres. It appears the fullereno l acts as both a reagent
and a physical point for subsequent oxide growth, and it is C, or an aggregate of C, that is present withi n the spherical particle.
The addition of fullerenol alters the morphology an d crystal phase of CaCO precipitates from aqueous so lution, resulting in the
formation of spherical features, 5-pointed flower sha ped clusters, and triangular crystals as opposed to th e usual rhombic crystals.
In addition, the meta-stable vaterite phase is observe d with the addition of C (OH).
As noted above individual SWNTs may be obtained in solut ion when encased in a cylindrical micelle of a suita ble surfactant. These
individualized nanotubes can be coated with a range o f inorganic materials. Liquid phase deposition (LPD) a ppears to have
significant advantages over other methods such as inc orporating surfacted SWNTs into a preceramic matrix, in situ growth of the
SWNT in an oxide matrix, and sol-gel methods. The prima ry advantage of LPD growth is that individual SWNTs may be coated
rather than bundles or ropes. For example, SWNTs have b een coated with silica by liquid phase deposition (L PD) using a
silica/H SiF solution and a surfactant-stabilized solu tion of SWNTs. The thickness of the coating is depende nt on the reaction
mixture concentration and the reaction time. The SWNT core can be removed by thermolysis under oxidizing conditions to leave a13
-1 -1 -1
-1
60 n
60 60
60 n
2 6

7.3.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653silica nano fiber. It is interesting to note that th e use of a surfactant is counter productive when usin g MWNTs and VGFs, in this
case surface activation of the nanotube offers the su itable growth initiation. Pre-oxidation of the MWNT or VGF allows for
uniform coatings to be deposited. The coated SWNTs, MWNTs, and VGFs can be subsequently reacted with suitable surfa ce
reagents to impart miscibility in aqueous solutions, guar gels, and organic matrixes. In addition to simple oxides, coated nanotubes
have been prepared with minerals such as carbonates and semicon ductors.
Bibliography
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley, an d R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361.
D. S. Bethune, C. H. Klang, M. S. deVries, G. Gorman, R. Savoy, J. Vazquez, and R. Beyers, Nature, 1993, 363, 605.
J, J. Brege, C. Gallaway, and A. R. Barron, J. Phys. Chem., C, 2007, 111, 17812.
C. A. Dyke and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1156.
Z. Ge, J. C. Duchamp, T. Cai, H. W. Gibson, and H. C. Dorn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16292.
L. A. Girifalco, M. Hodak, and R. S. Lee, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 62, 13104.
T. Guo, P. Nikolaev, A. G. Rinzler, D. Tománek, D. T. Colbert, and R. E. Smalley, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 10694.
J. H. Hafner, M. J. Bronikowski, B. R. Azamian, P. Nikolaev, A. G. Rinz ler, D. T. Colbert, K. A. Smith, and R. E. Smalley,
Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 296, 195.
A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2002, 40, 4002.
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603.
H. R. Jafry, E. A. Whitsitt, and A. R. Barron, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42, 7381.
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O’Brien, R. F. Curl, and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162.
F. Liang, A. K. Sadana, A. Peera, J. Chattopadhyay, Z. Gu, R. H. Hauge, and W. E. Billups, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1257.
D. Ogrin and A. R. Barron, J. Mol. Cat. A: Chem., 2006, 244, 267.
D. Ogrin, J. Chattopadhyay, A. K. Sadana, E. Billups, and A. R. Barron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11322.
R. E. Smalley, Acc. Chem. Res., 1992, 25, 98.
M. M. J. Treacy, T. W. Ebbesen, and J. M. Gibson, Nature, 1996, 381, 678.
E. A. Whitsitt and A. R. Barron, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 775.
J. Yang and A. R. Barron, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2884.
L. Zeng, L. B. Alemany, C. L. Edwards, and A. R. Barron, Nano Res., 2008, 1, 72.
Graphene
Introduction
Graphene is a one-atom-thick planar sheet of sp -bonde d carbon atoms that are densely packed in a honeycom b crystal lattice
(Figure). The name comes from “graphite” and “alkene”; graphite itself consists of many graphene sheets stacked together.
Figure: Idealized structure of a single graphene sheet.
Single-layer graphene nanosheets were first characteri zed in 2004, prepared by mechanical exfoliation (the “scotch-tape” method)
of bulk graphite. Later graphene was produced by epita xial chemical vapor deposition on silicon carbide an d nickel substrates.
Most recently, graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) have been prep ared by the oxidative treatment of carbon nanotubes and by plasma
etching of nanotubes embedded in polymer films.2

7.3.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653Physical properties of graphene
Graphene has been reported to have a Young’s modulus of 1 TPa and intrinsic strength of 130 GP; similar to si ngle walled carbon
nanotubes (SWNTs). The electronic properties of graphen e also have some similarity with carbon nanotubes. Grap hene is a zerobandgap semiconductor. Electron mobility in graphen e is extraordinarily high (15,000 cm /V.s at room tempe rature) and ballistic
electron transport is reported to be on length scales comparable to that of SWNTs. One of the most promising aspects of graphene
involves the use of GNRs. Cutting an individual graph ene layer into a long strip can yield semiconductin g materials where the
bandgap is tuned by the width of the ribbon.
While graphene’s novel electronic and physical proper ties guarantee this material will be studied for years to come, there are some
fundamental obstacles yet to overcome before graphen e based materials can be fully utilized. The aforeme ntioned methods of
graphene preparation are effective; however, they are impractical for large-scale manufacturing. The most plentiful and inexpensive
source of graphene is bulk graphite. Chemical method s for exfoliation of graphene from graphite provide the most realistic and
scalable approach to graphene materials.
Graphene layers are held together in graphite by enor mous van der Waals forces. Overcoming these forces is t he major obstacle to
graphite exfoliation. To date, chemical efforts at g raphite exfoliation have been focused primarily on intercalation, chemical
derivatization, thermal expansion, oxidation-reductio n, the use of surfactants, or some combination of these.
Graphite oxide
Probably the most common route to graphene involves t he production of graphite oxide (GO) by extremely har sh oxidation
chemistry. The methods of Staudenmeier or Hummers are most commonly used to produce GO, a highly exfoliated material that is
dispersible in water. The structure of GO has been the subject of numerous studies; it is known to contain ep oxide functional
groups along the basal plane of sheets as well as hydro xyl and carboxyl moieties along the edges (Figure). I n contrast to
other methods for the synthesis of GO, the the m-peroxybenzoic acid (m-CPBA) oxidation of microcrystalline synthetic graphite at
room temperature yields graphite epoxide in high yield, without significant additional defects.
Figure: Idealized structure proposed for graphene oxi de (GO). Adapted from C. E. Hamilton, PhD Thesis, Ric e University
(2009).
As graphite oxide is electrically insulating, it must be converted by chemical reduction to restore the e lectronic properties of
graphene. Chemically converted graphene (CCG) is typic ally reduced by hydrazine or borohydride. The proper ties of CCG can
never fully match those of graphene for two reasons:
1. Oxidation to GO introduces defects.
2. Chemical reduction does not fully restore the graph itic structure.
As would be expected, CCG is prone to aggregation unless stabilized. Graphene materials produced from pristine graphite avoid
harsh oxidation to GO and subsequent (incomplete) redu ction; thus, materials produced are potentially much better suited to
electronics applications.
A catalytic approach to the removal of epoxides fro m fullerenes and SWNTs has been applied to graphene ep oxide and GO.
Treatment of oxidized graphenes with methyltrioxorhe nium (MeReO, MTO) in the presence of PPh results in the oxygen transfer,
to form O=PPh and allow for quantification of the C:O ratio.2
3 3

7.3.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653Homogeneous graphene dispersions
An alternate approach to producing graphene material s involves the use of pristine graphite as starting ma terial. The fundamental
value of such an approach lies in its avoidance of o xidation to GO and subsequent (incomplete) reduction, t hereby preserving the
desirable electronic properties of graphene. There i s precedent for exfoliation of pristine graphite in n eat organic solvents without
oxidation or surfactants. It has been reported that N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) dispersions of graphene are p ossible, but no
detailed characterization of the dispersions were re ported. In contrast, Coleman and coworkers reported si milar dispersions using
N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP), resulting in individual she ets of graphene at a concentration of ≤0.01 mg/mL. NMP and DMF are
highly polar solvents, and not ideal in cases where reaction chemistry requires a nonpolar medium. Further, they are hygroscopic,
making their use problematic when water must be exclude d from reaction mixtures. Finally, DMF is prone to therm al and chemical
decomposition.
Recently, dispersions of graphene has been reported in ortho -dichlorobenzene (ODCB) using a wide range of graphite sources. The
choice of ODCB for graphite exfoliation was based on severa l criteria:
1. ODCB is a common reaction solvent for fullerenes and is known to form stable SWNT dispersions.
2. ODCB is a convenient high-boiling aromatic, and is comp atible with a variety of reaction chemistries.
3. ODCB, being aromatic, is able to interact with graphene via π-π stacking.
4. It has been suggested that good solvents for graphite exf oliation should have surface tension values of 40 – 50 mJ /m. ODCB
has a surface tension of 36.6 mJ/m, close to the proposed r ange.
Graphite is readily exfoliated in ODCB with homogenizat ion and sonication. Three starting materials were succ essfully dispersed:
microcrystalline synthetic, thermally expanded, and h ighly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). Dispersions of mic rocrystalline
synthetic graphite have a concentration of 0.03 mg/ mL, determined gravimetrically. Dispersions from exp anded graphite and
HOPG are less concentrated (0.02 mg/mL).
High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) shows mostly few-layer graphene (n < 5) with single laye rs and small
flakes stacked on top (Figure). Large graphitic dom ains are visible; this is further supported by selecte d area electron
diffraction (SAED) and fast Fourier transform (FFT) in se lected areas. Atomic force microscope (AFM) images of dispersions
sprayed onto silicon substrates shows extremely thin f lakes with nearly all below 10 nm. Average height is 7 - 10 nm. The thinnest
are less than 1 nm, graphene monolayers. Lateral dimensio ns of nanosheets range from 100 – 500 nm.
Figure: TEM images of single layer graphene from HOPG dispersion. (a) monolayer and few layer of graphene st acked with
smaller flakes; (b) selected edge region from (a), (c) selected area from (b) with FFT inset, (d) HRTEM of b oxed region in (c)
showing lattice fringes with FFT inset. Adapted from C. E. Hamilton, PhD Thesis, Rice University (2009).
As-deposited films cast from ODCB graphene show poor electr ical conductivity, however, after vacuum annealing a t 400 °C for 12
hours the films improve vastly, having sheet resistan ces on the order of 60 Ω/sq. By comparison, graphene e pitaxially grown on Ni2

7.3.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212653has a reported sheet resistance of 280 Ω/sq.
Covalent functionalization of graphene and graphite oxide
The covalent functionalization of SWNTs is well establ ished. Some routes to covalently functionalized SWNTs in clude
esterification/ amidation, reductive alkylation (Bi llups reaction), and treatment with azomethine ylides (Prato reaction), diazonium
salts, or nitrenes. Conversely, the chemical derivatizatio n of graphene and GO is still relatively unexplored.
Some methods previously demonstrated for SWNTs have bee n adapted to GO or graphene. GO carboxylic acid groups h ave been
converted into acyl chlorides followed by amidation with long-chain amines. Additionally, the coupling of primary amines and
amino acids via nucleophilic attack of GO epoxide gro ups has been reported. Yet another route coupled isocy anates to carboxylic
acid groups of GO. Functionalization of partially reduc ed GO by aryldiazonium salts has also been demonstrated. The Billups
reaction has been performed on the intercalation co mpound potassium graphite (C K), as well as graphite flu oride, and most
recently GO. Graphene alkylation has been accomplished by t reating graphite fluoride with alkyllithium reagents.
ODCB dispersions of graphene may be readily converted to covalently functionalize graphene. Thermal decom position of benzoyl
peroxide is used to initiate radical addition of alkyl i odides to graphene in ODCB dispersions.
Additionally, functionalized graphene with nitrenes gen erated by thermal decomposition of aryl azides
Bibliography
P. Blake, P. D. Brimicombe, R. R. Nair, T. J. Booth, D. Jiang, F. Sch edin, L. A. Ponomarenko, S. V. Morozov, H. F. Gleeson, E.
W. Hill, A. K. Geim, and K. S. Novoselov, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1704.
J. Chattopadhyay, A. Mukherjee, C. E. Hamilton, J.-H. Kang, S. Chak raborty, W. Guo, K. F. Kelly, A. R. Barron, and W. E.
Billups, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5414.
G. Eda, G. Fanchini, and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270.
M. Y. Han, B. Ozyilmaz, Y. Zhang, and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 98, 206805.
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun’Ko, J. J.
Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchi nson, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari, and J. N. Coleman,
Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563.
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339.
L. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Diankov, and H. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877.
D. V. Kosynkin, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, J. R. Lomeda, A. Di miev, B. K. Price, and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2009, 458,
872.
D. Li, M. B. Mueller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner, and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101.
S. Niyogi, E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, J. L. McWilliams, M. A. Hamon, a nd R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7720.
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679.
L. Staudenmaier, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1898, 31, 1481.
This page titled 7.3: Carbon Nanomaterials is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.8

7.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126547.4: Nitrogen Compounds of Carbon
There are a myriad of organic compounds containing carbon-nitrogen bonds, including: amines, imines, and nitriles. However, here
we are concerned with the simplest carbon-nitrogen compounds.
Cyanogen
Cyanogen, (CN), may be considered the smallest molec ular fragment containing carbon and nitrogen (Figure a). The reaction
chemistry of cyanogen is related to that of the halogens, i.e., F, Cl, etc. Consequently, cyanogen is called a pseudo halogen.
Figure: The structures of (a) cyanogen, (CN) and (b) dicyanoacetylene (carbon subnitride, C N).
As shown in Table the bonding in cyanogen is consisten t with localization of the π-bonding between carbon a nd nitrogen
given the similarity of the C-N bond distance in cyan ogens and acetonitrile. However, there is clearly some π-delocalization
associated with the C-C distance given its shortening as co mpared to ethane.
Table: A comparison of the bond distances in selected carbon nitrogen compounds.
Compound Formula C-C bond distance (Å) C-N bond distance (Å)
Cyanogen (CN) 1.393 1.163
Hydrogen cyanide HCN - 1.154
Acetonitrile CH CN 1.46 1.16
Ethane C H 1.535 Ethylene C H 1.339 Cyanogen is produced by the reaction of a mixture of the c yanide and chloride of mercury, (7.4.1).
Alternatively, the decomposition of unstable copper(II) cyanide, formed from a copper(II) salts with a Group 1 cyanide, (7.4.2),
yields cyanogens, (7.4.3).
Cyanogen is a flammable gas (Mp = -28 °C and Bp = -21 °C) that produces the second hottest flame natural f lame (after carbon
subnitride, C N) with a temperature of over 4525 °C whe n burnt in oxygen. Heating cyanogen in the absence o f oxygen results
self polymerizes.
Hydrolysis of cyanogen results in addition across the carbon-nitrogen triple bonds and the formation of ox amide. Cleavage of the
C-C bond does occur in the presence of base (e.g., KOH), with the formation of cyanide (CN) and cyanate (CNO) salts, (7.4.4).
2 2
2 4 2
2 6
2 4
4 2

7.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212654Dicyanoacetylene
Dicyanoacetylene (also known as carbon subnitride or by its IUPAC name but-2-ynedinitrile) has the structure shown in Figure
b, and may be thought of as a dicyanaide substituted acety lene.
At room temperature, dicyanoacetylene is a clear liq uid, however, solid dicyanoacetylene has been detect ed in the atmosphere of
Titan (the largest moon of the planet Saturn) by inf rared spectroscopy. Dicyanoacetylene is an entropic e xplosive giving carbon
powder and nitrogen gas. In the presence of oxgyen it burns with a bright blue-white flame at a temperature of 4990 °C.
Hydrogen cyanide
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) is a colorless, highly poisonous, gas (Mp = -13.5 °C and Bp = 25.6 °C). Due to its origin al isolation from
Prussian blue (hydrated ferric ferrocyanide), hydrogen c yanaide is also known by the name of prussic acid.
The synthesis of hydrogen cyanide is accomplished com mercially by the partial oxidation of methane in th e presence of ammonia,
(7.4.5), using a platinum catalyst. The heat to activ ate the reaction is derived from the partial combust ion of the methane and
ammonia. The resulting aqueous solution is dried by distilled from phosphorus pentoxide (P O) to yield an hydrous hydrogen
cyanide.
Hydrogen cyanide may also be formed in the absence o f oxygen, (7.4.6); however, in this case the reaction mu st be heated
externally.
Small quantities of hydrogen cyanide for laboratory use may be prepared by the reaction of an acid with a cyanide salt (either
potassium or sodium), (7.4.7).
The structure of hydrogen cyanide is shown in Figure a long with its isomeric form, hydrogen isocyanide (HNC). While
hydrogen cyanide is present in the pits of many frui ts, and is generated by burnet moths and some milliped es, hydrogen isocyanide
is only found in interstellar space. It is postulated, however, that along with HCN, HNC is an important buildin g block for amino
acids and hence life.
Figure: The structures of (a) hydrogen cyanaide (HCN) and (b) its isomer hydrogen isocyanide (HNC).
In the liquid state hydrogen cyanide forms strong hy drogen bonds (Figure). Hydrogen cyanide is a good sol vent for polar
compounds due to its high permittivity (∈) and high dipole moment (2.98 D).
Figure: The hydrogen bonding in liquid hydrogen cya nide.
In aqueous solution hydrogen cyanide is a weak acid, (7.4.7), and several salts are known. However, HCN also rea cts with water to
give ammonium formate via formamide, (7.4.8).
In a similar manner to cyanogen’s relationship to the halogens, the cyanide anion (CN) is considered a pseudo halide (i.e., F, Cl,
etc), and as such forms many coordination compounds, e.g., [Fe(CN)] and [Ag(CN)].
Assassination, execution, and the Holocaust
Hydrogen cyanide is fatal to humans due to its inhibit ion of the enzyme cytochrome c oxidase by the cyani de ion (CN), which
results in the halting of cellular respiration. A con centration of 300 mg/m will kill within 10 minutes, whil e 3200 mg/m (ca. 3500
ppm) will be fatal in about 1 minute.2 5
r
- - 63-23 3

7.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212654The symptoms of cyanide poisoning appear similar to a heart attack and this has led to it being the pois on of choice for both
fictional murder mystery writers as well as the former KGB (Konitet gosudarstvennoy bezopasnosti or Committee for State
Security) and its predecessor SMERSH (from the contractio n smert shpionam meaning death to spies) in real life. Possibly the
most famous use of hydrogen cyanide for assassinatio n was the use of an atomizer mist gun by KGB agent Bohd an Stashynsky for
the killing of the Ukranian political writer and anti -communist Lev Rebet in 1957, and later in 1959 tha t of fellow Ukranian, Stepan
Bandera. In both cases the intention was to induce cardiac a rrest and make it look like the victim had died of a hear t attack.
Without doubt the most notorious use of hydrogen cya nide is in the form of the product Zyklon B, which was originally developed
as an insecticide. Dr. Walter Heerdt found that hydroge n cyanide could be absorbed onto substrates such as ab sorbent pellets (e.g.,
silica), fibers, or diatomaceous earth (Figure). While stable in an airtight container, once opened the hy drogen cyanide is
released. The “B” in the trade name comes from the Ge rman name for prussic acid (the common name for hyd rogen cyanide), i.e.,
Blausäure meaning blue acid.
Figure: A can of Zyklon B granules.
The first wholesale use of Zyklon B was actually in the US where it was used as early as 1929 to disinfect the fr eight trains and
cloths of Mexican immigrants entering the US. The first use of Zyklon B in the concentration camps during World War II was for a
similar purpose (in particular for delousing to cont rol typhus); however, for its use as an insecticide, Zyklon B contained a warning
odorant. The deliberate manufacture of Zyklon B with out the odorant resulted in the material that was used on a group of 250
gypsy children at the Buchenwald concentration camp in early 1940. Subsequently in September 1940, a simila r number of sick
Polish prisoners of war and 600 Soviet prisoners of war we re killed at Auschwitz (Figure). Once these horrific test s were
performed, the systematic murder of millions of peop le, including Jews, gypsies, and homosexuals, was accompl ished using
Zyklon B at Auschwitz, Majdanek, Sachsenhausen, and one of t he Operation Reinhard camps. It is only fitting that ma ny of the
architects of the Holocaust themselves died from cyani de, including: Adolf Hitler (in addition to a bullet), Joseph Goebbles,
Hermann Göring, and Heinrich Himmler.
Figure: The main gate at Auschwitz, through which an estimated two million victims of Nazi genocide passed.
Despite the horror associated with the use of hydrogen cyanide for the Holocaust, it was used by 11 US states for the death penalty
(Figure). Arizona, Maryland, and Missouri retain the ga s chamber as a secondary method of execution though they have lethal
injection as the primary method. Potassium cyanide (KCN) pellets are placed into a compartment directly b elow the chair in the gas
chamber. The condemned person is then strapped int o the chair, and the airtight chamber sealed. Conce ntrated sulfuric acid
(H SO) is then poured down a tube onto the cyanide pel lets to generate hydrogen cyanide, (7.4.7). Execution by gas chamber is 2 4

7.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212654especially unpleasant for the witnesses to the executio n due to the physical responses exhibited during the process of dying,
including: convulsions and excessive drooling.
Figure: The former gas chamber in San Quentin State P rison, now an execution chamber for lethal injection, in which the
State of California executed 192 men and 4 women.
Bibliography
J. Wu and N. J. Evans, Astrophys. J., 2003, 592, L79.
This page titled 7.4: Nitrogen Compounds of Carbon is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew
R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126557.5: Carbon Monoxide
Carbon monoxide (CO) is iso-electronic with nitrogen (N) and formed through the incomplete combustion of c arbon, (7.5.1), or
hydrocarbon compounds.
Carbon monoxide may also be made from steam and coal as part of synthesis gas, (7.4.2). A convenient lab oratory preparation of
CO is the dehydration of formic acid by sulfuric acid, (7.4. 3).
Hazards and toxicity
Carbon monoxide is flammable, (7.4.4), and has an explosive limit of 12.5 – 74% with an auto ignition temperature of 609 °C.
Carbon monoxide is also very toxic; however, it is co lorless, odorless, tasteless and non-irritating all of which increase its danger.
The incomplete combustion of hydrocarbon (natural g as or heating oil) or carbon sources (coal or charcoa l) is a common hazard in
the home. In a closed environment (e.g., charcoal grill in room with no, or poor, ventilation) as carbon uses up oxygen in room the
formation of toxic carbon monoxide results instead o f carbon dioxide (CO).Typical sources of CO in the ho me are shown in
Figure.
Figure: Potential sources of carbon in the home. Copyr ight: Fire Safety Council.
The toxicity of CO is due to its competition with oxygen at the hem e binding site in hemoglobin. The binding affinity for CO is 20 0
times greater than that for oxygen, meaning that jus t small amounts of CO dramatically reduces hemoglobin 's ability to transport
oxygen around the body. The bright red color of the CO-heme complex is the reason that chronic exposure r esults in the skin
adopting a bright red color. The symptoms of CO poiso ning include headache, nausea, weakness, and eventually d eath. When air
contains CO levels as low as 0.02%, headache and nausea occur; if the CO concentration is increased to 0.1%, unconsciousness
will follow.
Cigarette smoke containing large amounts of carbon mo noxide and as a result heavy smokers can have up to 20% of the
oxygen-active sites in their blood blocked by CO. Howeve r, despite this hazard, cigarettes would be even more deadly if they
were not burnt. A key (and often engineered) ingredi ent in cigarettes is the addictive drug nicotine. Nico tine is an alkaloid
(Figure a) as is caffeine (Figure b) that is in coffee and tea. The lethal dose of caffeine is approximately 10 g, which
relates to approximately 70 – 100 cups of coffee (assu ming a concentration of 100- 150 mg per cup). Altern atively, a lethal
dose of caffeine from cola would require approximate ly 180 – 280 12 oz bottles, each containing 35 – 44 mg. In comparison
nicotine has a lethal dose of 50 mg. This means that 12 cigarettes can provide a lethal does if consume d. The only reason
smoking 12 cigarettes do not kill immediately is th at the majority of the nicotine is burnt in the smok ing of the cigarette. If this
were not true smokers would be killed before they could dev elop a habit!2
Note

7.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212655
Figure: The molecular structures of (a) nicotine and (b) caffeine.
Structure and bonding
The bonding in CO involves 1 σ-bond and 2 sets of π- bonds (Figure). The C-O bond distance in carbon monox ide is 1.1 Å and
therefore consistent with a triple bond. In comparison a typical C-O single bond is ca. 1.43 Å, and an average C-O double bond is
ca. 1.23 Å. The major absorption band in the infra red spectrum for CO is 2143 cm, while for CO it is 2099.2 cm.
Figure: The carbon monoxide molecular orbital diagr am.
This page titled 7.5: Carbon Monoxide is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.-1 13 -1

7.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126567.6: Carbon Dioxide
Carbon dioxide (CO) is the most stable oxide of carb on and is formed from the burning of carbon or carb on containing
compounds in air or an excess of oxygen, (7.6.1). For ind ustrial applications it is usually prepared from th e decomposition of
calcium carbonate (limestone), (7.6.2), rather than sepa ration from combustion products.
Phase chemistry of carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide does not exists as a liquid under no rmal atmospheric pressure, but solid CO (also known as dry ice) sublimes at
-78.5 °C (Figure). Dry ice (Figure) is commonly used as a r efrigerant for food or biological sample preservation.
Figure: The phase diagram for carbon dioxide.
Figure: Photograph of a solid block of dry ice.
When dry ice is placed in water (especially heated) s ublimation is accelerated, and a low-sinking dense cl oud of fog (smokelike) is created. This is used in fog machines, at thea ters, concerts, haunted houses, and nightclubs for dram atic effects (Figure
). Fog from dry ice hovers above the ground unlike o ther artificial fog machines (that use partial combus tion of oil) where
the fog rises like smoke.
Figure: Dry ice generated smoke being used during Iro n Maiden’s Somewhere Back in Time World Tour. Copyright: Pyrotek.2
Note

7.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212656Supercritical carbon dioxide
As noted above carbon dioxide usually behaves as a gas in air at standard temperature and pressure (STP = 25 °C and 1 atm) or as a
solid when frozen. However, if the temperature and press ure are both increased from STP to be at or above the critical point (Figure
), carbon dioxide adopts properties midway between a gas a nd a liquid (T = 31.1 °C and P = 72.9 atm).
Supercritical CO has become an important industrial solvent due to its role in chemical extraction in a ddition to its low toxicity
and environmental impact. In this regard it is seen a s a promising green solvent. One of the biggest applic ations is the
decaffeination of coffee and tea without leaving any residue and allowing the caffeine to be separated a nd used in other beverage
products.
Structure and bonding
Carbon dioxide is a linear molecule due to π-localiz ation. The bonding in CO involves 2 σ-bond and 2 set s of 3 center π-bonds
(Figure). The C-O bond length of 1.2 Å should be comp ared to the value observed for organic carbonyls (e. g., ketones, esters,
aldehydes) of 1.2 – 1.3 Å.
Figure: The carbon dioxide molecular orbital diagra m.
Dissolution and reaction with water
Although CO has no dipole moment it is very polar (d ielectric constant = 1.60 at 0 °C, 50 atm) and conse quently dissolves in polar
solvents such as water up to a concentration of 18% (0.04 M). Most of it (+99%) is present as solvated CO (Figu re), and only
ca. 0.2% is reacted to form carbonic acid, (7.6.1), wit h subsequent equilibria resulting in the formation o f bicarbonate (HCO) and
carbonate (CO).
Figure: Typical water solvation of carbon dioxide.
The overall reaction involves a series of equilibria. The first equilibrium is the formation of carbonic acid, (7.6.4). The reaction
rates, (7.6.5), are on the magnitude of 1 second (i.e., slow), and as a consequence when carbon dioxide is c arried in the body anc c
332-

7.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212656enzyme is present to speed up the reaction.
The 2 equilibrium is as a consequence of first ioniz ation of carbonic acid to form bicarbonate (HCO), (7.6.6). In contrast to the
first reaction, (7.6.4), this reaction is very fast with a K = 1.6 x 10 @ 25 °C.
The 3 equilibrium involves the formation of the car bonate ion (7.6.7), and has a K = 4.84 x 10. Carbonat e (CO) is a
delocalized ligand, which can act as a mono or bidentat e or bridging group.
The formation of carbonic acid is the reason that e ven in the absence of pollutants (such as SO) natural r ain water is slightly acidic
due to dissolved CO. The equilibrium associated with carbon ic acid is also responsible for the buffering of the pH in bloo d.
Reaction chemistry
Photosynthesis in plants reduces CO to organic matter but similar reactions have yet to be developed in non-living systems.
Grignards react readily with carbon dioxide to form t he carboxylate, which yields the associated carboxylic acid upon hydrolysis,
(7.6.8). Similar reactions occur with other organometa llic compounds. In addition, CO reacts with alkali me tal salts of phenols
(phenolates) to yield the hydroxy-carboxylate.
A number of complexes of CO with transition metals ar e known in which the coordination can occur via the c entral carbon (Figure
a) or the C=O bond (Figure b). Alternatively, CO can bridge two metal centers.
Figure: Bonding modes of CO to transition metals.
Global warming and carbon dioxide
Global warming is the process of the observed increase i n the average temperature of the Earth's near-surfac e air and oceans since
the mid-20 century. Global surface temperature increa sed 0.74 °C (1.33 °F) between the start and the end of the 20 century
(Figure). It is generally agreed that the majority o f this temperature increase has occurred since the mi ddle of the 20 century
and was caused by increasing concentrations of greenho use gases resulting from burning fossil fuels (the gener ation of additional
CO) and deforestation (the loss of a mechanism for th e consumption of CO), see Figure. While it is apprec iated that natural
phenomena (including solar radiation and volcanoes) produ ced most of the warming from pre-industrial times, the ma gnitude of the
changes brought on by global industrialization is more s ignificant.nd3eq-4
rd
eq-11
th th
th
2 2

7.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212656
Figure: Correlation of Earth average temperature wi th carbon dioxide and global population.
The Earth’s atmosphere has two functions. First, the ozon e (O) in the upper atmosphere screens harmful UV from reaching the
surface of the Earth. Second, as solar radiation penet rates the atmosphere a portion of the heat is then re tained as a consequence of
the CO in the atmosphere. It is this process that modul ates the surface temperature and provides a stable environment for life. The
failure or alteration of either of these processes can have a dramatic effect on the livability of a planet.
Consider the relative position of Venus, Earth, and Mars to the Sun (Figure). The closer a planet is to t he sun the greater the
UV radiation and the greater the heating of the plan et; however, the temperature is also greatly modulate d by the atmosphere.
Venus has an atmosphere comprising 95% CO and has a surface temperature of approximately 450 °C. In contr ast, while Mars’
atmosphere is also 95% CO, it is only 1% as dense as that of Earth’s, and thus the surface temperatures ra nge from 40 °C during
the day (due to radiative heating) to –80 °C at nig ht (due to the lack of retained heat because of the thin atmosphere). These should
be compared to Earth’s atmosphere which is 0.038% CO, wh ich allows for the correct amount of heat to be reta ined to sustain life.
Clearly any significant change in the CO content of the a tmosphere will change the global temperatures of a plane t.
Figure: The relative size and position of the planets from the sun.
Bibliography
N. Stern, The Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change, HM Treasury, London.
R. B. Gupta and J.-J. Shim, Solubility in Supercritical Carbon Dioxide, CRC Press (2006).
Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage: Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge
University Press (2005).
This page titled 7.6: Carbon Dioxide is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX)
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.3

7.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128967.7: Suboxides of Carbon
Carbon suboxide
Carbon suboxide is the third oxide of carbon, C O. It is made from the dehydration of malonic acid, (7.7.1), with P O above 140
°C Like carbon dioxide, the C O molecule is linear, with pπ -pπ bonding.
Gaseous carbon suboxide has an evil smell and while s table at –78 °C it polymerizes at 25 °C. Photolysis of C O yields the
unstable C O. As expected from its synthesis, carbon sub oxide reacts slowly with water to form malonic acid, i.e., the reverse of
(7.7.1); however, the reaction with stronger nuceophiles su ch as amines is rapid, (7.7.2).
Mellitic acid anhydride
The anhydride of mellitic acid (Figure a) may be con sidered as an oxide of carbon since its chemical form ula contains only
carbon and oxygen, i.e., C O (Figure b).
Figure: Structures of (a) mellitic acid and (b) its an hydride.
7.7: Suboxides of Carbon is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.3 2 4 10
3 2
3 2
12 9

7.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128977.8: Carbon Halides
There are two general classes of carbon halides.
1. Homoleptic halides, e.g., CCl, CCl F, C Cl, etc.
2. Carbonyl halides, e.g., Cl C=O.
A summary of some simple carbon halides is given in Table.
Table: Physical properties of simple halogen compounds of carbon.
Compound Mp (°C) Bp (°C) Remarks
CF -185 -128 Very stable gas
CCl -23 76 Colorless liquid, stable
CBr 93 190Pale yellow solid, decomposes
upon boiling
CI 171 -Bright red solid, decomposes
prior to boiling, sublimed at low
pressure
F C=O -114 -83 Decomposed by H O
Cl C=O -118 8 Phosgene, highly toxic
Br C=O - 65 Fumes in air
Carbon tetrahalides
The carbon tetrahalides are generally prepared by th e direct (thermal) reaction of carbon with the appro priate halogen, (7.8.1);
however, specific syntheses are possible for each derivati ve.
In addition to the direct reaction of fluorine with carbon, CF can be prepared from SiC, (7.8.2). The SiF sid e product is removed
by passing the reaction mixture through NaOH solution, in which SiF reacts to form silicate. The difference i n reactivity of SiF
and CF is attributable to the lack of an energetica lly accessible five-coordinate intermediate required for the associative
mechanism.
Carbon tetrabromide can be obtained by bromination of CH with HBr or Br, or by the reaction of CCl with AlB r, (7.8.3).
Carbon tetraiodide (CI4) can be made by the Lewis acid ca talyzed halogen exchange reaction, (7.8.4).
CF is very stable. In fact, it is so stable that it do es not even react with molten sodium. In contrast to CF, carbon tetrachloride
(CCl) reacts readily with alkali metals (K and Na) or other strong reducing agents (e.g., F, Al, Ba, Be, and Z n). While CCl is
thermodynamically unstable with respect to hydrolysis, it is kinetically stable, and thus finds extensive us e as a solvent. Photolysis
can result in the transfer of a chloride radical to various substrates. It is also used in the convers ion of metal oxides to the chlorides.
Carbon tetrabromide (CBr) is insoluble in water and other polar solvents, but soluble in benzene. Carbon t etraiodide (CI)
decomposes thermally, (7.8.5).
The decreasing stability of CX, from fluorine to iodine, is directly related to the C-X bond energy.4 2 2 6 6
2 2
4 4
4 4
4 2 4 3
4 4
4 2 4
4 4

7.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212897Table: Bond energies for carbon-halide bonds.
C-X Bond energy (kJ/mol)
C-F 485
C-Cl 327
C-Br 285
C-I 213
Hazards
Despite its use as a solvent CCl has significant haz ardous effects. Inhalation of carbon tetrachloride vapor can cause headaches,
mental confusion, depression, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, and coma. The symptoms can take many hours to appear.
The vapor and liquid irritate the eyes, and interna l irritation, nausea, and vomiting are caused when t aken orally. Chronic effects
from prolonged inhalation include bronchitis and jaundi ce, while skin exposure can cause dermatitis.
Carbon tetrabromide is toxic by inhalation, and the v apor is narcotic if taken in high concentrations. As with CCl, CBr can react
explosively with alkali metals.
Higher homoleptic halides
Organic compounds that contain only carbon and a halo gen are called halocarbons, and these include fluor ocarbons and
chlorocarbons. The easiest route to fluorocarbons inv olves the reaction of a hydrocarbon with a high vale nt fluoride (e.g., CoF) or
the reaction of a chlorocarbon with SbF. In general, chlorocarbons with sp carbon atoms are more stable tha n those with sp
carbon centers. The exception to this is aromatic compound s such as C Cl.
The physical properties of fluorocarbons range from inert to toxic. Thus, poly(tetrafluoroethylene), (C F), known by either its
acronym (PTFE) or its trade name (Teflon), is chemical ly inert and has a low coefficient of friction (Tabl e). As a consequence
its uses include coatings on armor-piercing bullets (to stop the wear on the gun barrel), laboratory cont ainers and magnetic stirrers,
tubing for corrosive chemicals, and thread seal tape in plumbing applications (plumbers tape). A summary of the physical
properties of PTFE is given in Table. PTFE is synthesiz ed by the emulsion polymerization of tetrafluoroeth ylene monomer
under pressure through free radical catalyst.
Table: Physical properties of poly(tetrafluoroethylen e) (PTFE).
Property Value
Density 2.2 g/cm
Melting point 327 °C
Young's modulus 0.5 GPa
Yield strength 23 MPa
Coefficient of friction 0.05 - 0.10
Dielectric constant 2.1
Dielectric strength (1 MHz) 60 MV/m
In contrast with PTFE, octafluoroisobutylene, (CF) C=CF, is highly toxic, while perfluorodecahydronapthalene (C F, Figure
) is used as a blood substitute component.4
4 4
33 2
6 6
2 4 n
3 2 2 10 8

7.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212897
Figure: Structure of perfluorodecahydronapthalene.
Mixed halides
Mixed halides are an important class of halocarbon c ompound. They are synthesized by halide exchange, (7.8.6). The high cost of
SbF means that the reaction is generally run with an excess o f the chloride.
The ordinary name for mixed carbon halide is halon or Freon, although Freon is actually a Du Pont trademark. A list of selected
Freon compounds are given in Table. Halons are non-tox ic, non-flammable, and have no odor. However, it is the ir very lack of
reactivity that has caused a problem.
Table: Selected Freons and their applications.
Freon Formula Uses
12 CCl F Refrigerant
11 CCl F Refrigerant
114 ClF C-CClF Refrigerant
113 Cl C-CF Solvent
13B1 CBrF Fire extinguisher
1211 CBrClF Fire extinguisher
Environmental impact of chlorofluorcarbon compounds (CFCs)
Chlorofluorcarbon compounds (CFCs) are very stable a nd are not degraded in the environment. As a consequ ence they are
transported to the stratosphere where they decomposed upon photolysis, (7.8.7). The resulting chloride radica l is a catalyst for the
decomposition of ozone, (7.8.8), as well as a catalyst for the reaction of ozone with molecular oxygen, (7.8.9).
The widespread use of CFCs as refrigerants and propellan ts meant that by 1986 there were 2.5 billion pounds o f CFC being
liberated to the atmosphere. This was equivalent to /. lb per person on the planet. Since the ozone layer p rovides the vital
protection to life on the Earth’s surface from high energy UV radiation the release of CFC (along with oth er chemicals) caused a
dramatic change in the ozone layer, including the in crease in the polar hole in the ozone layer. As a res ult of the EU called for a
complete ban of CFCs (which was followed by other countri es). In their place new chemicals with similar refriger ant properties
were developed. These compounds contained C-H bonds (e.g., C HCl F and C H Cl F) that are readily broken in the lowe r
atmosphere, thus limiting the transport to the stratosphere.
Carbonyl halides
All the carbonyl halides (X C=O, X = F, Cl, Br, I) are kno wn (Table). Phosgene (Cl C=O) was first synthesized by John Davy
(Figure) in 1812 by exposing a mixture of carbon mon oxide and chlorine to sunlight, (7.8.10). He named it phosgene from the3
2 2
2 2
3 3
2 2 3 2 3 2
2 2

7.8.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212897Greek, phos (light) and gene (born), in reference to use of light to promote the reaction. The fluoride is also prepared by the
reaction of carbon monoxide with the halogen, while the br omide is prepared by the partial hydrolysis of CBr with sulfuric acid.
Figure: British doctor and chemist John Davy FRS (1790 – 1868) was also the brother of the noted chemist Sir Humphry
Davy.
The synthesis of isocyanates from alkyl or aryl amin es illustrates the electrophilic character of phosge ne and its ability to introduce
the equivalent of "CO ", (7.8.11). This reaction is con ducted in the presence of a base such as pyridine that absorbs the hydrogen
chloride. Phosgene may also be used to produce acyl ch lorides from carboxylic acids, (7.8.12). However, thionyl chloride is more
commonly and more safely used in this reaction.
Phosgene as a weapon of war
Phosgene is a toxic gas with the smell of “new-mown hay” and was used in chemical warfare during the First Worl d War (Figure
) where it was a more potent weapon than chlorine. Whil e chlorine was potentially deadly it caused the victi m to violently
cough and choke (the bodies natural defense to limit ing inhalation), in contrast, phosgene caused much less coughing with the
result that more of it was inhaled. Phosgene often had a delayed effect; apparently healthy soldiers were ta ken down with phosgene
gas poisoning up to 48 hours after inhalation. A fata l dose of phosgene eventually led to shallow breathin g and retching, pulse up to
120, an ashen face and the discharge of four pints of yello w liquid from the lungs each hour for the 48 of the drowning spasms.
Figure: Australian infantry from the 45 Battalion, A ustralian 4 Division wearing Small Box Respirators (SBR) as protection
of chemical warfare agents. Photograph taken at Zonn ebeke, on the Ypres sector, 27 September 1917. Copyri ght: Australian War
Memorial.4
2+
th th
th

7.8.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212897Although phosgene’s boiling point (7.6 °C) meant that is was a vapor, the so-called "white star" mixture of phosgene and chlorine
was commonly used on the Somme, because the chlorine su pplied the necessary vapor with which to carry the phos gene. A
summary of the casualties inflicted by chemical warfare a gents during the Great War is shown in Table.
Table: Casualties from gas attacks during the First Worl d War (including chlorine, phosgene, and mustard gas). British Empire includes
troops from United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, India, New Zealand, and South Africa.
Country Total casualties Deaths
Russia 419,340 56,000
Germany 200,000 9,000
France 190,000 8,000
British Empire 188,706 8,109
Austria-Hungary 100,000 3,000
USA 72,807 1,462
Italy 60,000 4,627
Others 10,000 1,000
7.8: Carbon Halides is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128987.9: Comparison Between Silicon and Carbon
An understanding of the differences between carbon and silicon is important in understanding the relative c hemistry of these Group
14 elements.
Size
As expected silicon is larger than carbon due to the presence of a second shell: i.e., C = 1 s 2s 2p while Si = 1 s 2s 2p 3s 3p.
A comparison of the relative sizes of carbon and silicon a re given in Table.
Table: Atomic, covalent, and van der Waals radii of carbon and silicon.
Element Atomic radius (Å) Covalent radius sp (Å) van der Waal radius (Å)
C 0.70 0.75 1.70
Si 1.10 1.14 2.10
Covalent and van der Waal radii from Royal Society of Chemistry Online Periodic Table. Webelements has a more detailed
discussion of all three types of radii, the atomic radii quoted here are empirical.
Coordination number
Carbon is known to have a coordination number of 2, 3, and 4 in its compounds depending on the hybridizat ion. A coordination
number of 1 can also be considered for CO and CN. Fou r-coordinate carbon may be considered to be coordin atively saturated. In
contrast, in the absence of overwhelming steric bulk, si licon is observed to have coordination numbers of 3, 4, 5, and 6. Examples
of five and six-coordinate silicon include Si(acac) Cl and SiF, respectively. Coordination numbers of highe r than 4 have been
ascribed to the use of low-lying d orbitals; however, calculations show these are not sig nificant. Instead, hypervalent silicon is
better described by the formation of 3-center molecula r orbitals, e.g., Figure.
A hypervalent molecule is a molecule that contains o ne or more typical elements (Group 1, 2, 13-18) forma lly bearing more
than eight electrons in their valence shells.2 2 2 2 2 6 2 2
2 62Note

7.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212898
Figure: Molecular orbital diagram for SiF.
Electronegativity
The electronegativities of silicon and carbon are g iven in Table along with hydrogen. Since carbon is mo re electronegative than
hydrogen the C-H bond is polarized towards carbon resu lting in a more protic hydrogen (Figure a). In contra st, the lower
electronegativity of silicon results in a more hydri dic hydrogen (Figure b). This difference is reflected in the reaction chemistry
of SiH versus CH.
Table: Selected Pauling electronegativity values. Royal Society of Chemistry Online Periodic Table
Element Pauling scale
C 2.55
H 2.20
Si 1.90
Figure: Relative polarization of C-H and Si-H bonds.
Bond energies
The E-E and E-O bond energies for carbon and silicon are given in Table. The bond energy for a C-C bond is slightly greater
than for a C-O bond, while the Si-O bond is significantly stronger than the Si-Si bond. This difference is refle cted in the chemistry
of silicon versus carbon compounds. The chemistry of carbon is dominated by catenation: the ability of a chemical element to form
a long chain-like structure via a series of covalen t bonds. Although silicon does form Si-Si bonds, they ar e far more reactive than
their C-C analogs, and polymers of silicon are predominan tly comprised of Si-O chains (as a result of the very strong b ond).624 4

7.9.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212898Table: Selected bond energies for carbon and silicon. Royal Society of Chemistry Online Periodic Table
Element E-E bond energy (kJ/mol) E-O bond energy (kJ/mol)
C 345.6 357.7
Si 222 462
Multiple bonds
While unsaturated compounds for carbon (i.e., alkenes and alkynes) are common, the analogous silicon compou nds (disilenes)
were only reported in 1981, and disilynes in 2004. The Si=Si double bond lengths are 2.14 - 2.29 Å which is 5 - 10% shorter than
the Si-Si single bond lengths. This bond shortening is less tha n ca. 13% in carbon compounds.
The traditional lack of multiple bonds for the Period 3 elements and lower led to the formulation of the double bond rule which
states that chemical elements with a principal quantum number greater than 2 do not form multiple bonds (e.g., double bonds
and triple bonds) with themselves or with other elements. This rule was made obsolete starting from 1981 with t he discovery of
silicon and phosphorus double bonds. Double bonds th at would ordinarily not form can be stabilized with p roper functional
groups through kinetic stabilization, i.e., either elect ronically or sterically.
Bibliography
R. West, M. J. Fink, and J. Michl, Science, 1981, 214, 1343.
A. Sekiguchi, R. Kinjo, and M. Ichinohe, Science, 2004, 305, 1755.
7.9: Comparison Between Silicon and Carbon is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Note

7.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128997.10: Semiconductor Grade Silicon
Introduction
The synthesis and purification of bulk polycrystallin e semiconductor material represents the first step towar ds the commercial
fabrication of an electronic device. This polycrysta lline material is then used as the raw material for t he formation of single crystal
material that is processed to semiconductor wafers. The strong influence on the electric characteristics of a semiconductors
exhibited by small amounts of some impurities require s that the bulk raw material be of very high purity (> 99.9999%). Although
some level of purification is possible during the cr ystallization process it is important to use as hig h a purity starting material as
possible.
Following oxygen (46%), silicon (L. silicis flint) is t he most abundant element in the earth's crust (28%). However, silicon does not
occur in its elemental form, but as its oxide (SiO) or as silicates. Sand, quartz, amethyst, agate, flint, an d opal are some of the
forms in which the oxide appears. Granite, hornblende, as bestos, feldspar, clay and mica, etc. are a few of the numerous silicate
minerals. With such boundless supplies of the raw mater ial, the costs associated with the production of bulk silicon is not one of
abstraction and conversion of the oxide(s), but of purification of the crude elemental silicon. While 9 8% elemental silicon, known
as metallurgical-grade silicon (MGS), is readily produ ced on a large scale, the requirements of extreme pur ity for electronic device
fabrication require additional purification steps in order to produce electronic-grade silicon (EGS). Elec tronic-grade silicon is also
known as semiconductor-grade silicon (SGS). In order for th e purity levels to be acceptable for subsequent crys tal growth and
device fabrication, EGS must have carbon and oxygen im purity levels less than a few parts per million (ppm), and metal impurities
at the parts per billion (ppb) range or lower. Table and Table give typical impurity concentrations in MGS and EGS,
respectively. Besides the purity, the production cost a nd the specifications must meet the industry desires.
Table: Typical impurity concentrations found in met allurgical-grade silicon (MGS).
Element Concentration (ppm) Element Concentration (ppm)
aluminum 1000-4350 manganese 50-120
boron 40-60 molybdenum < 20
calcium 245-500 nickel 10-105
chromium 50-200 phosphorus 20-50
copper 15-45 titanium 140-300
iron 1550-6500 vanadium 50-250
magnesium 10-50 zirconium 20
Table: Typical impurity concentrations found in ele ctronic-grade silicon (EGS).
Element Concentration (ppb) Element Concentration (ppb)
arsenic < 0.001 gold < 0.00001
antimony < 0.001 iron 0.1-1.0
boron ≤ 0.1 nickel 0.1-0.5
carbon 100-1000 oxygen 100-400
chromium < 0.01 phosphorus ≤ 0.3
cobalt 0.001 silver 0.001
copper 0.1 zinc < 0.12

7.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212899Metallurgical-grade silicon (MGS)
The typical source material for commercial productio n of elemental silicon is quartzite gravel; a relati vely pure form of sand
(SiO). The first step in the synthesis of silicon is the melting and reduction of the silica in a submer ged-electrode arc furnace. An
example of which is shown schematically in Figure, alo ng with the appropriate chemical reactions. A mixtur e of quartzite
gravel and carbon are heated to high temperatures (c a. 1800 °C) in the furnace. The carbon bed consists of a mixture of coal, coke,
and wood chips. The latter providing the necessary p orosity such that the gases created during the reac tion (SiO and CO) are able
to flow through the bed.
Figure: Schematic of submerged-electrode arc furnace for the production of metallurgical-grade silicon (M GS).
The overall reduction reaction of SiO is expressed in (7.10.1), however, the reaction sequence is more compl ex than this overall
reaction implies, and involves the formation of SiC and SiO intermediates. The initial reaction between molte n SiO and C,
(7.10.2), takes place in the arc between adjacent ele ctrodes, where the local temperature can exceed 2000 °C. The SiO and CO thus
generated flow to cooler zones in the furnace where Si C is formed, (7.10.3), or higher in the bed where they reform SiO and C,
(7.10.2). The SiC reacts with molten SiO, (7.10.4), produ cing the desired silicon along with SiO and CO. The molt en silicon
formed is drawn-off from the furnace and solidified.
The as-produced MGS is approximately 98-99% pure, with th e major impurities being aluminum and iron (Table), however,
obtaining low levels of boron impurities is of partic ular importance, because it is difficult to remove and serves as a dopant for
silicon. The drawbacks of the above process are that it is energy and raw material intensive. It is estimate d that the production of
one metric ton (1,000 kg) of MGS requires 2500 - 2700 k g quartzite, 600 kg charcoal, 600 - 700 kg coal or co ke, 300 - 500 kg
wood chips, and 500,000 kWh of electric power. Currentl y, approximately 500,000 metric tons of MGS are produce d per year,
worldwide. Most of the production (ca. 70%) is used for metallurgical applications (e.g., aluminum-silicon al loys are commonly
used for automotive engine blocks) from whence its na me is derived. Applications in a variety of chemical products such as
silicone resins account for about 30%, and only 1% o r less of the total production of MGS is used in the ma nufacturing of highpurity EGS for the electronics industry. The current worldwi de consumption of EGS is approximately 5 x 10 kg per year.
Electronic-grade silicon (EGS)
Electronic-grade silicon (EGS) is a polycrystalline mate rial of exceptionally high purity and is the raw mate rial for the growth of
single-crystal silicon. EGS is one of the purest materi als commonly available, see Table. The formation of EGS from MGS is
accomplished through chemical purification processes. The basic concept of which involves the conversion o f MGS to a volatile
silicon compound, which is purified by distillation, and subsequently decomposed to re-form elemental sil icon of higher purity
(i.e., EGS). Irrespective of the purification route emplo yed, the first step is physical pulverization of MGS fo llowed by its
conversion to the volatile silicon compounds.2
'_' allowed only in math mode

7.10.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212899A number of compounds, such as monosilane (SiH), dichlor osilane (SiH Cl), trichlorosilane (SiHCl), and silicon tet rachloride
(SiCl), have been considered as chemical intermediat es. Among these, SiHCl has been used predominantly as the intermediate
compound for subsequent EGS formation, although SiH is used to a lesser extent. Silicon tetrachloride and its lower chlorinated
derivatives are used for the chemical vapor deposit ion (CVD) growth of Si and SiO. The boiling points of sil ane and its
chlorinated products (Table) are such that they are con veniently separated from each other by fractional distill ation.
Table: Boiling points of silane and chlorosilanes at 7 60 mmHg (1 atmosphere).
Compound Boiling point (°C)
SiH -112.3
SiH Cl -30.4
SiH Cl 8.3
SiHCl 31.5
SiCl 57.6
The reasons for the predominant use of SiHCl in the synthesi s of EGS are as follows:
1. SiHCl can be easily formed by the reaction of anhydrous hydrogen chloride with MGS at reasonably low temperatures (200 400 °C);
2. it is liquid at room temperature so that purificatio n can be accomplished using standard distillation technique s;
3. it is easily handled and if dry can be stored in carbon steel tanks;
4. its liquid is easily vaporized and, when mixed with hydrogen it can be transported in steel lines without corrosion;
5. it can be reduced at atmospheric pressure in the presen ce of hydrogen;
6. its deposition can take place on heated silicon, thus el iminating contact with any foreign surfaces that may cont aminate the
resulting silicon; and
7. it reacts at lower temperatures (1000 - 1200 °C) and at faster rates than does SiCl.
Chlorosilane (Seimens) process
Trichlorosilane is synthesized by heating powdered MGS wit h anhydrous hydrogen chloride (HCl) at around 300 °C in a fluidizedbed reactor, (7.10.5).
Since the reaction is actually an equilibrium and the formation of SiHCl highly exothermic, efficient remov al of generated heat is
essential to assure a maximum yield of SiHCl. While t he stoichiometric reaction is that shown in (7.10.5), a mixture of chlorinated
silanes is actually prepared which must be separated by fractional distillation, along with the chlorides of any impurities. In
particular iron, aluminum, and boron are removed as Fe Cl (b.p. = 316 °C), AlCl (m.p. = 190 °C subl.), and BCl (b.p. = 12.65
°C), respectively. Fractional distillation of SiHCl from these impurity halides result in greatly increased pu rity with a
concentration of electrically active impurities of less than 1 ppb.
EGS is prepared from purified SiHCl in a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process similar to the epitaxial growt h of Si. The
high-purity SiHCl is vaporized, diluted with high-purit y hydrogen, and introduced into the Seimens deposition reactor, shown
schematically in Figure. Within the reactor, thin sil icon rods called slim rods (ca. 4 mm diameter) are su pported by graphite
electrodes. Resistance heating of the slim rods causes the decomposition of the SiHCl to yield silicon, as d escribed by the reverse
reaction shown in (7.10.5).4 2 2 3
4 3
2 2
'_' allowed only in math mode
3 3 3

7.10.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212899
Figure: Schematic representation of a Seimens deposition reactor.
The shift in the equilibrium from forming SiHCl from Si at low temperature, to forming Si from SiHCl at high temperature is as a
consequence of the temperature dependence, (7.10.6), of the equilibrium constant, (7.10.7) where ρ = parti al pressure, for (7.10.5).
Since the formation of SiHCl is exothermic, i.e., ΔH < 0, an increase in the temperature causes the partial pre ssure of SiHCl to
decrease. Thus, the Siemens process is typically run at ca. 1 100 °C, while the reverse fluidized bed process is carried out at 300 °C.
The slim rods act as a nucleation point for the depo sition of silicon, and the resulting polycrystalline rod consists of columnar
grains of silicon (polysilicon) grown perpendicular t o the rod axis. Growth occurs at less than 1 mm per hour, and after deposition
for 200 to 300 hours high-purity (EGS) polysilicon ro ds of 150 - 200 mm in diameter are produced. For subs equent float-zone
refining the polysilicon EGS rods are cut into long c ylindrical rods. Alternatively, the as-formed polysilico n rods are broken into
chunks for single crystal growth processes, for example Czo chralski melt growth.
In addition to the formation of silicon, the HCl copr oduct reacts with the SiHCl reactant to form silicon te trachloride (SiCl) and
hydrogen as major byproducts of the process, (7.10.8). This reaction represents a major disadvantage with th e Seimens process:
poor efficiency of silicon and chlorine consumption. Typically, only 30% of the silicon introduced into CVD reactor is converted
into high-purity polysilicon.
In order to improve efficiency the HCl, SiCl, H, and u nreacted SiHCl are separated and recovered for recycli ng. Figure
illustrates the entire chlorosilane process starting with MGS and including the recycling of the reaction b yproducts to achieve high
overall process efficiency. As a consequence, the produc tion cost of high-purity EGS depends on the commercia l usefulness of the
byproduct, SiCl. Additional disadvantages of the Seimen s process are derived from its relatively small batc h size, slow growth
rate, and high power consumption. These issues have lead to th e investigation of alternative cost efficient routes t o EGS.
Figure: Schematic representation of the reaction path ways for the formation of EGS using the chlorosilane p rocess.
Silane process
An alternative process for the production of EGS that has begun to receive commercial attention is the py rolysis of silane (SiH).
The advantages of producing EGS from SiH instead of SiHC l are potentially lower costs associated with lower rea ction
temperatures, and less harmful byproducts. Silane decompos es < 900 °C to give silicon and hydrogen, (7.10.9).3 3
3 3
3 4
4 2 3
4 3

7.10.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212899Silane may be prepared by a number of routes, each h aving advantages with respect to purity and productio n cost. The simplest
process involves the direct reaction of MGS powders with m agnesium at 500 °C in a hydrogen atmosphere, to form magnesium
silicide (Mg Si). The magnesium silicide is then reacted with ammonium chloride in liquid ammonia below 0 °C, (7.1 0.10).
This process is ideally suited to the removal of boron impurities (a p-type dopant in Si), because the dibo rane (B H) produced
during the reaction forms the Lewis acid-base complex, H B(NH), whose volatility is sufficiently lower than Si H, allowing for
the purification of the latter. It is possible to pre pare EGS with a boron content of ≤ 20 ppt using SiH synt hesized in this manner.
However, phosphorus (another dopant) in the form of PH m ay be present as a contaminant requiring subsequent purification of the
SiH.
Alternative routes to SiH involve the chemical reduct ion of SiCl by either lithium hydride, (7.10.11), lithi um aluminum hydride,
(7.10.12), or via hydrogenation in the presence of e lemental silicon, (7.10.13) - (7.10.16). The hydride red uction reactions may be
carried-out on relatively large scales (ca. 50 kg), but only batch processes. In contrast, Union Carbide h as adapted the
hydrogenation to a continuous process, involving disp roportionation reactions of chlorosilanes, (7.10.14) - (7.10.16), and the
fractional distillation of silane, Table.
Pyrolysis of silane on resistively heated polysilicon filaments at 700 - 800 °C yields polycrystalline EGS. As noted above, the EGS
formed has remarkably low boron impurities compared with material prepared from trichlorosilane. Moreover, the resulting EGS is
less contaminated with transition metals from the rea ctor container because SiH decomposition does not cau se as much of a
corrosion problem as is observed with halide precursor co mpounds.
Granular polysilicon deposition
Both the chlorosilane (Seimens) and silane processes r esult in the formation of rods of EGS. However, there has been increased
interest in the formation of granular polycrystalli ne EGS. This process was developed in 1980’s, and relies on the decomposition of
SiH in a fluidized-bed deposition reactor to produce free-flowing granular polysilicon.
Tiny silicon particles are fluidized in a SiH /H flow, and act as seed crystal onto which polysilicon depos its to form free-flowing
spherical particles. The size distribution of the par ticles thus formed is over the range from 0.1 to 1.5 mm in diameter with an
average particle size of 0.7 mm. The fluidized-bed s eed particles are originally made by grinding EGS in a ball (or hammer) mill
and leaching the product with acid, hydrogen peroxide, and water. This process is time-consuming and costly, an d tended to
introduce undesirable impurities from the metal grin ders. In a new method, large EGS particles are fired at e ach other by a highspeed stream of inert gas and the collision breaks them down into particles of suitable size for a fluidiz ed bed. This process has the
main advantage that it introduces no foreign materials a nd requires no leaching or other post purification.
The fluidized-bed reactors are much more efficient than traditional rod reactors as a consequence of the greater surface area
available during CVD growth of silicon. It has been sugg ested that fluidized-bed reactors require / to / the energy, and half the
capital cost of the traditional process. The quality o f fluidized-bed polysilicon has proven to be equiva lent to polysilicon produced
by the conventional methods. Moreover, granular EGS in a free-flowing form, and with high bulk density, enable s crystal growers
to obtain the high, reproducible production yields out of each crystal growth run. For example, in the Czo chralski crystal growth
process, crucibles can be quickly and easily filled t o uniform loading with granular EGS, which typically ex ceed those of randomly
stacked polysilicon chunks produced by the Siemens sila ne process.2
2 6
3 3 4
4 4
4 2

7.10.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212899Zone refining
The technique of zone refining is used to purify so lid materials and is commonly employed in metallurgi cal refining. In the case of
silicon may be used to obtain the desired ultimate p urity of EGS, which has already been purified by chemic al processes. Zone
refining was invented by Pfann, and makes use of the fa ct that the equilibrium solubility of any impurity (e.g., Al) is different in the
solid and liquid phases of a material (e.g., Si). For the dilute solutions, as is observed in EGS silicon, an eq uilibrium segregation
coefficient (k) is defined by k = C /C, where C and C are the equilibrium concentrations of the impurity in the solid and liquid
near the interface, respectively.
If k is less than 1 then the impurities are left in the melt as the molten zone is moved along the mate rial. In a practical sense a
molten zone is established in a solid rod. The zone is th en moved along the rod from left to right. If k < 1 then the frozen part left
on the trailing edge of the moving molten zone will be purer than the material that melts in on the rig ht-side leading edge of the
moving molten zone. Consequently the solid to the lef t of the molten zone is purer than the solid on the right. At the completion of
the first pass the impurities become concentrated to the right of the solid sample. Repetition of the proc ess allows for purification to
exceptionally high levels. Table lists the equilib rium segregation coefficients for common impurity a nd dopant elements in
silicon; it should be noted that they are all less than 1.
Table: Segregation coefficients for common impurity and dopant elements in silicon.
Element k Element k
aluminum 0.002 iron 8 x 10
boron 0.8 oxygen 0.25
carbon 0.07 phosphorus 0.35
copper 4 x 10 antimony 0.023
Bibliography
K. G. Baraclough, K. G., in The Chemistry of the Semiconductor Industry, Eds. S. J. Moss and A. Ledwith, Blackie and Sons,
Glasgow, Scotland (1987).
L. D. Crossman and J. A. Baker, Semiconductor Silicon 1977, Electrochem. Soc., Princeton, New Jersey (1977).
W. C. O’Mara, Ed. Handbook of Semiconductor Silicon Technology, Noyes Pub., New Jersey (1990).
W. G. Pfann, Zone Melting, John Wiley & Sons, New York, (1966).
F. Shimura, Semiconductor Silicon Crystal Technology, Academic Press (1989).
7.10: Semiconductor Grade Silicon is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.0 0 s l s l
0 0
-6
-6

7.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2129007.11: Oxidation of Silicon
This module was developed as part of the Rice Universit y course CHEM-496: Chemistry of Electronic Materials. This module
was prepared with the assistance of Andrea Keys.
Introduction
In the fabrication of integrated circuits (ICs), th e oxidation of silicon is essential, and the production of superior ICs requires an
understanding of the oxidation process and the ability to form oxides of high quality. Silicon dioxide has several uses:
1. Serves as a mask against implant or diffusion of dopant i nto silicon.
2. Provides surface passivation.
3. Isolates one device from another (dielectric isolat ion).
4. Acts as a component in MOS structures.
5. Provides electrical isolation of multi-level metalliza tion systems.
Methods for forming oxide layers on silicon have bee n developed, including thermal oxidation, wet anodiza tion, chemical vapor
deposition (CVD), and plasma anodization or oxidation. Generally, CVD is used when putting the oxide layer on t op of a metal
surface, and thermal oxidation is used when a low-char ge density level is required for the interface between the oxide and the
silicon surface.
Oxidation of silicon
Silicon's surface has a high affinity for oxygen and thus an oxide layer rapidly forms upon exposure to the atmosphere. The
chemical reactions which describe this formation are:
In the first reaction a dry process is utilized invol ving oxygen gas as the oxygen source and the second re action describes a wet
process which uses steam. The dry process provides a "go od" silicon dioxide but is slow and mostly used at the beginning of
processing. The wet procedure is problematic in that th e purity of the water used cannot be guaranteed to a suitable degree. This
problem can be easily solved using a pyrogenic techni que which combines hydrogen and oxygen gases to form wat er vapor of very
high purity. Maintaining reagents of high quality i s essential to the manufacturing of integrated circu its, and is a concern which
plagues each step of this process.
The formation of the oxide layer involves shared va lence electrons between silicon and oxygen, which allows the silicon surface to
rid itself of "dangling" bonds, such as lone pairs and vacant orbitals. These vacancies create mid-gap sta tes between the valence
and conduction bands, which prevents the desired band gap of the semiconductor. The Si-O bond strength is co valent (strong), and
so can be used to achieve the loss of mid-gap states and passivate the surface of the silicon.
Figure: Removal of dangling bonds by oxidation of sur face.
The oxidation of silicon occurs at the silicon-oxide i nterface and consists of four steps:
1. Diffusive transport of oxygen across the diffusion lay er in the vapor phase adjacent to the silicon oxide-vapor interface.
2. Incorporation of oxygen at the outer surface into th e silicon oxide film.
3. Diffusive transport across the silicon oxide film to its i nterface with the silicon lattice.
4. Reaction of oxygen with silicon at this inner interf ace.Note

7.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212900As the Si-SiO interface moves into the silicon its volu me expands, and based upon the densities and molecula r weights of Si and
SiO, 0.44 Å Si is used to obtain 1.0 Å SiO.
Pre-oxidation cleaning
The first step in oxidizing a surface of silicon is the removal of the native oxide which forms due to e xposure to open air. This may
seem redundant to remove an oxide only to put on an other, but this is necessary since uncertainty exists as to the purity of the oxide
which is present. The contamination of the native oxi de by both organic and inorganic materials (arising from previous processing
steps and handling) must be removed to prevent the d egradation of the essential electrical characteristic s of the device. A common
procedure uses a H O-H O -NH OH mixture which removes the orga nics present, as well as some group I and II metals. Rem oval
of heavy metals can be achieved using a H O-H O -HCl mix ture, which complexes with the ions which are formed. Aft er removal
of the native oxide, the desired oxide can be grown. T his growth is useful because it provides: chemical p rotection, conditions
suitable for lithography, and passivation. The prote ction prevents unwanted reactions from occurring and the passivation fills
vacancies of bonds on the surface not present within t he interior of the crystal. Thus the oxidation of t he surface of silicon fulfills
several functions in one step.
Thermal oxidation
The growth of oxides on a silicon surface can be a pa rticularly tedious process, since the growth must be uniform and pure. The
thickness wanted usually falls in the range 50 - 500 Å, which can take a long time and must be done on a lar ge scale. This is done
by stacking the silicon wafers in a horizontal quartz tube while the oxygen source flows over the wafers, whic h are situated
vertically in a slotted paddle (boat). This procedur e is performed at 1 atm pressure, and the temperatur e ranges from 700 to 1200
°C, being held to within ±1 °C to ensure uniformity. T he choice of oxidation technique depends on the thi ckness and oxide
properties required. Oxides that are relatively thin and those that require low charge at the interface a re typically grown in dry
oxygen. When thick oxides are required (> 0.5 mm) are desired, steam is the source of choice. Steam can be u sed at wide range of
pressures (1 atm to 25 atm), and the higher pressur es allow thick oxide growth to be achieved at moderat e temperatures in
reasonable amounts of time.
Figure: Horizontal diffusion tube showing the oxidati on of silicon wafers at 1 atm pressure.
The thickness of SiO layers on a Si substrate is readily determined by the color of the film. Table provides a guidline for
thermal grown oxides.2
2 2
2 2 2 4
2 2 2

7.11.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212900Table: Color chart for thermally grown SiO films obse rved under daylight fluorescent lighting.
Film thickness (μm) Color Film thickness (μm) Color
0.05 tan 0.63 violet-red
0.07 brown 0.68 "bluish"
0.10 dark violet to red-violet 0.72 blue-green to gree
0.12 royal blue 0.77 "yellowish"
0.15 light blue to metallic blue 0.80 orange
0.17 metallic to light yellow-green 0.82 salmon
0.20 light gold 0.85 light red-violet
0.22 gold 0.86 violet
0.25 orange to melon 0.87 blue violet
0.27 red-violet 0.89 blue
0.30 blue to violet blue 0.92 blue-green
0.31 blue 0.95 yellow-green
0.32 blue to blue-green 0.97 yellow
0.34 light green 0.99 orange
0.35 green to yellow-green 1.00 carnation pink
0.36 yellow-green 1.02 violet red
0.37 green-yellow 1.05 red-violet
0.39 yellow 1.06 violet
0.41 light orange 1.07 blue-violet
0.42 carnation pink 1.10 green
0.44 violet-red 1.11 yellow-green
0.46 red-violet 1.12 green
0.47 violet 1.18 violet
0.48 blue-violet 1.19 red-violet
0.49 blue 1.21 violet-red
0.50 blue green 1.24 carnation pink to salmon
0.52 green 1.25 orange
0.54 yellow-green 1.28 "yellowish"
0.56 green-yellow 1.32 sky blue to green-blue
0.57 "yellowish" 1.40 orange
0.58 light orange to pink 1.46 blue-violet
0.60 carnation pink 1.50 blue2

7.11.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212900High pressure oxidation
High pressure oxidation is another method of oxidizi ng the silicon surface which controls the rate of oxi dation. This is possible
because the rate is proportional to the concentrati on f the oxide, which in turn is proportional to the partial pressure of the oxidizing
species, according to Henry's law, (7.11.3), where C is the equilibrium concentration of the oxide, H is Henr y's law constant, and
p is the partial pressure of the oxidizing species.
This approach is fast, with a rate of oxidation ranging from 100 to 1000 mm/h, and also occurs at a relativel y low temperature. It is
a useful process, preventing dopants from being displace d and also forms a low number of defects, which is most useful at the end
of processing.
Plasma oxidation
Plasma oxidation and anodization of silicon is readil y accomplished by the use of activated oxygen as th e oxidizing species. The
highly reactive oxygen is formed within an electrical discharge or plasma. The oxidation is carried out in a low pressure (0.05 - 0.5
Torr) chamber, and the the plasma is produced either by a DC electron source or a high-frequency dischar ge. In simple plasma
oxidation the sample (i.e., the silicon wafer) is hel d at ground potential. In contrast, aniodization syste ms usually have a DC bias
between the sample and an electrode with the sample bi ased positively with respect to the cathode. Platinum el ectrodes are
commonly used as the cathodes.
There have been at least 34 different reactions repo rted to occur in an oxygen plasma, however, the vast ma jority of these are
inconsequential with respect to the formation of activ e species. Furthermore, many of the potentially active sp ecies are sufficiently
short lived that it is unlikely that they make a si gnificant contribution. The primary active species within the oxygen plasma are
undoubtedly O and O. Both being produced in near eq ual quantities, although only the former is relevant to plasma aniodization.
While these species may be active with respect to sur face oxidation, it is more likely that an electron transfer occurs from the
semiconductor surface yields activated oxygen species, which are the actual reactants in the oxidation of the silicon.
The significant advatage of plasma processes is that while the electron temperature of the ionized oxyge n gas is in excess of 10,000
K, the thermal temperatures required are significantl y lower than required for the high pressure method, i.e., < 600 °C. The
advantages of the lower reaction temperatures include: the minimization of dopant diffusion and the impe diment of the generation
of defects. Despite these advantages there are two prim ary disadvantages of any plasma based process. First, t he high electric fields
present during the processes cause damage to the re sultant oxide, in particular, a high density of inte rface traps often result.
However, post annealing may improve film quality. Secon d, the growth rates of plasma oxidation are low, typic ally 1000 Å/h. This
growth rate is increased by about a factor of 10 for plasma aniodization, and further improvements are o bserved if 1 - 3% chlorine
is added to the oxygen source.
Masking
A selective mask against the diffusion of dopant atoms at high temperatures can be found in a silicon dioxi de layer, which can
prove to be very useful in integrated circuit proce ssing. A predeposition of dopant by ion implantation, c hemical diffusion, or spinon techniques typically results in a dopant source a t or near the surface of the oxide. During the initia l high-temperature step,
diffusion in the oxide must be slow enough with respec t to diffusion in the silicon that the dopants do no t diffuse through the oxide
in the masked region and reach the silicon surface. The required thickness may be determined by experime ntally measuring, at a
particular temperature and time, the oxide thickness necessary to prevent the inversion of a lightly do ped silicon substrate of
opposite conductivity. To this is then added a safety factor, with typical total values ranging from 0.5 to 0.7 mm. The impurity
masking properties result when the oxide is partially converted into a silica impurity oxide "glass" phas e, and prevents the
impurities from reaching the SiO -Si interface.
Bibliography
M. M. Atalla, in Properties of Elemental and Compound Semiconductors, Ed. H. Gatos, Interscience: New York (1960).
S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, Silicon and Gallium Arsenide, Wiley, Chichester, 2nd Ed. (1994).
S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York (1981).
D. L. Lile, Solid State Electron., 1978, 21, 1199.O
- 2+

7.11.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212900W. E. Spicer, P. W. Chye, P. R. Skeath, and C. Y. Su, I. Lindau, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1979, 16, 1422.
V. Q. Ho and T. Sugano, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1980, ED-27, 1436.
J. R. Hollanhan and A. T. Bells, Techniques and Applications of Plasma Chemistry, Wiley, New York (1974).
R. P. H. Chang and A. K. Sinha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 56.
7.11: Oxidation of Silicon is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2129017.12: Applications for Silica Thin Films
Introduction
While the physical properties of silica make it suita ble for use in protective and optical coating appli cations, the biggest application
of insulating SiO thin films is undoubtedly in semic onductor devices, in which the insulator performs a number of specific tasks,
including: surface passivation, field effect transistor (FET) gate layer, isolation layers, planarization and pack aging.
The term insulator generally refers to a material tha t exhibits low thermal or electrical conductivity; e lectrically insulating materials
are also called dielectrics. It is in regard to the h igh resistance to the flow of an electric current that SiO thin films are of the
greatest commercial importance. The dielectric consta nt (ε) is a measure of a dielectric materials abili ty to store charge, and is
characterized by the electrostatic energy stored per u nit volume across a unit potential gradient. The magn itude of ε is an indication
of the degree of polarization or charge displacemen t within a material. The dielectric constant for air is 1, and for ionic solids is
generally in the range of 5 - 10. Dielectric constan ts are defined as the ratio of the material’s capac itance to that of air, i.e., (7.12.1).
The dielectric constant for silicon dioxide ranges from 3.9 to 4.9, for thermally and plasma CVD grown films, respecti vely.
An insulating layer is a film or deposited layer of dielectric material separating or covering conducti ve layers. Ideally, in these
application an insulating material should have a sur face resistivity of greater than 10 Ω/cm or a volume resistivity of greater than
10 Ω.cm. However, for some applications, lower values are acceptable; an electrical insulator is generally acce pted to have a
resistivity greater than 10 Ω.cm. CVD SiO thin films have a re sistivity of 10 - 10 Ω.cm, depending on the film growth m ethod.
As a consequence of its dielectric properties SiO, and related silicas, are used for isolating conducting la yers, to facilitate the
diffusion of dopants from doped oxides, as diffusion a nd ion implantation masks, capping doped films to p revent loss of dopant, for
gettering impurities, for protection against moistu re and oxidation, and for electronic passivation. Of t he many methods used for
the deposition of thin films, chemical vapor deposit ion (CVD) is most often used for semiconductor process ing. In order to
appreciate the unique problems associated with the CVD of insulating SiO thin films it is worth first reviewing some of their
applications. Summarized below are three areas of grea test importance to the fabrication of contemporary semiconductor devices:
isolation and gate insulation, passivation, and planarizat ion.
Device isolation and gate insulation
A microcircuit may be described as a collection of d evices each consisting of "an assembly of active and passive components,
interconnected within a monolithic block of semicond ucting material". Each device is required to be isola ted from adjacent devices
in order to allow for maximum efficiency of the over all circuit. Furthermore within a device, contacts must also be electrically
isolated. While there are a number of methods for isol ating individual devices within a circuit (reverse-bia sed junctions, mesa
isolation, use of semi-insulating substrates, and oxide i solation), the isolation of the active components in a single device is almost
exclusively accomplished by the deposition of an insula tor.
In Figure is shown a schematic representation of a silicon MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistor). The
MOSFET is the basic component of silicon-CMOS (complimenta ry metal-oxide-semiconductor) circuits which, in turn, form the
basis for logic circuits, such as those used in the CPU (central processing unit) of a modern personal com puter. It can be seen that
the MOSFET is isolated from adjacent devices by a reverse -biased junction (p -channel stop) and a thick oxide layer. The gate,
source and drain contact are electrically isolated from each other by a thin insulating oxide. A simila r scheme is used for the
isolation of the collector from both the base and the em itter in bipolar transistor devices.2
13 2
526 16

7.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212901
Figure: Schematic diagrams of a Si-MOSFET (metal-oxide- semiconductor field effect transistor).
As a transistor, a MOSFET has many advantages over altern ate designs. The key advantage is low power dissipatio n resulting from
the high impedance of the device. This is a result of the thin insulation layer between the channel (regio n between source and drain)
and the gate contact, see Figure. The presence of an insulating gate is characteristic of a general cla ss of devices called
MISFETs (metal-insulator-semiconductor field effect tra nsistor). MOSFETs are a subset of MISFETs where the insulat or is
specifically an oxide, e.g., in the case of a silicon MI SFET device the insulator is SiO, hence MOSFET. It is the fa brication of
MOSFET circuits that has allowed silicon technology to dom inate digital electronics (logic circuits). However, in creases in
computing power and speed require a constant reduction in device size and increased complexity in device archit ecture.
Passivation
Passivation is often defined as a process whereby a fil m is grown on the surface of a semiconductor to eith er (a) chemically protect
it from the environment, or (b) provide electronic st abilization of the surface.
From the earliest days of solid state electronics it ha s been recognized that the presence or absence of su rface states plays a decisive
role in the usefulness of any semiconducting materia l. On the surface of any solid state material there a re sites in which the
coordination environment of the atoms is incomplete. These sites, commonly termed "dangling bonds", are the cause of the
electronically active states which allow for the reco mbination of holes and electrons. This recombination occurs at energies below
the bulk value, and interferes with the inherent prop erties of the semiconductor. In order to optimize the properties of a
semiconductor device it is desirable to covalently satisfy all these surface bonds, thereby shifting the surface states out of the band
gap and into the valence or conduction bands. Electr onic passivation may therefore be described as a pro cess which reduces the
density of available electronic states present at the surface of a semiconductor, thereby limiting hole a nd electron recombination
possibilities. In the case of silicon both the native oxi de and other oxides admirably fulfill these requirements.
Chemical passivation requires a material that inhibi ts the diffusion of oxygen, water, or other species to the surface of the
underlying semiconductor. In addition, the material is ideally hard and resistant to chemical attack. A perfect passivation material
would satisfy both electronic and chemical passivation requirements.
Planarization
For the vast majority of electronic devices, the start ing point is a substrate consisting of a flat singl e crystal wafer of
semiconducting material. During processing, which inclu des the growth of both insulating and conducting film s, the surface
becomes increasingly non-planar. For example, a gate oxide in a typical MOSFET (see Figure) may be typicall y 100 - 250 Å
thick, while the isolation or field oxide may be 10,00 0 Å. In order for the successful subsequent deposition o f conducting layers
(metallization) to occur without breaking metal line s (often due to the difficulty in maintaining step c overage), the surface must be
flat and smooth. This process is called planarization, and can be carried out by a technique known as sacri ficial etchback. An abrupt
step (Figure a) is coated with a conformal layer of a low melting dielectric, e.g., borophosphorosilicate gl ass, BPSG (Figure
b), and subsequently a sacrificial organic resin (Fig ure c). The sample is then plasma etched such that the resin and
dielectric are removed at the same rate. Since the pl asma etch follows the contour of the organic resin, a smooth surface is left
behind (Figure d). The planarization process thus re duces step height differentials significantly. In addi tion regions or valleys
between individual metallization elements (vias) can be completely filled allowing for a route to produc ing uniformly flat surfaces,
e.g., the BPSG film shown in Figure.2

7.12.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212901
Figure: Schematic representation of the planarizatio n process. A metallization feature (a) is CVD covered with silicate glass
(b), and subsequently coated with an organic resin (c). After etching the resist a smooth silicate surface is p roduced (d).
The processes of planarization is vital for the deve lopment of multilevel structures in VLSI circuits. To mini mize interconnection
resistance and conserve chip area, multilevel metall ization schemes are being developed in which the inter connects run in 3dimensions.
Bibliography
J. L. V ossen and W. Kern, Phys. Today, 1980, 33, 26.
S. K. Ghandhi, VLSI Fabrication Principles, Silicon and Gallium Arsenide, Wiley, Chichester, 2nd Ed. (1994).
S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York (1981).
W. E. Beadle, J. C. C. Tsai, R. D. Plummer, Quick Reference Manual for Silicon Integrated Cuircuit Technology, Wiley,
Chichester (1985).
A. C. Adams and C. D. Capio, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 2630.
7.12: Applications for Silica Thin Films is shared under a CC BY 1.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Group 15 - The Pnictogens
8.1: The Group 15 Elements- The Pnictogens
8.2: Reaction Chemistry of Nitrogen
8.3: Hydrides
8.4: Oxides and Oxoacids
8.5: Halides of Phosphorous
This page titled 8: Group 15 - The Pnictogens is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126588.1: The Group 15 Elements- The Pnictogens
The elements
The Group 15 elements have a particular name pnictogens. Despite the modern IUPAC notation, the Group 15 elemen ts are still
referred to as Group V elements in particular by the semiconductor industry. Table lists the derivation o f the names of the
Group 15 elements.
Table: Derivation of the names of each of the Group 15 (V) elements.
Element Symbol Name
Nitrogen NLatin nitrogenium, where nitrum (derived
from Greek nitron) means saltpetre
Phosphorus PFrom the Greek phosphoros meaning
bringer of light
Arsenic AsDerived from Syriac zarniqa and Persian
zarnikh, meaning yellow orpiment
Antimony SbGreek anti and monos meaning not alone.
The symbol Sb from Latin stibium
Bismuth BiNew Latin bisemutum from German
Wismuth, meaning white mass
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the correct spelling of the element is phosphorus. The word phos phorous is the
adjectival form of the P valence. In the same way tha t sulfur forms sulfurous and sulfuric compounds, phosph orus forms
phosphorous compounds (e.g., phosphorous acid) and P v alency phosphoric compounds (e.g., phosphoric acids an d
phosphates).
Discovery
Nitrogen
Nitrogen was discovered by Rutherford (Figure) in 177 2. He called it noxious air or fixed air because there it had been known
since the late 18 century that there was a fraction o f air that did not support combustion. Nitrogen was al so studied by Scheele
(Figure), Cavendish (Figure), and Priestley (Figure), who referred to it as burnt air or phlogisticated air.
Figure: Scottish chemist and physician Daniel Rutherfor d (1749 - 1819).Note
3+
5+
th

8.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212658
Figure: Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele (1742 – 1 786). Isaac Asimov called him "hard-luck Scheele" becau se he made
a number of chemical discoveries before others who are generally given the credit.
Figure: British scientist Henry Cavendish FRS (1731 - 181 0).
Figure: Portrait (by Ellen Sharples) of British clerg yman natural philosopher, educator, and political th eorist Joseph Priestley
(1733 - 1804).
Phosphorus
German alchemist Hennig Brand (Figure) was experimentin g with urine (which contains dissolved phosphates) in 1669.
While attempting to create the fabled philosopher's stone (the legendary alchemical substance capable of turning base metals, such
as lead, into gold) by the distillation of salts from u rine, he produced a white material that glowed in the dark and burned with a
brilliant light. He gave the substance the name phosphorus mirabilis (miraculous bearer of light). His process involved letting the
urine stand for days then boiling it down to a paste whi ch led to a white waxy substance, white phosphorus.

8.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212658
Figure: The discovery of phosphorus by German merchant and alchemist Hennig Brand (1630 - 1710) as depicted by Joseph
Wright (with significant artistic license with regard to the brightness of the chemiluminescence).
Brand sold the recipe for 200 thaler (a silver coin from whose name the dollar is derived) to D Krafft who t oured much of Europe
showing it. During his journeys he met Robert Boyle (Fig ure) who without learning the details of the synthesis recreated and
improved it by using sand in the reduction of the phospha te, (8.1.1).
Figure: British natural philosopher, chemist, physicist, and inventor Robert Boyle (1627 - 1691).
Arsenic
Arsenic sulfides and oxides were known since ancient time s. Zosimos (ca. 300 AD) describes roasting sandarach (realgar, αAs S) to obtain cloud of arsenious oxide (As O) that he redu ced to metallic arsenic (Figure).
Figure: The distillation apparatus of Zosimos.
Antimony
Antimony(III) sulfide, Sb S was known as early as 3000 BC. Pastes of Sb S powder in fat were used as eye cosmetics in the
Middle East. An artifact made of antimony dating to ab out 3000 BC was found at Tello (part of present-day Iraq), and copper4 4 2 3
2 3 2 3

8.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212658objects plated with antimony from 2500 - 2200 BC hav e been found in Egypt. The first European descriptio n of a procedure for
isolating antimony is in the book De la pirotechnia by Vannoccio Biringuccio (1480 - 1539).
Bismuth
Since bismuth was known in ancient times, no one person is credited with its discovery. However, the French chemi st Claude
François Geoffroy (1729 - 1753) demonstrated in 1753 that t his metal is distinct from lead and tin.
Abundance
The abundance of the Group 15 elements is given in Table.
Table: Abundance of the Group 15 elements.
Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
N 25 (Earth’s crust), 5 (soil), 0.5 (sea water), 78 x 10 (atmosphere)
(atmosphere)
As1.5 (Earth’s crust), 10 (soil), 16 x 10 (sea water), tr ace
(atmosphere)
Sb 0.2 (Earth’s crust), 1 (soil), 0.3 x 10 (sea water)
Bi 48 x 10 (Earth’s crust), 0.25 (soil), 400 x 10 (sea wat er)
Isotopes
The naturally abundant isotopes of the Group 15 elements a re listed in Table.
Table: Abundance of the non-synthetic isotopes of the Group 15 elements.
Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Nitrogen-14 99.634
Nitrogen-15 0.0366
Phosphorus-31 100
Arsenic-75 100
Antimony-121 57.36
Antimony-123 42.64
Bismuth-209 100%
Two radioactive isotopes of phosphorus (P and P) have half-lives that make them useful for scientific exp eriments (14.262 and
25.34 days, respectively). P is a β-emitter (1.71 MeV) and is used to produce radiolabeled DNA and RNA probes. Due to the high
energy of the β particles which can penetrate skin a nd corneas, and because any P ingested, inhaled, or ab sorbed is incorporated
into bone and nucleic acids extreme care needs to be taken in handling. The lower energy β particles emi tted from P (0.25 MeV)
make it useful for applications such as DNA sequencing.
While bismuth is traditionally regarded as the eleme nt with the heaviest stable isotope, Bi, it had long be en suspected to be
unstable on theoretical grounds. In 2003 researcher s at the Institut d'Astrophysique Spatiale in Orsay, Fra nce, measured the alpha
emission half-life of Bi to be 1.9 × 10 years, over a billion times longer than the current estimated age of the univers e!
Industrial production of the elements
Nitrogen is the largest constituent of the Earth's at mosphere (78.082% by volume, 75.3% by weight). It is cr eated by fusion
processes in stars, and is estimated to be the 7 most abundant element by mass in the universe. Industrial gas produced is by the4
-3
-3
-3
-3 -6
32 33
209 19
th

8.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212658fractional distillation of liquid air, or by mechan ical means using gaseous air (i.e., pressurized reverse osmosis membrane or
pressure swing adsorption). Commercial nitrogen is oft en a byproduct of air processing for industrial conc entration of oxygen for
steelmaking, etc.
White phosphorus was originally made commercially for the match industry in the 19 century, by distilling off phosphorus vapor
from precipitated phosphates, mixed with ground coal or charcoal, (8.1.2). The precipitated phosphates were made from ground-up
bones that had been de-greased and treated with stro ng acids. This process is, however, obsolete due to the submerged-arc furnace
for phosphorus production was introduced to reduce ph osphate rock. Calcium phosphate (phosphate rock) is h eated to 1200 - 1500
°C with SiO and coke (impure carbon) to produce vaporiz ed tetraphosphorus, P.
Physical properties
The physical properties of the Group 15 elements (Tabl e) encompasses a gas (N), a non-metallic solid (P), metalloids (As
and Sb), and a metal (Bi).
Table: Selected physical properties of the Group 15 e lements.
Element Mp (°C) Bp (°C) Density (g/cm)
N -210.00 -195.79 1.251 g/L (0 °C @ 101.325 kPa)
red), 620 (sub, violet)1.823 (white), 2.2 - 2.34 (red),
2.36 (violet), 2.69 (black)
As 817 615 (sub.) 5.727
Sb 630.63 1587 6.697 (solid), 6.53 (liquid)
Bi 271.5 1564 9.78 (solid), 10.05 (liquid)
Vapor phase
Nitrogen forms a dimer in the vapor phase with a triple bond (Figure). In the vapor phase above 800 °C tetra phosphorus (P)
is partially dissociated to P.
Figure: Molecular orbital diagram for the formation of N.
Solid state
Phosphorus forms a number of allotropes with very diffe rent properties (Figure). Red phosphorus is an interm ediate phase
between the white and violet forms. Scarlet phosphorus is obtained by allowing a solution of white phosphorus in carbon disulfide
to evaporate in sunlight. Black phosphorus is formed by heating white phosphorus under high pressures (ca. 12,000 atmospheres).th
2 4
2 4

8.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212658
Figure: Images of (left to right) white, red, violet and black allotropes of phosphorus.
White phosphorus has two forms, low-temperature β form and high-temperature α form; both of which contain the P4 tetrahedron
(Figure). White phosphorus is the least stable, the most reactive, most volatile, less dense, and most toxic of the a llotropes.
Figure: The structure of the P molecule in white pho sphorus.
The structural relationship between white and red phos phorus involves breaking one of the P-P bonds in the P unit and forming a
bond with a neighboring tetrahedron to give a chain structure (Figure). Red phosphorus is formed by heating white
phosphorus to 250 °C or by exposing white phosphorus t o sunlight. Actually red phosphorus is not a single al lotrope, but rather an
intermediate phase between the white and violet phosphor us, and most of its properties have a range of values (Tabl e).
Figure: Crystal unit cell of red phosphorus.
Violet phosphorus (Figure) is the thermodynamic stab le form of phosphorus that is produced by heating red phosphorus
above 550 °C. Due to the synthesis being developed by Johann Hittorf (Figure) it is sometimes known as Hittorf's
phosphorus.
Figure: Structure of violet (Hittorf’s) phosphorus.
Figure: German physicist Johann Wilhelm Hittorf (1824 - 1914).4

8.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212658Black phosphorus is the least reactive allotrope and the thermodynamic stable form below 550 °C. It is als o known as β-metallic
phosphorus and has a structure somewhat resembling that of g raphite (Figure).
Figure: Crystal structure of black phosphorus.
In a similar manner to phosphorus, arsenic has severa l allotropes some of which a structurally related to th ose of phosphorus. Grey
arsenic has a structure similar to black phosphorus (Fi gure). Yellow arsenic (As) is soft and waxy with a structu re similar to
too P (Figure). Finally, black arsenic is similar in structure to red phosphorus (Figure). Antimony and b ismuth are
both traditional metals and have trigonal hexagonal structur es (a = 4.299, c = 11.25 Å, and a = 4.537, c = 11.838 Å, respectively).
Bibliography
V. Biringuccio, The Pirotechnia of Vannoccio Biringuccio: The Classic Sixte enth-Century Treatise on Metals and Metallurgy,
Dover Publications (1990).
This page titled 8.1: The Group 15 Elements- The Pnictogens is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.4

8.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126598.2: Reaction Chemistry of Nitrogen
Despite nitrogen being the inert component of the Ea rth’s atmosphere, dinitrogen undergoes a range of rea ctions, although it only
reacts with a few reagents under standard temperature and pressure. Nitrogen reacts with oxygen in an electr ic arc, (8.2.1), both in
the laboratory and within lightening strikes.
The synthesis of ammonia is accomplished by the Harber process, using an iron oxide (Fe O) catalyst, (8.2.2), at about 500 °C and
200 atmospheres pressure.
Nitrogen reacts with lithium metal at room temperature to form the nitride, (8.2.3). Magnesium also burns in n itrogen, forming
magnesium nitride, (8.2.4).
Nitrogen forms complexes with transition metals yielding nitrogeno complexes, (8.2.5). Under some conditions the se complexes
react to give ammonia, (8.2.6), and as such may give a hint to the action of nitrogenase in which molybdenum in the a ctive site.
This page titled 8.2: Reaction Chemistry of Nitrogen is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew
R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.3 4

8.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126608.3: Hydrides
Trihydrides of the Group 15 Elements
All five of the Group 15 elements form hydrides of the formula EH. Table lists the IUPAC names along with t hose in more
common usage.
Table: Traditional and IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) names for the Group 15 hydrides.
Compound Traditional name IUPAC name
NH Ammonia Azane
PH Phosphine Phosphane
AsH Arsine Arsane
SbH Stibine Stibane
BiH Bismuthine Bismuthane
The boiling point and melting point increase increa ses going down the Group (Table) with increased molec ular mass, with the
exception of NH whose anomalously high melting and bo iling points (Figure) are a consequence of strong N- H H hydrogen
bonding. A similar (and stronger) effect is observed for the Group 16 hydrides (H E).
Table: Selected physical properties of Group 15 hydri des.
Compound Mp (°C) Bp (°C) ΔH (kJ/mol)E-H bond energy
(kJ/mol)H-E-H bond angle
NH -77.7 -33.35 -46.2 391 107
PH -133 -87.7 9.3 322 93.5
AsH -116.3 -55 172.2 247 92
SbH -88 -17.1 142.8 255 91.5
Figure: Plot of melting and boiling points of EH (E = N, P, As, and Sb) as a function of molecular mass.3
3...
f

8.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660The E-H bond strengths decrease down the group and thi s correlates with the overall stability of each compo und (Table). The
H-E-H bond angles (Table) also decrease down the Group. The H-E-H bond angle is expected to be a tetrahedral ideal of
109.5°, but since lone pairs repel more than bonding pairs, the actual angle would be expected to be slig htly smaller. Two possible
explanations are possible for the difference between NH and the other hydrides.
1. The N-H bond is short (1.015 Å) compared to the heavier anal ogs, and nitrogen is more electronegative than hydrogen, so the
bonding pair will reside closer to the central atom and th e bonding pairs will repel each other opening the H-N-H ang le more
than observed for PH, etc.
2. The accessibility of the 2 s and 2 p orbitals on nitrogen allows for hybridization and the orbitals associated with N-H bonding in
NH are therefore close to sp in character, resulting in a clo se to tetrahedral geometry. In contrast, hybridization of t he ns and
np orbitals for P, As, etc., is less accessible, and as a conseq uence the orbitals associated with P-H bonding in PH are close r to
p in character resulting in almost 90° H-P-H angle. The lowe r down the Group the central atom the less hybridization that
occurs and the closer to pure p-character the orbitals on E associated with the E-H bond.
Ammonia
Ammonia (NH) is a colorless, pungent gas (bp = -33.5 °C) whose odor can be detected at concentrations as low 2 0 – 50 ppm. Its
high boiling point relative to its heavier congener s is indicative of the formation of strong hydrogen b onding. The strong hydrogen
bonding also results in a high heat of vaporization (23.35 kJ/mol) and thus ammonia can be conveniently used as a liquid at room
temperature despite its low boiling point.
Ammonia solution causes burns and irritation to the eye s and skin. The vapor causes severe irritation to the respiratory system.
If swallowed the solution causes severe internal damage.
Synthesis
Ammonia is manufactured on the industrial scale by t he Haber process using the direct reaction of nitrogen with hydrogen at high
pressure (10 – 10 atm) and high temperature (400 – 550 °C) over a catalyst (e.g., α-iron), (8.3.1).
On the smaller scale ammonia is prepared by the reac tion of an ammonium salt with a base, (8.3.2), or hyd rolysis of a nitride,
(8.3.3). The latter is a convenient route to ND by the us e of D O.
Structure
The nitrogen in ammonia adopts sp hybridization, and ammonia has an umbrella structure (Figure) due to t he
stereochemically active lone pair.
Figure: The structure of ammonia.
The barrier to inversion of the umbrella is very low (E = 24 kJ/mol) and the inversion occurs 100’s of time s a second. As a
consequence it is not possible to isolate chiral amines i n the same manner that is possible for phosphines.3
WARNING
2 3
3 2
a

8.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660
In a similar manner to water, (8.3.4), ammonia is a se lf-ionizing, (8.3.5); however, the equilibrium constan t (K = 10) is much
lower than water (K = 10). The lower dielectric constan t of ammonia (16.5 @ 20 °C) as compared to water (80. 4 @ 20 °C)
means that ammonia is not as good as water as a solvent for ion ic compounds, but is better for covalent organic compound s.
Reactions
The similarity of ammonia and water means that the two compounds are miscible. In fact, ammonia forms a seri es of solid
hydrates, analogous to ice in which hydrogen bonding defines the structures (Figure). Several hydrates of amm onia are
known, including: NH.2H O (ammonia dihydrate, ADH), NH.H O (a mmonia monohydrate, AMH), and 2NH.2H O (ammonia
hemihydrate, AHH).
Figure: The crystal structure of ammonia monohydrate (ANH-II) with hydrogen atoms omitted. Adapted from A. D. Fortes, E.
Suard, M. -H. Lemée-Cailleau, C. J. Pickard, and R. J. Needs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13508. Copyright: American
Chemical Society (2009).
It should be noted that these hydrates do not contain discrete NH or OH ions, indicating that ammonium hydroxide does not exist
as a discrete species despite the common useage of the na me. In aqueous solution, ammonia is a weak base (pK = 4.75), (8.3.6).
Ammonia solutions commonly used in the laboratory is a 35% solution in water. In warm weather the solution dev elops
pressure and the cap must be released with care. The 25% so lution sold commercially (for home use) is free from this p roblem.
Ammonia is a Lewis base and readily forms Lewis acid-ba se complexes with both transition metals, (8.3.7), and m ain group metals
(Figure).-33
-14
3 2 3 2 3 2
4+ b
Note

8.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660
Figure: The molecular structure of AlMe (BHT)NH. Hydr ogen atoms, except those attached to nitrogen, are om itted for
clarity. Adapted from M. D. Healy, J. T. Leman, and A. R. Barron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2776. Copyright: American
Chemical Society.
The formation of stable ammonia complexes is the bas is of a simple but effective method of detection: Ne ssler’s reagent, (8.3.8).
Using a 0.09 mol/L solution of potassium tetraiodomercu rate(II), K [HgI], in 2.5 mol/L potassium hydroxide. A ye llow coloration
indicates the presence of ammonia: at higher concent rations, a brown precipitate may form. The sensitivit y as a spot test is about
0.3 μg NH in 2 μL.
Ammonia forms a blue solution with Group 1 metals. As an e xample, the dissolution of sodium in liquid ammonia results in the
formation of solvated Na cations and electrons, (8.3. 9) where solv = NH. The solvated electrons are stable in liquid ammonia and
form a complex: [e (NH)].
It is this solvated electron that gives the strong redu cing properties of the solution as well as the charact eristic signal in the ESR
spectrum associated with a single unpaired electron. The blue color of the solution is often ascribed to these solvated electrons;
however, their absorption is in the far infra-red regi on of the spectrum. A second species, Na (solv), is act ually responsible for the
blue color of the solution.
The reaction of ammonia with oxygen is highly favore d, (8.3.11), and the flammability limit of ammonia i s 16 – 25 vol%. If the
reaction is carried out in the presence of a cataly st (Pt or Pd) the reaction can be limited to the form ation of nitric oxide (NO),
(8.3.12).
Ammonium salts
The ammonium cation (NH) behaves in a similar manner to the Group 1 metal ions. The solubility and struct ure of ammonium
salts particularly resembles those of potassium and r ubidium because of their relative size (Table). One difference is that
ammonium salts often decompose upon heating, (8.3.13).
Table: Ionic radius of the ammonium ion compared to those of potassium and rubidium.2 3
2 4
+3
-3 6
4+

8.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660Cation Ionic radius (Å)
K 1.33
NH 1.43
Rb 1.47
The decomposition of ammonium salts of oxidizing aci ds can often be violent to highly explosive, and they should be treated with
care. For example, while ammonium dichromate, (NH) Cr O, de composes to give a volcano (Figure), ammonium
permanganate, NH [MnO], is friction sensitive and explode s at 60 °C. Ammonium nitrate, NH [NO], can cause fire if contacted
with a combustible material and is a common ingredien t in explosives since it acts as the oxygen source due to its positive oxygen
balance, i.e., the compound liberates oxygen surplus to i ts own needs upon decomposition, (8.3.14).
Figure: A laboratory demonstration of an ammonium di chromate volcano.
Bibliography
A. R. Barron, The Detonator, 2009, 36, 60.
A. D. Fortes, E. Suard, M. -H. Lemée-Cailleau, C. J. Pickard, and R. J. Needs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13508.
M. D. Healy, J. T. Leman, and A. R. Barron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2776.
A. I. V ogel and G. Svehla, Textbook of Macro and Semimicro Qualitative Inorganic Ana lysis, Longman, London (1979).
Liquid Ammonia as a Solvent
Ammonia has a reasonable liquid range (-77 to –33 °C), and as such it can be readily liquefied with dry ice (solid CO, T = -78.5
°C), and handled in a thermos flask. Ammonia’s high boiling point relative to its heavier congeners is ind icative of the formation of
strong hydrogen bonding, which also results in a hig h heat of vaporization (23.35 kJ/mol). As a consequenc e ammonia can be
conveniently used as a liquid at room temperature despi te its low boiling point.
Liquid ammonia is a good solvent for organic molecu les (e.g., esters, amines, benzene, and alcohols). It is a better solvent for
organic compounds than water, but a worse solvent for ino rganic compounds. The solubility of inorganic salts i s highly dependant
on the identity of the counter ion (Table).
Table: General solubility of inorganic salts in liqui d ammonia as a function of the counter ion.
Soluble in liquid NH Generally insoluble in liquid NH
SCN, I, NH, NO, NO, ClO F, Cl, Br, CO, SO, O, OH, S
The difference in solubility of inorganic salts in a mmonia as compared to water, as well as the lower temp erature of liquid
ammonia, can be used to good advantage in the isolat ion of unstable compounds. For example, the attempted s ynthesis of
ammonium nitrate by the reaction of sodium nitrate and ammonium chloride in water results in the formati on of nitrogen and water
due to the decomposition of the nitrate, (8.3.15). By contrast, if the reaction is carried out in liquid ammonia, the sodium chloride
side product is insoluble and the ammonium nitrate may be isolated as a white solid after filtration and evaporation below its
decomposition temperature of 0 °C, (8.3.16).+
4+
4 2 2 7
4 4 4 3
2 sub
3 3
- -4+3-2-4- - - -32-42- 2- - 2-

8.3.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660Ammonation
Ammonation is defined as a reaction in which ammonia is added t o other molecules or ions by covalent bond formation utilizing
the unshared pair of electrons on the nitrogen atom, or through ion-dipole electrostatic interactions. In simple terms the resulting
ammine complex is formed when the ammonia is acting as a L ewis base to a Lewis acid, (8.3.17) and (8.3.18), or as a l igand to a
cation, e.g., [Pt(NH)], [Ni(NH)], [Cr(NH)], and [Co(NH)].
Ammonolysis
Ammonolysis with ammonia is an analogous reaction to hyd rolysis with water, i.e., a dissociation reaction of the ammonia
molecule producing H and an NH species. Ammonolysis r eactions occur with inorganic halides, (8.3.18) and (8.3.19), and
organometallic compounds, (8.3.20). In both case the NH moi ety forms a substituent or ligand.
The reaction of esters, (8.3.21), and aryl halides, (8.3.22), are also examples of ammonolysis reactions.
Homoleptic amides
A homoleptic compound is a compound with all the ligands being identical, e.g., M(NH). A general route to homoleptic amide
compounds is accomplished by the reaction of a salt of the desired metal that is soluble in liquid ammon ia (Table) with a
soluble Group 1 amide. The solubility of the Group 1 amides is given in Table. Since all amides are insolu ble (except those of
the Group 1 metals) are insoluble in liquid ammonia, the re sulting amide may be readily isolated, e.g., (8.3.23) and (8.3.24).
Table: Solubility of Group amides in liquid ammonia.
Amide Solubility in liquid ammonia
LiNH Sparingly soluble
NaNH Sparingly soluble
KNH Soluble
RbNH Soluble
CsNH Soluble
Redox reactions
Ammonia is poor as an oxidant since it is relatively easily oxidized, e.g., (8.3.25) and (8.3.26). Thus, if it is necessary to perform an
oxidation reaction ammonia is not a suitable solvent; howeve r, it is a good solvent for reduction reactions.3 42+3 62+3 63+3 63+
+222 n

8.3.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660Liquid ammonia will dissolve Group 1 (alkali) metals and other electropositive metals such as calcium, stron tium, barium,
magnesium, aluminum, europium, and ytterbium. At low conc entrations (ca. 0.06 mol/L), deep blue solutions are fo rmed: these
contain metal cations and solvated electrons, (8.3.27). The solvated electrons are stable in liquid ammonia and form a complex: [e
(NH)].
The solvated electrons provide a suitable and powerf ul reducing agent for a range of reactions that are not ordinarily accomplished,
e.g., (8.3.28) and (8.3.29).
\[\rm Co_2(CO)_8 + 2 e^-_{(solv)} \rightarrow 2 [Co(CO)_4]^Ammonia: From Uses in Agriculture and Beer Production to Prolonging the First World War
One of the cornerstones of the industrial expansion in Germany between 1870 and 1910 (when the population grew from 41 million
to 66 million) was the chemicals industry. In particu lar companies such as Badische Anilin und Soda Fabrik (B aden Aniline and
Soda Factory or BASF) had developed their business on the form ation of synthetic dyes derived from the chemicals in c oal tar.
Coal tar was formed as a by-product of the gasificati on of coal. A key ingredient of coal tar is naphtha (Table) that was used
by the rubber industry; however, the remainder was dis posed off. It was not long before chemists started to investigate the
constituents present in coal tar. One of the first di scoveries was by a chemistry student at the Royal Col lege of Chemistry (now
Imperial College) in London, William Perkin (Figure), who isolated the first synthetic dye: mauveine (Figure). This
discovery led to an explosion in the chemical indust ry based on the extraction of compounds from coal tar, which was an
essentially free waste product from every gasworks. Nowhere wa s this research more commercially driven that in Germany.
Table: The typical physical properties of naphtha.
Property Typical value
Molecular weight 100 - 215 g/mol
Specific gravity 0.75 - 0.85 g/cm3
Boiling point 160 - 220 °C
Vapor pressure 5 mmHg
Solubility in water Insoluble
Figure: A portrait of English chemist Sir William Perki n (1838 - 1907) holding a sample of cloth dyed with his discovery,
mauveine, which is often called Perkin’ s purple.3 6

8.3.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660
Figure: The structure of mauveine-B.
The rapid increase in the German population also put a strain on the countries food resources. What compo unded this issue was that
the aristocratic Junkers families of East Prussia who owned much of the land in what was known as Germany’ s breadbasket.
Junkers grew rye on their estates because the soil wa s too light for wheat, and since rye was fertilized wit h potash (potassium
oxide, K O) of which Germany had vast resources. However, in 1870 grain from the US was becoming cheaper and thus
competitive with German rye. To protect their profits the Junkers demanded both subsidies for the export o f rye and tariffs for the
import of wheat. The result of this was that all the Ge rman rye was leaving the country and there was not en ough wheat being
produced to satisfy the needs of the local populatio n. Sufficient wheat could be grown in Germany if a suit able fertilizer was
available.
Sodium nitrate (NaNO), also known as Chile saltpeter, was the most common fertilizer. Unfortunately, by 1900 the deposits
looked to be depleted and an alternative was needed. The alternative was found as a component in coal tar. It was known that one
of the chemicals that caused the stink associated with coal gas and coal tar was ammonia (NH). Chemist George Fownes (Figure
) had suggested that ammonia be turned into a salt and used as a fertilizer. Unfortunately, the amount of a mmonia that could be
separated from coal tar was still insufficient, so if ammonia could be made on a large enough scale, the n large-scale manufacture of
a fertilizer could be realized.
Figure: British chemist George Fownes, FRS (1815 – 1849).
In 1909 Fritz Haber (Figure) presented a method of am monia synthesis to BASF. His work in collaboration with Car l Bosch
(Figure) resulted in the process known as the Haber-Bos ch process in which nitrogen and hydrogen are mixed a t high
temperature (600 °C) under pressure (200 atm) over an osmi um catalyst, (8.3.30).
Figure: German chemists Fritz Haber (1868 –1934) who r eceived the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1918 for his d evelopment
for synthesizing ammonia.2

8.3.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660
Figure: German chemist Carl Bosch (1874 –1940) who re ceived the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1931 for his wo rk in highpressure chemistry.
It is interesting to note that the realization of th e Haber-Bosch process required not only high-pressure vessels to be constructed by
the steel industry, but also the liquid forms of nitr ogen and hydrogen. As it turned out ammonia was a nece ssary component for
enabling the production of liquid nitrogen and hydr ogen, and involved a false hypothesis of what caused ma laria, which led to a
desire to keep drinks cold.
Long before it was understood the real cause of malar ia, John Gorrie (Figure), a doctor working in Apalachicol a on the Gulf
Coast of Florida, was obsessed with finding a cure for m alaria. The term malaria originated from Medieval Italian: mala aria (bad
air), and it was associated with swamps and marshlands. Gorrie noticed that malaria was connected to hot humi d weather so he
began hanging bowl of ice in wards and circulating th e air with a fan. However, ice was cut from frozen lakes and rivers in the
North East of the US, stored and then shipped all over the world, and Apalachicola was so small that ice was seldo m delivered.
Gorrie started looking into methods of making ice. I t was well known that when a compressed gas expands it t akes heat from its
surroundings. Gorrie made a steam engine that compress ed air in a piston, which when the piston retracted the air cooled. On the
next compression stroke the cold air was pushed out across a brine solution (saturated aqueous NaCl) cooli ng it. When he brought
water in contact with the cold brine, it froze creati ng the first man made ice. On 14 July 1850 Gorrie produc ed ice for the French
Consul to cool the champagne for the celebration of Bastille Day. Just before he died, Gorrie suggested that his (by then) Patented
process could be used for cooling food for transport, and it was this application that was used extensively by British merchants to
bring meat from Australia to Britain. However, in Germany, Go rrie’s invention was more useful for beer.
Figure: Portrait of American physician and scientist Joh n Gorrie (1803 –1855) is considered the father of ref rigeration and air
conditioning.
Whereas the British traditionally brewed beer in which the yeast ferments on the surface (top fermentation) at a temperature of 60 –
70 °F, in Germany beer was made using bottom fermentation. This style of fermentation requires a temperature j ust above freezing.
Traditionally, cold cellars were used to store the f ermenting beer, and it is from here the name lager is derived from the German
verb largern: to store. There had been a law in Germany preventing brewing in the summer, but with Gorrie’s process the
possibility was to be able to brew beer all year. Carl von Linde (Figure) was asked to develop a refrigerat ion system. He used
ammonia instead of air in Gorrie’s system, and in 187 9 he set up a company to commercialize his ideas. The success of his
refrigerator was such that by 1891 there were over 12,0 00 fridges being used, and more importantly there was n ow a convenient
method of liquefying gases such as hydrogen and nitrog en; both of which were needed for the Haber-Bosch process.

8.3.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660
Figure: German engineer Carl Paul Gottfried von Lind e (1842 - 1934).
As a consequence of the use of ammonia as a refrigeran t, it was possible to prepare ammonia on a large indu strial scale. Ammonia
prepared by the Haber-Bosch process can be converted to nitric acid by the Ostwald process developed by Wilh elm Ostwald
(Figure). Treatment of ammonia with air over a plati num catalyst yields initially nitric oxide, (8.3.31), and subsequently to
nitrogen dioxide, (8.3.32), which dissolves in water to give nitric acid, (8.3.33).
Addition of soda (sodium hydroxide, NaOH) to nitric acid results in the formation of sodium nitrate, (8.3.34), which was the same
fertilizer produced from the deposits in Chile.
Figure: German chemist Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald (185 3 – 1932) received the Nobel Prize in 1909 for his w ork on
catalysis.
Unfortunately, for the Haber-Bosch and Ostwald processes, a n even cheaper form of fertilizer was synthesized aro und the same
time using calcium carbide to prepare calcium cyana mide (CaCN), (8.3.35). As a consequence, the Haber-Bosch pr ocess was
forgotten until the outbreak of the First World War in 19 14.
Within weeks of the outbreak Germany realized it had o nly enough explosives for about a year of conflict. T his was because the
main source of explosives, sodium nitrate was the same source that gave fertilizer, i.e., Chile. Realizing t his, the Royal Navy
effectively blockaded the supply lines. If Germany di d not find another source of Great War would have been over early in 1916,
however, it was remembered that the Haber-Bosch process i n combination with the Ostwald processes would allow the s ynthesis of
nitric acid, which when mixed with cotton, made nitrocellulo se (Figure), also known as gun cotton, an explosive, (8.3.36).2

8.3.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660
Figure: The structure of nitrocellulose.
As a result of the industrial synthesis of ammonia Germ any was able to manufacture sufficient explosives to fight until 11
November 1918, by which time almost 10 million were de ad, almost 7 million missing, and over 21 million were wounded (Figure
Figure: The Douamont Ossuary cemetery and World War I memorial in Verdun, France.
Hydrazine
Hydrazine (N H) is a colorless liquid with an odor simi lar to ammonia. Hydrazine has physical properties very close to water, with
a melting point of 2 °C and a boiling point of 114 °C. The similarity in its chemistry to water is as a r esult of strong intermolecular
hydrogen bonding.
Hydrazine is highly toxic and dangerously unstable, a nd is usually handled as aqueous solution for safet y reasons. Even so,
hydrazine hydrate causes severe burns on the skin an d eyes. Contact with transition metals, their oxides (e.g., rust), or salts
cause catalytic decomposition and possible ignition of evol ved hydrogen. Reactions with oxidants are violent.
Synthesis
Hydrazine is manufactured on the industrial scale by t he Olin Raschig process using the reaction of a sodium hypochlorite solution
with ammonia at 5 °C to form chloramine (NH Cl) and so dium hydroxide, (8.3.37). The chloramines solution i s the reacted with
ammonia under pressure at 130 °C, (8.3.38). Ammonia is us ed in a 33 fold excess.
If transition metals are present then decomposition occurs, (8.3.38), and therefore, ethylenediaminetet raacetic acid (EDTA, Figure
) is added to complex the transition metal ions. The as produced hydrazine solution can be concentrated b y distillation to give
a 65% solution. Anhydrous hydrazine is formed by the distil lation from NaOH.2 4
WARNING

8.3.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660
Figure: The structure of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA).
Alternative routes to hydrazine include the oxidation of urea with sodium hypochlorite, (8.3.40), and the re action of ammonia and
hydrogen peroxide, (8.3.41).
Structure
The nitrogen atoms in hydrazine adopt sp hybridizat ion (Figure a), and molecule adopts a gauche conformation in the vapor,
liquid and solid states (Figure b).
Figure: The structure of hydrazine.
In a similar manner to ammonia, (8.3.42), hydrazine is a self-ionizing, (8.3.43). While there is a wide range o f salts of the N H
cation, only the sodium and potassium salts of N H are st able.
Reaction chemistry and uses
Hydrazine is polar, highly ionizing, and forms stable h ydrogen bonds, and its resemblance to water is refle cted in the formation of
aqueous solutions and hydrates. In the solid state the monohydrate is formed, i.e., N H.H O. In solution hydraz ine acts as a base to
form the hydrazinium ion, (8.3.44) where K = 8.5 x 10. The presence of a second Lewis base site means that h ydrazine can be
protonated twice to form the hydrazonium ion, (8.3.45) where K = 8.9 x 10. Salts of the cation N H are stable i n water;
however, the salts of the dication are less stable.
The reaction of hydrazine with oxygen is highly favored, (8.3.46), and the explosive limit is 1.8 – 100 vol%.
Hydrazine is useful in a number of organic reactions for the synthesis of a wide range of compounds used in pharmaceuticals,
textile dyes, and in photography, including:
Hydrazone formation, (8.3.47) and (8.3.48).
Alkyl-substituted hydrazine synthesis via direct alkylat ion with alkyl halides.
Reaction with 2-cyanopyridines to form amide hydrazides, which can be converted using 1,2-diketones into triazines.
Use in the Wolff-Kishner reduction that transforms the carb onyl group of a ketone or aldehyde into a methylene (or met hyl)
group via a hydrazone intermediate, (shown below).3
2 5+
2 32 4 2
b-7
b-162 5+

8.3.13 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660As a building block for the preparation of many heterocyc lic compounds via condensation with a range of difunc tional
electrophiles.
Cleavage N-alkylated phthalimide derivatives.
As a convenient reductant because the by-products are typica lly nitrogen gas and water.
Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet
Designed by Alexander Lippisch (Figure), the Messerschm itt Me 163B Komet (Figure) was the first rocket-powered
fighter plane. With a top speed of around 596 mph (Mach 0.83) and a service ceiling of 40,000 ft, the Kome t’s performance of the
Me 163B far exceeded that of contemporary piston engi ne fighters. However, despite its impressive performan ce, it was only
produced in limited numbers (ca. 370 as compared to the 1,430 built of its jet power ed compatriot the Me 262) and was not an
effective combat airplane.
Figure: German pioneer of aerodynamics Alexander Mar tin Lippisch (1894 – 1976).
Figure: The Messerschmitt Me 163B-1.
The Komet was powered by the HWK 109-509 hot engine (Figure) that used a mixture of a fuel and an oxid izer. The fuel
was a mixture of hydrazine hydrate (30%), methanol (57%), and water (13%) that was designated by the code n ame, C-Stoff, that
burned with the oxygen-rich exhaust from hydrogen pe roxide (T-Stoff) used as the oxidizer. The C-Stoff was stored in a gla ss tank
on the plane, while the T-Stoff was stored in an alumi num container. An oxidizing agent cocktail of CaMnO and/or K CrO was
added to the T-Stoff generating steam and high temperatures, this in ter n reacted violently with the C-Stoff. The flow of reagents
was controlled by two pumps, to regulate the rate of combustion and thereby the amount of thrust. The viole nt combustion process
resulted in the formation of water, carbon dioxide a nd nitrogen, and a huge amount of heat sending out a superheated stream of
steam, nitrogen and air that was drawn in through the hole in the mantle of the engine, thus providing a f orward thrust of
approximately 3,800 lbf. Because of the potential h azards of mixing the fuels, they were stored at least / mile apart, and the plane
was washed with water between fueling steps and after mission s.4 2 4

8.3.14 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660
Figure: A photograph taken by Professor A. D. Baxter of the HWK 109-509 hot engine.
Phosphine and Arsine
Because of their use in metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) of 13-15 (III-V) semiconductor compo unds phosphine
(PH) and arsine (AsH) are prepared on an industrial scale.
Synthesis
Phosphine (PH) is prepared by the reaction of elementa l phosphorus (P) with water, (8.3.49). Ultra pure phosph ine that is used by
the electronics industry is prepared by the thermal disp roportionation of phosphorous acid, (8.3.50).
Arsine can be prepared by the reduction of the chlori de, (8.3.51) or (8.3.52). The corresponding syntheses ca n also be used for
stibine and bismuthine.
The hydrolysis of calcium phosphide or arsenide can also gen erate the trihydrides.
Structure
The phosphorus in phosphine adopts sp hybridization, and thus phosphine has an umbrella structure (Figure a) due to the
stereochemically active lone pair. The barrier to in version of the umbrella (E = 155 kJ/mol) is much hi gher than that in ammonia
(E = 24 kJ/mol). Putting this difference in context, a mmonia’s inversion rate is 10 while that of phosphine is 10. As a
consequence it is possible to isolate chiral organophosph ines (PRR'R"). Arsine adopts the analogous structure (Figur e b).
Figure: The structures of (a) phosphine and (b) arsine.
Reactions
Phosphine is only slightly soluble in water (31.2 mg/1 00 mL) but it is readily soluble in non-polar solvent s. Phosphine acts as
neither an acid nor a base in water; however, proton exchange proceeds via the phosphonium ion (PH) in aci dic solutions and via
PH at high pH, with equilibrium constants K = 4 x 10 and K = 41.6 x 10, respectively.
Arsine has similar solubility in water to that of phosph ine (i.e., 70 mg/100 mL), and AsH is generally considered non-basic, but it
can be protonated by superacids to give isolable salts of AsH. Arsine is readily oxidized in air, (8.3.53).
Arsine will react violently in presence of strong oxidiz ing agents, such as potassium permanganate, sodium hy pochlorite or nitric
acid. Arsine decomposes to its constituent elements upon heati ng to 250 - 300 °C.3 3
3 4
a
a11 3
4+
2b-28
a-29
4+

8.3.15 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212660Gutzeit test
The Gutzeit test is the characteristic test for arsenic and involves the reaction of arsine with Ag. Arsine is g enerated by reduction
of aqueous arsenic compounds, typically arsenites, with Zn in the presence of H SO. The evolved gaseous AsH is then exposed to
silver nitrate either as powder or as a solution. With solid AgNO, AsH reacts to produce yellow Ag AsNO, while with a solution
of AgNO black Ag As is formed.
Hazards
Pure phosphine is odorless, but technical grade phosphi ne has a highly unpleasant odor like garlic or rotti ng fish, due to the
presence of substituted phosphine and diphosphine (P H). The presence of P H also causes spontaneous combustio n in air.
Phosphine is highly toxic; symptoms include pain in t he chest, a sensation of coldness, vertigo, shortness o f breath, and at higher
concentrations lung damage, convulsions and death. The rec ommended limit (RL) is 0.3 ppm.
Arsine is a colorless odorless gas that is highly toxi c by inhalation. Owing to oxidation by air it is poss ible to smell a slight, garliclike scent when arsine is present at about 0.5 ppm. Ars ine attacks hemoglobin in the red blood cells, causin g them to be destroyed
by the body. Further damage is caused to the kidney and liver. Exposure to arsine concentrations of 250 ppm is rapidly fatal:
concentrations of 25 – 30 ppm are fatal for 30 min exposure, and concentrations of 10 ppm can be fatal at longer exposure times.
Symptoms of poisoning appear after exposure to concentrat ions of 0.5 ppm and the recommended limit (RL) is as low as 0.05 ppm.
Bibliography
R. Minkwitz, A. Kornath, W. Sawodny, and H. Härtner, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1994, 620, 753.
This page titled 8.3: Hydrides is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.+
2 4 3
3 3 4 3
3 3
2 4 2 4

8.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126618.4: Oxides and Oxoacids
Oxides of Nitrogen
A summary of the physical properties of the oxides of nit rogen is given in Table.
Table: Physical properties of the oxides of nitrogen.
Oxide Formula Mp (°C) Bp (°C)
Nitrous oxide N O -90.8 -88.5
Nitric oxide NO -163.6 -161.8
Dinitrogen trioxide N O -100.6 3.5 (dec.)
Nitrogen dioxide (dinitrogen
tetroxide)NO /N O -11.2 (NO) 21.2 (N O)
Nitrogen pentoxide N O 30 47
Nitrous oxide
Gaseous nitrous oxide (N O) is prepared by the careful thermal decomposition of ammonium nitrate (NH NO), (8.4.1). Nitrous
oxide is a linear molecule (Figure a) that is isoelect ronic (and isostructural) with carbon dioxide. Despite its use as a power
enhancement for automobiles, nitrous oxide is actually n ot very reactive and a major use is as an aerosol propell ant.
Figure: Structures of (a) nitrous oxide, (b) nitric o xide, (c) dinitrogen trioxide, (d) nitrogen dioxide, (e) nitrogen tetroxide, and
(f) nitrogen pentoxide.
Nitrous oxide as an anesthetic drug
Nitrous oxide is known as "laughing gas" due to the eup horic effects of inhaling it, a property that has l ed to its recreational use as
a hallucinogen. However, it is as a anesthetic that it has a legitimate application.
The first use of nitrous oxide as anesthetic drug was wh en dentist Horace Wells (Figure) with assistance by Gard ner Quincy
Colton (Figure) and John Mankey Riggs (Figure), demon strated insensitivity to pain from a dental extract ion in
December 1844. Wells subsequently treated 12-15 patien ts, and according to his own record it only failed a s an anesthetic in two
cases. In spite of these results, the method was not immed iately adopted, probably because during his first pub lic demonstration
was only partly successful.2
2 3
2 2 4 2 2 4
2 5
2 4 2

8.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661
Figure: American dentist Horace Wells (1815 - 1848).
Figure: American showman, lecturer, and former medic al student Gardner Quincy Colton (1814 - 1898).
Figure: John Mankey Riggs (1811 - 1885) was the leadin g authority on periodontal disease in the United State s, to the point
that periodontal disease was known as Riggs disease.
The method did not come into general use until 1863, when Colton successfully used it for more than 25,00 0 patients. As such, the
usage of nitrous oxide rapidly became the preferred anesthetic method in dentistry. Because the gas is mi ld enough to keep a patient
in a conscious and conversational state, and yet in most cases strong enough to suppress the pain caused by dental work, it remains
the preferred gas anesthetic in today's dentistry.
Nitrous: the secret to more power.
In motorsports, nitrous oxide (often referred to as nitrous or NOS) allows the engine to burn more fuel, resulting in a more powerful
combustion, and hence greater horsepower. The gas itsel f is not flammable, but it delivers more oxygen (33%) than atmospheric air
(21%) by breaking down at elevated temperatures. When N O breaks down in during fuel combustion, the decompo sition of
nitrous is exothermic, contributing to the overall power in crease.
Nitrous oxide is stored as a compressed liquid (Figure); the evaporation and expansion of liquid nitrous oxide in the intake
manifold causes a large drop in intake charge tempe rature, resulting in a denser charge, further allowing more air/fuel mixture to
enter the cylinder. Nitrous oxide is sometimes injec ted into (or prior to) the intake manifold, whereas other systems directly inject
right before the cylinder (direct port injection) to i ncrease power.2

8.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661
Figure: A typical NOS system for automotive use.
One of the major problems of using nitrous oxide in a reciprocating engine is that it can produce enough power to damage or
destroy the engine. Very large power increases are po ssible, and if the mechanical structure of the engine is not properly reinforced,
the engine may be severely damaged or destroyed during thi s kind of operation.
Automotive-grade liquid nitrous oxide differs slightl y from medical-grade nitrous oxide in that a small amount of sulfur is added to
prevent substance abuse.
Nitric oxide
Nitric oxide (NO) is formed by the high temperature ox idation of nitrogen, (8.4.2), or the platinum catalyz ed oxidation of ammonia
at 800 °C, (8.4.3).
Nitric oxide (Figure b) is electronically equivalent t o dinitrogen (N) plus an electron, and as a consequenc e it is paramagnetic
with one unpaired electron. The location of the unpai red electron in the π* orbital (Figure a) results in a bond order of 2.5
rather than the triple bond observed for N (Figure b). The N-O distance of 1.15 Å is intermediate between the triple bond
distance in NO (1.06 Å) and the typical double bond d istance (ca. 1.20 Å). Furthermore, because of the location of the electron it
is easy to oxidize nitric oxide to the nitrosonium io n (NO), (8.4.4).
Figure: Molecular orbital diagrams for (a) nitric ox ide and (b) dinitrogen.
Nitric oxide is unstable to heat, (8.4.6), and oxidation, (8.4.5). It will also react with halogens to form the nitrosyl halides, XNO.
Dinitrogen trioxide
Dinitrogen trioxide (N O) is formed from the stoichiom etric reaction between NO and O or NO and N O. Dinitrogen t rioxide
has an intense blue color in the liquid phase and a pale blue color in the solid state. Thermal dissociat ion of N O, (8.4.7), occurs
above -30 °C, and some self-ionization of the pure l iquid is observed, (8.4.8). The asymmetric structure of N O (Figure c)
results in a polar molecule (Figure).2
2 3 2 2 4
2 3
2 3

8.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661
Figure: The polarization of the N-N bond in dinitro gen trioxide.
Nitrogen dioxide (and tetroxide)
Formed from the oxidation of nitric oxide, (8.4.9), b rown nitrogen dioxide is actually in equilibrium with its colorless dimeric
form, nitrogen tetroxide (N O), (8.4.10).
Nitrogen dioxide (Figure d) is electronically equivale nt to the nitrate anion (NO) less one electron, and as such it is
paramagnetic with one unpaired electron. The locatio n of the unpaired electron in a nitrogen sp orbital, and a consequently it
forms a dimer through a N-N bond (Figure e). Furthermore, it is easy to oxidize nitrogen dioxide to the nit ronium ion (NO),
(8.4.11).
Nitrogen dioxide dissolves in water to form a mixture of nitric and nitrous acids, (8.4.12). Nitrogen dioxid e acts as an oxidizing
agent with the formation of nitrate anion, (8.4.13).
The most common structural form of N O (Figure e) is pl anar with a long N-N bond (1.78 Å) that is significantly longer than
observed in hydrazine (1.47 Å). Rationalization of t his structural effect is obtained from a considerati on of the molecular orbitals,
which show that the electrons in the σ-bond are actuall y delocalized over the whole molecule. The rotation a bout the N-N bond is
9.6 kJ/mol.
Nitrogen pentoxide
The dehydration of nitric acid, with P O, yields nitr ogen pentoxide, (8.4.14), which is an unstable solid at room temperature
(Table). In the solid state nitrogen pentoxide is act ually nitronium nitrate (NO NO), however, in the vapor p hase it exists as
a molecular species (Figure f) with a bent N-O-N unit. Nitrog en pentoxide is a very powerful nitrating and oxidatio n agent.
Nitrogen oxides as precursors to smog and acid rain
Nitrogen oxides (NO) emissions are estimated to be in the range of 25 - 100 megatonnes of nitrogen per yea r. Natural sources are
thought to make up approximately / of the total. Th e generations of NO (primarily a mixture of NO and NO) is the main source
of smog and a significant contribution to atmospheric pollution; however, NO is also responsible for much of the acidity in acid
rain.
Atmospheric reactions leading to acid rain
In the dry atmosphere, nitric oxide reacts is oxidiz ed rapidly in sunlight by ozone, (8.4.15). The nitro gen dioxide reacts with the
hydroxide radical, formed by the photochemical decom position of ozone, (8.4.16) and (8.4.17), in the prese nce of a non-reactive
gas molecule such as nitrogen to form nitric acid va por, (8.4.18). The conversion rate for NO to HNO is appr oximately ten times
faster than the equivalent reaction for sulfur diox ide. For example, conversion is essentially complete for a NO plume by the time
it transverses the North Sea from the UK to Scandinavia.2 4
2+
2 4
2 5
2+
3x
3 x 2
x
x 3
x

8.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661At night, conversion takes place via the formation of a nitrate radical, (8.4.19), which subsequently photoc hemically unstable under
sunlight forming nitrogen pentoxide, (8.4.20), that reac ts with water on the surface of aerosol particles to form nitric acid, (8.4.21).
Both NO and NO are only slightly soluble in water and it is therefore more probable that the nitric acid co ntent of rain is more
likely due to the dissolution of nitric acid vapor into rai ndrops, (8.4.22), rather than a separate reaction.
Oxoacids of Nitrogen
Nitrous acid
In the gas phase nitrous acid can be made by the following re action:
The gas phase structure as determined by IR spectros copy is shown in Figure a, in which the nitrogen is plana r with sp
hybridization.
Figure
In basic aqueous solution the same reaction results in the formation of the nitrite ion, (8.4.24), which c an be precipitated as the
Ba salt. After separation the addition to sulfuric ac id yields a solution of nitrous acid. However, it is no t possible to concentrate
by heating since decomposition occurs, (8.4.25).
Nitrous acid is a fairly weak acid in water (pK = 5.22); however, many salts are known of the nitrite ion, NO (Figure b).
Complexes of the nitrite ion can be monodentate with bonding via nitrogen (nitro) or an oxygen (nitrito). Both isomers can be
isolated in the case of an inert metal, i.e., substitut ionally inert d octahedral complexes (Figure). Bidentate and bridgi ng
modes of coordination are also known for the nitrite anion (Fi gure).
Figure: Structures of (a) orange nitro and (b) pink n itrito isomers of [Co (NH) (NO)].
Figure: Bidentate (a) and bridging (b and c) modes o f coordination of the nitrite anion.
Nitrite can act as either an oxidizing agent, (8.4.26), or a reducing agent, (8.4.27).2
2+
III
3 5 22+

8.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661The most important use of nitrous acid is in the diazo tization reactions in which nitrous acid is generated by acidifying nitrite
solution.
Nitric acid
Nitric acid (HNO), also known as aqua fortis and spirit of nitre, is made by the dissolution of nitrogen dioxide in water, (8.4.28).
Nitric acid can be concentrated by distillation from co ncentrated sulfuric acid.
The structure of HNO in the gas phase is planar at the sp nitrogen (Figure a).
Figure: The structures of (a) nitric acid and (b) the nitrate anion.
Pure 100% nitric acid is a very corrosive liquid tha t is strongly acidic and protonates and dissolves o rganic species. In the liquid
phase it is slightly dissociated, (8.4.29). It is also a powerful oxidizing agent, converting non-metal ele ments to either the oxide or
oxoacid. In contrast with metals it forms either salts or complexes in which the metal is in its highest oxi dation state. It is unstable
and decomposes upon heating or photolysis.
The pure acid has the highest self ionization of pu re liquid acids, (8.4.30). However, the loss of water res ults, (8.4.31), such that the
overall reaction can be described by (8.4.32).
The common concentration of nitric acid is 70%. While the pure acid is colorless, samples often take on a yellow color due to the
photochemical decomposition of nitric acid to give brown NO.
The term the “acid test” is derived from the mediev al practice of debasing of gold and silver currencies (often by the Monarchs
who issued them) by debasing with copper. With ducats (Milan), livres (France), florins (Florence), maravedi es (Spain) and
bezants (Constantinople) in widespread use, and each with a nominal gold or silver content, it was importa nt for a merchant to
be able verify the worth of any particular coin. If a drop of dilute nitric acid was placed onto a silver coin adulterated with
copper, it turned green, due to the formation of co pper(II) nitrate. Conversely, if a gold coin reacted i n any way with the nitric
acid it was not pure. In both cases the coins failed the “aci d test”.
Aqua regia (so called because it dissolves gold) is a mixture of 70% nitric acid and hydrochloric acid in a 1:3 r atio. Aqua regia is a
very powerful oxidizing agent (it contains Cl) and s tablizes some metals as their chloro complexes (Tabl e). If HF is added in
place of HCl, tantalum may be dissolved with the formatio n of [TaF].
Table: Metal chloride salts formed by the dissolution of metals in aqua regia.
Metal Chloride salt formed
Au [AuCl]
Pt [PtCl]3
Note
2462-

8.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661Fuming nitric acid (100% nitric) is exceedingly corr osive and should not be used. In 100% sulfuric acid, nitric acid acts as a base
and gets protonated, (8.4.34) and (8.4.35), and acts as a powe rful nitrating agent.
In water dilute nitric acid is fully ionized, (8.4.36).
The nitrate ion is planar (Figure b) and forms many sa lts and complexes. The nitrate anion is most commonly a monodentate
ligand, but can also be a bidentate ligand (Figure a) or a b ridging ligand (Figure b and 12c).
Figure: Coordination modes of the nitrate anion.
Phosphorous Oxides
Phosphorous trioxide
The stoichiometric oxidation of white phosphorus yield s phosphorous trioxide, (8.4.37).
Several structural forms of phosphorous trioxide are k nown, but P O is a stable molecule structure (Figure), whil e the rest
are polymers.
Figure: The structure of P O. Phosphorus atoms are repre sented by the large spheres, and oxygen atoms by the sma ll
spheres (Copyright: Karl Harrison, 2005).
Phosphorous pentoxide
The reaction of white phosphorus with excess oxygen (o r the oxidation of phosphorous trioxide) yields pho sphorous pentoxide,
(8.4.38).
The structure of hexagonal phosphorous pentoxide is actually that of the dimeric form, P O, and is based upon the structure of
P O, but with P=O units instead of lone pairs (Figure). The structure is maintained in the vapor phase; howev er, other
crystalline and glassy forms comprise of a sheet-like str ucture (Figure).
Figure: The structure of hexagonal P O. Phosphorus atoms are represented by the large spheres, and oxygen atoms by the
small spheres (Copyright: Karl Harrison, 2005).4 6
4 6
4 10
4 6
4 10

8.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661
Figure: The structure of a sheet in glassy P O.
Phosphorous pentoxide is an excellent drying agent be low 100 °C. It reacts with water to form various phospho ric acids, and it will
extract water from other ‘drying agents’, e.g., (8.4.39) and (8.4.40). Phosphorous pentoxide will dehydrate ami des to give nitriles,
(8.4.41).
Oxoacids of Phosphorus
Phosphorous pentoxide (P O) is an excellent drying agent, a nd its action is a result of the formation of a range of oxo acids.
Hypophosphorous acid
Hypophosphorous acid, H PO, is easily prepared pure buy the reaction of white phosphorous with base, followed b y acidification,
(8.4.42). The pure acid is a solid (Mp = 27 °C) and very solu ble in water.
The structure of H PO is determined by X-ray crystallog raphy to be tetrahedral with two hydride ligands and a hydroxide (Figure
a). The presence of two hydrides is confirmed by NMR sp ectroscopy. The H NMR resonance shows an OH line and a
doublet from the P-H with a large one-bond coupling co nstant to the P nucleus. The non-decoupled P NMR spec trum shows a
triplet (δ = 13 ppm, JP-H = 530 Hz) due to the two hydrides.
Figure: Oxoacids of phosphorous: (a) hypophosphorous aci d, (b), phosphorous acid, and (c) phosphoric acid.
In water hypophosphorous acid is a monobasic acid (pK = 1.2), (8.4.43), and it forms a wide range of salts. It i s also a powerful
reducing agent, but its reaction kinetics is slow.
Phosphorous acid
The reaction of P O or PCl with water yields phosphorous acid, H PO; which like hypophosphorous acid is a solid (Mp = 70.1
°C) and very soluble in water. The structure is shown by X-ray crystallography to be comprised of a tetrahed ral phosphorus with
one hydride and two hydroxides (Figure b). P NMR spectr oscopy demonstrates the presence of a single hydride by the
presence of a doublet as a consequence of the phosph orous center being split by a single hydride (δ = 4 ppm, JP-H = 700 Hz). The
H NMR spectrum shows a doublet for the hydride and a singl e resonance of twice the intensity for the hydroxide.
As expected, in water phosphorous acid is dibasic, (8.4.4 4). The acid (and the anions) are strong reducing age nts, yielding
phosphoric acid. They actually react very slowly, and it is thought that this may be due to the reaction being in the tautomeric form,
P(OH). Although this has not been isolated, the trialky l derivatives exist in both forms, i.e., esters of phosp horic acids (Figure
a) and trialkyl phosphates (Figure b).4 10
2 5
3 2
3 2
31 31
4 6 3 3 3

8.4.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661
Figure: Structures of two tautomeric forms; (a) an este r of phosphoric acid and (b) a trialkyl phosphate.
Ortho phosphoric acid
Orthophosphoric acid (H PO) is the most common oxoacid of phosphorus (Figure c). The term acid phosphoric ac id is commonly
used. It is made from the reaction of phosphates with sulfuric acid (H SO), or from the hydrolysis of P O. The pure acid is a
colorless crystalline solid (Mp = 42.35 °C) with exte nsive hydrogen bonding. The inter-phosphoric acid h ydrogen bonding is
partially maintained in aqueous solutions above 50% so lutions.
Phosphoric acid is very stable and shows no oxidation c hemistry below 350 °C. As expected, phosphoric acid is t ribasic, (8.4.45).
The anions H PO and HPO have particular names, dihydrogen phosphate and monohydrogen phosphate, respectively.
Many salts of are known for all three anions; those wit h phosphate (PO) are often insoluble in water. Many co ordination
complexes are known, especially with M and M ions.
Phosphorous esters
The alkyl and aryl homologs of phosphoric acid (i.e., the phosphate triester O=P(OR)) are prepared by the r eaction of P O with
the appropriate alcohol. The triesters are good solv ents and Lewis basic ligands with coordination via th e oxide moiety. The
diesters and monoesters can also be made, and they are i mportant in biochemical processes.
Phosphite triesters, P(OR), may be made by the reaction o f PCl with alcohols or phenols in the presence of an o rganic base as the
acceptor for the HCl formed. Alternatively, they can be pre pared directly from white phosphorous, (8.4.46).
Phosphite triesters are readily oxidized to the appro priate phosphate triester, (8.4.47). They also react wit h alkyl halides to form the
dialkyl phosphonate via the Michaelis-Arbusov reaction (8.4.48).
Polyphosphates
Polyphosphates contain the PO unit, and the simplest e xample (pyrophosphate or diphosphate, (Figure a) can be considered
as condensation products of monohydrogen phosphate, (8.4.49). Longer chains can be formed, e.g., the triph osphate P O
(Figure b). The formation and reverse (hydrolysis) reacti on are slow, but are readily catalyzed, e.g., by enzymes.
Figure: The structures of the (a) diphosphate and (b) triphosphate anions.
The monoesters of the diphosphate and triphosphate a re very important in biological processes. In partic ular the conversion of the
triphosphate ATP (adenosine triphosphate) to the diph osphate ADP (adenosine diphosphate) by the transfer o f a phosphate group is
important in the energetics of biological reactions.3 4
2 4 4 10
2 442423+ 4+
3 4 10
3 3
3 105-

8.4.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212661
Cyclic polyphosphates
Also known as meta phosphates, cyclic phosphates are also made from fused PO units. The simplest, P O, is shown in Figure
. Slow addition of water to P O results in the formation of the tetrameric polyphosphate, P O (Figure), which is
known as calgon due to its ability to complex Ca as well as other meta ls.
Figure: The structure of P O. Phosphorus atoms are repre sented by the large spheres, and oxygen atoms by the sma ll
spheres (Copyright: Karl Harrison, 2005).
Figure: The structure of P O calgon. Phosphorus atoms are represented by the large spheres, a nd oxygen atoms by the
small spheres (Copyright: Karl Harrison, 2005).
This page titled 8.4: Oxides and Oxoacids is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.4 3 934 10 4 1242+
3 934 124-

8.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126628.5: Halides of Phosphorous
Phosphorous trihalides
Phosphorous trihalides, PX, are produced from the dire ct reaction of phosphorous with the appropriate halog en, (8.5.1). The
fluoride is readily made from the halide exchange r eaction of PCl with fluoride salts, (8.5.2). Mixed trihal ides are formed by
halide exchange, (8.5.3).
A summary of the physical properties of the phospho rous trihalides is given in Table. All the compounds have a pyramidal
structure in the vapor phase and in solution.
Table: Selected physical properties of the phosphorous trihalides.
Compound Mp (°C) Bp (°C) P-X (Å) X-P-X (°)
PF -151.5 -101.8 1.56 96.3
PCl -93.6 76.1 2.04 100
PBr -41.5 173.2 2.22 101
PI 61.2 200 (dec.) 2.43 102
The phosphorous trihalides hydrolyze to phosphoric a cid, (8.5.4), and undergo alcoholysis to form the tria lkyl phosphite derivative,
(8.5.5). Phosphorous trifluoride is only slowly hydroly zed by water, but reacts readily with alakaline solution s. In contrast,
phosphorus triiodide is an unstable red solid that r eacts violently with water. Phosphorous trichloride in particular is an excellent
synthon for most trialkyl phosphines, (8.5.6).
As with other P(III) compounds such as trialkyl phosphin es, phosphorous trihalides can be oxidized to the a nalogous phosphene
oxide, e.g., (8.5.7).
Phosphorous trihalides form Lewis acid-base complexes wi th main group metals, but the bonding to d (n ≠ 0) transition metals
occurs in the same manner to that of trialkyl phosph ine, i.e., with dπ-pπ back donation. In fact one of th e first examples of
complexation of phosphorous to a low oxidation metal was th e formation of PF complexes with Fe-porphyrin.
Phosphorous pentahalides
The reaction of white phosphorous with excess halogen yields the pentahalides, (8.5.8). However, the pentaflu oride is best prepared
by halide exchange, (8.5.9).
The pentaiodide is unknown, however, selected physical pro perties are given for the others in Table.3
n

8.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212662Table: Selected physical properties of phosphorous pent ahalides.
Compound Mp (°C) Bp (°C)
PF -93.78 -84.5
PCl 166.8 160 (subl.)
PBr 100 106.0
The structures of the phosphorous pentahalides are al l trigonal bipyramidal in the gas phase (Figure). Phosph orous
pentafluoride maintains the trigonal bipyramidal str ucture in solid state, but the chloride and bromide a re ionic solids, [PCl]
[PCl] and [PBr]Br (Figure), respectively. The tetrahe dral [PCl] ion is also formed with the reaction of PCl with other
chloride ion acceptors, (8.5.10) and (8.5.11).
Figure: The structures of (a) PF and (b) PCl.
Figure: The crystal structure of phosphorous pentabromi de.
All of the pentahalides undergo thermal decomposition, (8.5.12).
Careful hydrolysis of the pentahalides yields the ox ide of the appropriate trihalide, (8.5.13), while exces s hydrolysis yields
phosphoric acid, (8.5.14).
This page titled 8.5: Halides of Phosphorous is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.5
4+
6-4 4+5
5 5

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: Group 16
9.1: The Group 16 Elements- The Chalcogens
9.2: Ozone
9.3: Water - The Fuel for the Medieval Industrial Revol ution
9.4: Hydrogen Peroxide
9.5: Hydrogen Peroxide Providing a Lift for 007
9.6: Comparison of Sulfur to Oxygen
9.7: Chalconide Hydrides
9.8: Oxides and Oxyacids of Sulfur
9.9: Sulfur Halides
Thumbnail: A sample of sulfur a member of the oxygen group of el ements. (Public Domain; Ben Mills).
This page titled 9: Group 16 is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126659.1: The Group 16 Elements- The Chalcogens
The elements
The Group 16 elements have a particular name chalcogen es. Table 1 lists the derivation of the names of the halog ens.
Table: Derivation of the names of each of the Group 16(VI) elements.
Element Symbol Name
Oxygen OGreek oxys (sharp, from the taste of acids)
and genēs (producer)
Sulfur (sulphur) S From the Latin sulphurium
Selenium Se Greek selene meaning Moon
Tellurium Te Latin tellus meaning earth
Polonium Po Named after Poland, Latin Polonia
In Latin, the word is variously written sulpur, sulphur, and sulfur. It is an original Latin name and not a classical Gre ek loan,
so the ph variant does not denote the Greek letter φ. Sulfur in Gr eek is thion, whence comes the prefix thio- to donate a sulfur
derivative, e.g., a thioketone, R C=S. The simplification of the Latin words p or ph to an f appears to have taken place towards
the end of the classical period. The element has tradi tionally been spelled sulphur in the United Kingdom, I ndia, Malaysia,
South Africa, Australia, Ireland, and Canada, but sulfu r in the United States. IUPAC adopted the spelling “sulf ur” in 1990, as
did the Royal Society of Chemistry Nomenclature Committe e in 1992.
Discovery
Oxygen
The 2 century BC Greek writer, Philo of Byzantium, obse rved that inverting a jar over a burning candle and surrounding the jar’s
neck with water resulted in some water rising into the neck. He incorrectly ascribed this to the idea that p art of the air in the vessel
were converted into the element fire and thus were able to escape through pores in the gl ass. Much later Leonardo da Vinci (Figure
) suggested that this effect was actually due to a portion o f air being consumed during combustion.
Figure: Italian painter, sculptor, architect, musicia n, scientist, mathematician, engineer, inventor, anat omist, geologist,
cartographer, botanist and writer Leonardo di ser Pie ro da Vinci (1452 - 1519).Note
nd

9.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665By the late 17 century, Robert Boyle (Figure) showed that air is necessary for combustion. His work was expande d by
English chemist John Mayow (Figure) by showing that fire requires only a part of air that he called spiritus nitroaereus or just
nitroaereus.
Figure: British natural philosopher, chemist, physicist, and inventor Robert Boyle (1627 - 1691).
Figure: English chemist, physician, and physiologist John Mayow FRS (1641–1679).
The reactive nature of nitroaereus was implied by May ow from his observation that antimony (Sb) increased i n weight when heated
in air. He also suggested that the lungs separate nitro aereus from air and pass it into the blood and that animal heat and muscle
movement result from the reaction of nitroaereus with c ertain substances in the body; both concepts that were proven to be correct.
Robert Hooke (Figure), Ole Borch (Figure), Mikhail Lomo nosov (Figure), and Pierre Bayen (Figure) all
produced oxygen in experiments in the 17 and the 18 century but none of them recognized it as an elemen t, probably since the
prevalence at that time of the phlogiston, and their attem pts to fit their experimental observations to that the ory.th
th th

9.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665
Figure: Portrait of English natural philosopher, archi tect Robert Hooke FRS (1635 - 1703).
Figure: Danish scientist, physician, grammarian, and po et Ole Borch (1626 - 1690).
Figure: Russian scientist and writer Mikhail Vasilyevich Lomonosov (1711 - 1765).

9.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665
Figure: French chemist and pharmacist Pierre Bayen (172 5 - 1798).
The phlogiston theory was postulated in 1667 by the Ger man alchemist J. J. Becher, and modified in 1731 by the chemist
Georg Ernst Stahl. Phlogiston theory stated that all com bustible materials were made of two parts. One part, cal led phlogiston,
was given off when the substance containing it was burn ed, while the dephlogisticated component was thought to be its true
form, or calx. Highly combustible materials that leave little resi due (e.g., wood) were thought to mostly comprise of
phlogiston, while non-combustible substances that cor rode (e.g., iron) contained very little phlogiston. Air did not play a role in
phlogiston theory, instead, it was based on observations of what happens when something burns, that most common o bjects
appear to become lighter and seem to lose something in the process. However, one observation that overturn ed phlogiston
theory was that metals, gain weight in rusting when they were s upposedly losing phlogiston!
Oxygen was first discovered by Carl Wilhelm Scheele (Fi gure) by heating mercuric oxide (HgO). Scheele called the gas fire
air because it was the only known supporter of combustion. He wrote an account of this discovery in a manuscri pt (Treatise on Air
and Fire) submitted in 1775. Unfortunately for Scheele his work was not published until 1777. In August 1774, an experim ent
conducted by Joseph Priestley (Figure) sunlight on m ercuric oxide (HgO) inside a glass tube, which liberat ed a gas he named
dephlogisticated air. Priestley noted that candles burned brighter in this gas. He even went as far as breathing the gas himself, a fter
which he wrote: "The feeling of it to my lungs was not sensibly different from that of common air, but I fan cied that my breast felt
peculiarly light and easy for some time afterwards." Priestley published his findings in 1775. Because he pub lished his findings
first, Priestley is usually given credit for the discovery of what became known as oxygen.
Figure: Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele (1742 – 1 786). Isaac Asimov called him "hard-luck Scheele" becau se he made
a number of chemical discoveries before others who are generally given the credit.Note

9.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665
Figure: Portrait (by Ellen Sharples) of British clerg yman natural philosopher, educator, and political th eorist Joseph Priestley
(1733 - 1804).
Interestingly, Lavoisier (Figure) claimed to have d iscovered this new substance independently. However, Pri estley visited
Lavoisier in October 1774 and told him about his exp eriment and how he liberated the new gas. Furthermore, Scheele also posted a
letter to Lavoisier on September 30, 1774 that descr ibed his own discovery. Lavoisier never acknowledged r eceiving it, however, a
copy of the letter was found in Scheele's belongings after h is death.
Figure: Line engraving (by Louis Jean Desire Delaistre) of the French chemist and biologist Antoine-Laurent d e Lavoisier
(1743 - 1794) often refereed to as the father of modern chemistry due to his extensive contributions.
Raoul Pictet (figure 11) showed that by the evaporatio n of liquid sulfur dioxide (SO), carbon dioxide coul d be liquefied, which in
turn was evaporated to cool oxygen gas enough to liq uefy it. Pictet reported his results on December 22, 1 877. Two days later,
Louis Cailletet (Figure) announced his own method of liquefying oxygen. In both cases only a few drops cou ld be produced,
making analysis difficult. In 1891 James Dewar (Figure) was able to produce enough liquid oxygen to study. However, it was
the process developed independently by Carl von Linde (Fig ure) and William Hampson (1854 - 1926).2

9.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665
Figure: Swiss chemist and physicist Raoul Pierre Pictet (1 846 - 1929).
Figure: French physicist Louis Paul Cailletet (1832 - 19 13).
Figure: Scottish chemist and physicist Sir James Dewar FRS (1842 - 1923).

9.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665
Figure: German engineer Carl Paul Gottfried von Lind e (1842 - 1934).
Sulfur
Sulfur was known in ancient times and is referred to in the Bible. English translations of the Bible commonly referred to burning
sulfur as brimstone, giving rise to the name of fire-and-brimstone sermons, in which listeners are reminded of the fate of eternal
damnation that await the unbelieving and unrepentant. It is from this part of the Bible that Hell is implie d to smell of sulfur (likely
due to its association with volcanic activity). Sulfur ointments were used in ancient Egypt, while it was use d for fumigation in
Greece. A natural form of sulfur known as shiliuhuang was known in China since the 6 century BC. However, it was not until
1777 that Lavoisier (Figure) convinced the scientific community that sulfur was an element and not a compound.
Selenium
The element was discovered in 1817 by Berzelius (Figu re), who found the element associated with tellurium. It was
discovered as a byproduct of sulfuric acid production.
Figure: Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius (1779 - 1848).
Tellurium
Tellurium was discovered in the 18 century in gold o re from the mines in Zlatna, Transylvania. In 1782 Mül ler von Reichenstein
(Figure), the Hungarian chief inspector of mines in Transylvania, concluded that the ore was bismuth sulf ide. However, the
following year, he reported that this was erroneous an d that the ore contained mostly gold and an unknown metal very similar to
antimony. After three years of work Müller determined th e specific gravity of the mineral and noted the rad ish-like smell of the
white smoke evolved when the new metal was heated. Never theless, he was not able to identify this metal and gav e it the names
aurum paradoxium and metallum problematicum, as it did not show the properties predicted for the exp ected antimony.th
th

9.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665
Figure: A stamp showing Hungarian mineralogist Franz-Jose ph Müller von Reichenstein (1742 - 1825).
In 1789 Kitaibel (Figure) also discovered the elemen t independently in an ore from Deutsch-Pilsen which ha d been regarded
as argentiferous molybdenite, but later he gave the credit to Müller. In 1798, t he name was chosen by Klaproth (Figure) who
earlier isolated it from the mineral calaverite.
Figure: Hungarian botanist and chemist Pál Kitaibel (1 757 - 1817).
Figure: Figure. German chemist Martin Heinrich Klapro th (1743 –1817).
Polonium
Temporarily called radium F, polonium was discovered by Marie Curie and her husband Pierre Curie (Figure) in 1898, but it
was later named after Marie Curie's native land of Pol and. At the time Poland was not an independent country, b ut partitioned
under Russian, Prussian, and Austrian. It was Curie's hope that naming the element after her native land would publicize its lack of
independence. Polonium was the first chemical element name d to highlight a political controversy.

9.1.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665
Figure: Pierre (1859 - 1906) and Marie Skłodowska-Curi e (1867 - 1934) in their Paris laboratory.
Abundance
The abundance of the chalcogenes is given in Table.
Table: Abundance of Group 16 elements.
Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
O47 x 10 (Earth’s crust), constituent of water, 21 x 10
(atmosphere)
S 260 (Earth’s crust), 870 (sea water), 10 (atmosphere)
Se 0.05 (Earth’s crust), 5 (soil), 0.2 x 10 (sea water)
Te 5 x 10-3 (Earth’s crust), 0.03 (soil), 0.15 x 10 (sea w ater)
Po Trace (Earth’s crust)
Isotopes
The naturally abundant isotopes of the Group 16 elements a re listed in Table. All of the isotopes of polonium are radioactive.4 4
-3
-3
-6

9.1.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665Table: Abundance of the non-synthetic isotopes of the Group 16 elements.
Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Oxygen-16 99.76
Oxygen-17 0.039
Oxygen-18 0.201
Sulfur-32 95.02
Sulfur-33 0.75
Sulfur-34 4.21
Sulfur-36 0.02
Selenium-74 0.87
Selenium-76 9.36
Selenium-77 7.63
Selenium-78 23.78
Selenium-80 49.61
Tellurium-120 0.09
Tellurium-122 2.55
Tellurium-123 0.89
Tellurium-124 4.74
Tellurium-125 7.07
Tellurium-126 18.84
Tellurium-128 31.74
Tellurium-130 34.08
There are 38 known nuclear isomers of tellurium with a tomic masses that range from 105 to 142. Tellurium is the lightest element
known to undergo alpha decay, with isotopes Te to Te bei ng able to undergo this mode of decay.
Cigarettes: it is not only the smoke that kills, but also the radioactivity
Ever since the early 1960s, the presence of poloniu m-210 in tobacco smoke has been known. The world's big gest tobacco firms
spent over 40 years trying to find ways to remove th e polonium-210 without success: even to this day. However, they also never
published the results, keeping the facts of the radioactiv e hazards from the consumer.
Radioactive polonium-210 is contained in phosphate fertilizers and is absorbed by the roots of plants (such as tobacco) and stored
in its tissues. Tobacco plants fertilized by rock phosp hates contain polonium-210, which emits alpha radiat ion estimated to cause
about 11,700 lung cancer deaths annually worldwide.
Industrial production of the elements
Sulfur
Elemental sulfur is found near hot springs and volc anic regions in many parts of the world. V olcanic dep osits are mined in
Indonesia, Chile, and Japan. Significant deposits of su lfur also exist in salt domes along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico, and in
eastern Europe and western Asia. The sulfur in these de posits is believed to come from the action of anaero bic bacteria on sulfate106 110

9.1.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665minerals. However, fossil-based sulfur deposits from salt domes are the basis for commercial production in th e United States,
Poland, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine. Sulfur is mainl y extracted from natural sources by two processes: the Sicilian process
and the Frasch process.
Sicilian process
First used in Sicily from where it takes its name, the Si cilian process was used in ancient times to get sulfur from rocks present in
volcanic regions. The sulfur deposits are piled and s tacked in brick kilns built on sloping hillsides, and with airspaces between them
(Figure). Then powdered sulfur is put on top of the sul fur deposit and ignited. As the sulfur burns, the heat m elts the sulfur
deposits, causing the molten sulfur to flow down the slopi ng hillside. The molten sulfur can then be collected in wooden buckets.
The sulfur produced by the Sicilian process must be purifi ed by distillation.
Figure: Extraction of sulfur by the Sicilian process.
Frasch process
In 1867, sulfur was discovered in the caprock of a salt dome in Louisiana; however, it was beneath quicksand, wh ich prevented
mining. In 1894 Herman Frasch (Figure), devised a method of sulfur removal using pipes to bypass the quicksan d. The
process proved successful, but the high cost of fuel n eeded to heat the water made the process uneconomic until the 1901 discovery
of the Spindletop oil field in Texas (Figure) provided cheap fuel oil to the region.
Figure: German-born American chemist Herman Frasch (18 51 - 1914).
Figure: Spindletop oil field in Beaumont, Texas.
In the Frasch process three concentric pipes to extrac t sulfur at high purity directly out of the ground (Figure). Superheated
steam (160 °C) is pumped down the outermost pipe, whic h melts the sulfur. Hot compressed air is pumped down th e innermost

9.1.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665pipe, which serves to create foam and pressure. The res ulting molten sulfur foam is then expelled through the middle pipe. The
Frasch process produces sulfur with 99.5% purity, which ne eds no further purification.
Figure: Schematic diagram of the Frasch process.
Most of the world's sulfur was obtained using the Frasch process until the late 20 century, when sulfur recover ed from petroleum
sources (recovered sulfur) became more commonplace.
Selenium
Elemental selenium is a rare mineral, and most elemen tal selenium comes as a byproduct of refining coppe r or producing sulfuric
acid. Isolation of selenium begins by oxidation with s odium carbonate to produce selenium dioxide. The sele nium dioxide is then
mixed with water and the solution is acidified to for m selenous acid (oxidation step). Selenous acid is bub bled with sulfur dioxide
(reduction step) to give elemental selenium.
Elemental selenium produced by chemical reactions a ppears as the amorphous red form. When the red form i s rapidly melted, it
forms the black, vitreous form. The most thermodynami cally stable and dense form of selenium is the elec trically conductive gray
(trigonal) form, which is composed of long helical ch ains of selenium atoms (Figure). The conductivity of this form is
notably light sensitive. Selenium also exists in three different deep-red crystalline monoclinic forms, which is composed of Se
molecules, similar to many allotropes of sulfur.
Figure: The structure of trigonal selenium.
Tellurium
The principal source of tellurium is from anode sludg es produced during the electrolytic refining of cop per. Treatment of 500 tons
of copper ore typically yields 1 lb (0.45 kg) of te llurium. The anode sludges contain the selenides and tellurides of the noble metals
in compounds with the formula M Se or M Te (M = Cu, Ag, Au). At temperatures of 500 °C the anode sludges are roa sted with
sodium carbonate (Na CO) under air. The metals are re duced to the metals, while the tellurium is converte d to sodium tellurite,
(9.1.1).
Tellurites can be extracted from the mixture with wat er and are normally present as hydrotellurites HTeO in solution. Selenates
are also formed during this process, but they can be separated by adding sulfuric acid. The hydrotelluri tes are converted into the
insoluble tellurium dioxide while the selenites stay in so lution, (9.1.2).th
2 2
2 3
3-

9.1.13 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665The reduction to the metal is done either by electr olysis or by reacting the tellurium dioxide with sulfu r dioxide in sulfuric acid,
(9.1.3).
Physical properties
The physical properties of the Group 16 elements encom passes a gas (O), a non-metallic solid (S), and metals (Se, Te, Po), Table
Table: Selected physical properties of the Group 16 e lements.
Element Mp (°C) Bp (°C) Density (g/cm)
O -218.79 -182.95 1.429 g/L
S 115.21 444.6 1.819
Se 221 6854.81 (gray), 4.39 (alpha), 4.28
(vitreous)
Te 449.51 988 6.24 (solid), 5.70 (liquid)
Po 254 962 9.196 (alpha), 9.398 (beta)
Vapor phase
The lighter Group 16 elements form X dimers in the va por phase. Sulfur also forms higher allotropes in the vapor phase (e.g., S
and S), while selenium and tellurium forms atomic va por in addition to the dimmers. Unlike dihydrogen, h owever, the bonding is
associated with the molecular orbital combination of the two π-orbitals (Figure). All of the dimeric X mol ecules are
paramagnetic.
Figure: Molecular orbital diagram for the formation of O.
Solid state
While sulfur forms over 30 allotropes, the common fo rm of sulfur is cyclooctasulfur (S) has three main a llotropes: Sα, Sβ, and Sγ.
The orthorhombic form (Sα) is more stable up to 95 °C, while the β-form is the thermodynamic form. The lon e pairs of electrons
make the S-S-S bend (108°), resulting in S having the s hape of a crown (Figure). When sulfur melts the S mole cules break
up. When suddenly cooled, long chain molecules are f ormed in the plastic sulfur that, behave as rubber. Plas tic sulfur transform
into rhombic sulfur over time.2 2
2 8
8 8

9.1.14 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665
Figure: The structure of S.
Elemental selenium produced in chemical reactions a ppears as the amorphous red form. When rapidly melted, it forms the black,
vitreous form, which is usually sold industrially as beads. The most thermodynamically stable and dense fo rm of selenium is the
electrically conductive gray (trigonal) form, which i s composed of long helical chains of selenium atoms (Figure). The
conductivity of gray selenium is light sensitive and i s hence used in photocopiers. Selenium also exists in three different deep-red
crystalline monoclinic forms, which are composed of Se molecules, similar to many allotropes of sulfur. Unlik e sulfur, however,
selenium does not undergo the changes in viscosity when h eated.
Tellurium is a crystalline metal with a triginal struc ture (a = 4.4572 Å, c = 5.929 Å). Polonium has a simple cubic structure in i t’s a
form (a = 3.359 Å)
Compounds of the Group 16 elements.
The chemistry of the Group 16 elements is dominated by the stability of the -2 oxidation state and the noble gas configuration of
the X anion.
Oxidation state
The electronegativity of oxygen (3.5) results in it h aving predominantly -2 oxidation state, however, sulf ur, selenium and tellurium
all for compounds with higher oxidation states, especially with oxygen (Table).
Table: Examples of oxidation states in compounds of th e Group 16 elements.
Element -2 -1 +4 +6
O Na O, H O H O - S H S H S SO H SO, SO
Se H Se H Se SeO SeF
Te H Te Bu Te TeO Te(OH)
Catenation
Catenation is the ability of a chemical element to form a long chain-like structure via a series of cov alent bonds. Although oxygen
shows this property only in the existence of ozone, sul fur is second only to carbon in exhibiting this mode of combination; the
chalcogens beyond sulfur show it to diminishing degrees, p olonium having no tendency to catenate.
When aqueous metal sulfide salts are heated with eleme ntal sulfur a range of polysulfide ions are formed, (9.1.4). When alkali
polysulfides dissolve in polar solvents (e.g., DMF or DMSO) a deep blue solution is formed. The absorption (λ = 6 10 nm) is
associated with the radical anion, S. While, polyselenide s and polytellurides are less common, the Se and Te ions a re known.
The term polysulfide often refers to a class of polymers with alternating chains of several sulfur atoms and hydrocarbon
substituents. The general formula is R Sn, where n rang es from 2 – 10. For the selenium and tellurium analo gs the extent of
catenation is far more limited.8
22 2 2 2
2 2 2 2 2 4 3
2 2 2 2 4
2t2 2 2 6
max
3-32-322

9.1.15 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212665Bibliography
D. Barisic, S. Lulic, and P. Miletic, Water Research, 1992, 26, 607.
M. Davies, History of Science, 1989, 22, 63.
T. F. Kelley, Science, 1965, 149, 537.
M. B. Power, J. W. Ziller, A. N. Tyler, and A. R. Barron, Organometallics., 1992, 11, 1055.
This page titled 9.1: The Group 16 Elements- The Chalcogens is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126669.2: Ozone
Ozone (O) is an allotrope of oxygen that is much les s stable than the diatomic molecule (O). Ground-level ozone is an air
pollutant with harmful effects on the respiratory sy stem, hile the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere fil ters potentially damaging
ultraviolet light from reaching the Earth's surface.
The structure of ozone is bent, with C symmetry, simi lar to water (Figure a). The central oxygen has sp hybridization with
one lone pair. As a consequence of the bent structure, and the resonance hybridization (Figure b) ozone is a polar molecule
(dipole moment = 0.5337 D).
Figure: The (a) structural parameters of ozone and (b) its resonance hybridization.
Ozone is made by the exposure of oxygen (O) to an el ectric discharge. Ozone has a characteristic smell ca n be commonly smelled
after a lightening strike; in fact the name ozone c omes from the Greek ozein meaning to smell. In the laboratory, ozone can also be
produced by electrolysis using graphite rod cathode, a platinum wire anode, and sulfuric acid (3 M) electr olyte. The half cell
reactions are as follows:
Ozone is also produced through photolysis of oxygen, (E quation and), both in the laboratory and the atmosphere.
Ozone is a very strong oxidizing agent, and will readil y oxidize a range of materials, e.g., Equations and. It will also
oxidize metals (except gold, platinum, and iridium) to thei r highest oxidation state, e.g., Equation.
Metal ozanides, which contain the ozonide anion (O) are explosive and must be stored at cryogenic temperatu res. Ozonides for all
the alkali metals are known. KO, RbO, and CsO can be prepared from their respective superoxides.
Ozone as a modulator of life on Earth
The Earth’s atmosphere acts as a source of O and a rep ository of CO, but its also acts as a shield for life. First, nearly all
meteorites burn up on entry because of the high temp eratures generated by the friction of the atmospher e. Second, the atmosphere
acts as a shield for high energy UV radiation.
Although UV radiation converts 7-dehydrocholesterol i nto vitamin D3 in the skin (Figure), and is therefore useful, high
energy UV destroys living cells. In fact the darkening we call a suntan is actually the body’s mechanism fo r preventing further UV
damage. Sun burn and skin cancer are caused by relativ ely weak UV light that reaches the Earth’s surface, with out the atmosphere
we would be exposed to high energy UV that would be a h azard to all life on Earth. The Earth’s “sun screen” is ozone (O). And
without ozone in the upper atmosphere there would be n o life on Earth.3 2
2v2
33 3 3
2 2

9.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212666
Figure: The conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol (a der ivative of cholesterol) to pre-vitamin D3 by photoly sis by ultraviolet
light, and its subsequent isomerization to vitamin D3.
The ozone layer is located in the lower portion of th e stratosphere from approximately 10 km to 50 km abo ve Earth, though the
thickness varies seasonally and geographically. This layer contains over 91% of the ozone in Earth’s at mosphere and absorbs 9399% of the sun's high frequency ultraviolet light. Th e ozone decomposes photolytically to O and molecular oxygen, (9.2.10), and
it is this reaction that accounts for the UV protectio n of the atmosphere. Ozone is naturally regenerated by the exothermic reaction
of the molecular oxygen with O, (9.2.11).
The balance between ozone formation and destruction i s thus an important mechanism for the protection of living organisms on the
planet. While the ozone layer had been relatively co nstant on Earth for millions of years, the last 70 h ave seen a dramatic change
including the increase in the polar hole in the ozo ne layer. The ozone hole is defined geographically a s the area where the total
ozone concentration is less than 220 Dobson Units.
One Dobson unit refers to a layer of ozone that would be 1 0 µm (micrometre) that is 1 x 10 m thick under standard tem perature
(25 °C) and pressure (1 atmosphere).
The ozone hole has steadily grown in size and length of existence over the past two and half decades. At pr esent the size of ozone
hole over Antarctica is estimated to be about 30 million s q.km (Figure).
Figure: The concentration profile of ozone over Ant arctica.
This page titled 9.2: Ozone is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2
-5

9.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126679.3: Water - The Fuel for the Medieval Industrial Revolution
Despite the greatest industrial complex of the Roman Empire being the imperial grain mill at Barbegal n ear Arles in what is now
southern France (Figure), and the knowledge of gearin g used for the mill, the waterwheel (the power source o f the Barbegal’s
power) was little used in the ancient world. This was pr obably due to the high slave population obviating th e need for labor saving
devices. However, it may also be that because the Roman Empire was very centralized, they could provide flou r on a large scale
from a few highly mechanized locations. Upon the fall of the Roman Empire, the knowledge of water power would have been lost
were it not for the writing departments of churches and monas teries that continued to operate through the subsequent Dar k Ages.
Figure: The Barbegal mill as it stands today.
The Barbegal mill is probably the first example of i ndustrial mass production. It consisted of eight pair s of waterwheels positioned
on a 65-foot slope (Figure). The wheels were turned b y water that fell from a reservoir, which in turn was f ed by a magnificent
aqueduct. The sixteen wheels each powered two grindstones using a set of gear that allowed the horizontal shaft from the wheel to
turn a vertical shaft on which the grindstones were p ositioned. Grain for the mill was imported from as far as Egypt, and the flour
production was eight times than that required for the local population of 10,000, resulting in an export b usiness. Unfortunately,
upon the fall of Rome the technology of waterpower al most ceased since the small city-states set up had no need for industrial
complexes.
Figure: An artist’s representation of the overshot wate rwheels that are thought to have driven the 16 mills at Barbegal.
There are two general designs of waterwheel. The first is powered by water falling from above the wheel and i s called an overshot
wheel (Figure). The alternative design, the undersho t wheel, relied on water flowing on a river or pond suc h that the current
moved the paddles at the bottom of the wheel (Figure).

9.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212667
Figure: A schematic diagram of an idealized overshot water wheel.
Figure: A schematic diagram of an idealized undershot water wheel.
Despite its fall from use, the waterwheel was not forgotte n. Due to the writings of 14 century BC engineers, such as Vitruvius
(Figure), whose texts had been preserved in the libra ries in churches and monasteries across Europe, the wa terwheel powered
mills made a resurgence between the fifth and the ten th century. In most cases mills were owned by the church, since they had the
knowledge (from ancient texts) to construct the mills and, possibly just as important, the literacy to dev elop the accounting system
for their profitable use. The church would lease mill s to farmers on a time usage, and they would take payme nt in flour. The owners
of waterwheels and their mills were the first barons o f industry post the Dark Ages. In fact, the fact that t he Saxon word for an
aristocrat is Lord, which means loaf giver, suggests the importance of the waterwheel. By the en d of the tenth century the
waterwheel was in widespread use across Europe. The Domesda y Book (the nationwide census carried out by the Norm ans after
the invasion of England) listed nearly six thousand gr ain mills in 1089.
Figure: A depiction of Vitruvius (right) presenting D e Architectura to the Emperor Augustus.
Despite the large number of waterwheels, the gearing used up until the ninth century was little different to that described by
Vitruvius and used at Barbegal. Then around 890 AD the monastery of St Gall a new device was attached to the waterwheel.
Instead of gearing to transfer power from horizontal to vertical rotation, a piece of wood was set into t he shaft driven by the
waterwheel (Figure). What had been created was a cam, s ince as the shaft turns the protruding piece of wood i ts anything in
its way. For example, the first recorded use, by the mon ks at St Gall, was to crush malt for beer. However, the c am could be made
to trip a hammer with every rotation (pounding), or to act on a crank to turn a rotary motion into a ho rizontal back-and-forward
motion (cutting), or to push down a level and activa te a suction pump (raising water from a well), or oper ate a bellows (for a metal
forge). The range of motions meant that waterpower cou ld now be used for a wide range of industries. By the en d of the tenthth

9.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212667century there were waterwheels powering forge hammers, o il and silk mills, sugar cane crusher, tanning mills pounding leather,
grinding stones, ore crushing mills (Figure), and as full ing mills for the rapidly expanding trans-European tex tile industry.
Figure: Schematic representation of the transformation of rotary motion into linear motion can be achieve d by having a cam
on the axle of the wheel
Figure: The cam principle as applied to a rock-crushi ng mill illustrated by Georgius Agricola in his book De Re Metallica
(1556).
As a consequence of the waterwheel and the cam, the perio d between the tenth and fourteenth centuries has com e to be known as
the Medieval Industrial Revolution. It is interesti ng to note that water played a key role in the drivi ng force during the next
Industrial Revolution four hundred years later – the stea m engine.
This page titled 9.3: Water - The Fuel for the Medieval Industrial Rev olution is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126689.4: Hydrogen Peroxide
Hydrogen peroxide (H O) is a very pale blue liquid bu t appears colorless in dilute solution. It is prepare d by the oxidation of
anthraquinol (shown below). The hydrogen peroxide is ex tracted with water from the anthraquinone solution an d the 20 - 40%
solution is purified by solvent extraction. An alterna tive process involves the oxidation of isopropanol in either the vapor or liquid
phase at 100 °C and ca. 15 atm, (9.4.1). The products are separated by fractiona l distillation.
In the gas phase H O adopts a gauche conformation (Figur e), but there is only a low barrier to rotation about the O-O bon d.
Figure: Structure of hydrogen peroxide in (a) the va por phase and (b) the solid (crystal) phase.
Hydrogen peroxide is a liquid at standard temperatur e and pressure (25 °C, 1 atm) due to the presence of strong hydrogen bonding
similar to found in water. In fact, the liquid range for H O (Mp = -0.43 °C, Bp = 150.2 °C) is actually br oader than water, and it is
slightly more viscous than water. Hydrogen peroxide has a den sity of 1.44 g/cm, and is 10 times less basic that water.
As with water, H O is a good solvent because of its polar nature and broad liquid temperature range, however, it is dangerous in
its pure state due to its facile (ΔH = -99 kJ/mol) auto deco mposition, (9.4.2), as well as its strong oxidizing nature.
Hydrogen peroxide is usually sold as 3 - 12% solutio n for home use; however, laboratory and certain indus trial applications require
30% solutions.
Hydrogen peroxide should be stored in a cool, dry, well -ventilated area and away from any flammable or comb ustible
substances. It should be stored in a container composed of non-reactive materials such as stainless steel or glass (other
materials including some plastics and aluminum alloy s may also be suitable). Because it breaks down quickly when exposed to
light, it should be stored in an opaque container, a nd pharmaceutical formulations typically come in br own bottles that filter out
light.
Aqueous solution are weakly acidic (K = 1.5 x 10), (9.4.3). However, there is no exchange of oxygen atoms between H O and
H O in the liquid phase.
As expected hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidizing agent, (9.4.4), however, it can also act as a reducing agent, (9.4.5).
This page titled 9.4: Hydrogen Peroxide is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2 2
2 2
2 2
3 6
2 2
Note
-122 2

9.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126699.5: Hydrogen Peroxide Providing a Lift for 007
In the pre-credit sequence of the 1965 film Thunderball, James Bond 007 (played by Sean Connery) uses a Jet pack to escape from
two gunmen after killing Jacques Bouvar, SPECTRE Agent No. 6 (Figure). The Jetpack was also used in the Thunderball
posters, being the "Look Up" part of the "Look Up! Loo k Down! Look Out!" tagline (Figure). The Jetpack return ed in 2002 in
Die Another Day (in which Pierce Brosnan played Bond) in the Q scene th at showcased many other classic gadgets from previous
Bond films.
Figure: James Bond 007 escaping from gunmen using a Jetp ack (Copyright: Eon Productions).
Figure: Original poster for Thunderball (Copyright Danjaq, LLC and Eon Productions).
The Jetpack was actually a real fully functional devic e: the Bell Rocket Belt. It was designed for use in t he US Army, but was
rejected because of its short flying time of 21-22 s econds. Powered by hydrogen peroxide (H O), it could fl y about 250 m and
reach a maximum altitude of 18 m, going 55 km/h. Desp ite its impracticality in the real world, the Jetpack made a spectacular
debut in Thunderball. Although Sean Connery is seen in close-up during the takeoff and landings (Figure), the main flight was
actually piloted by Gordon Yeager (Fugre 4) and Bill Suito r (Figure).
Figure: Close-up shot of Sean Connery as James Bond land ing the Jetpack. Note that the harness is not correctly attached,
indicating this was a set-up shot for the film rather t han a real flight. Presumably the crotch strap would have spoiled the lines of
his suit. (Copyright: Eon Productions).2 2

9.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212669
Figure 4: American pilot Gordon Yeager (1927 – 2005).
Figure: American rocket pack test pilot Bill Suitor (1944 -).
The Bell Rocket Belt is a low-power rocket propulsion device that allows an individual to safely travel o r leap over small distances.
All subsequent rocket packs were based on the construc tion design, developed in 1960-1969 by Wendell Moore. Moore's pack has
two major parts:
1. Rigid glass-plastic corset (Figure a), strapped to the pilot (Figure b). The corset has a tubular metallic frame o n the
back, on which are fixed three gas cylinders: two with liq uid hydrogen peroxide (Figure c), and one with compresse d
nitrogen (Figure d). When the pilot is on the ground, th e corset distributes the weight of the pack to the pilo t's back.
2. The rocket engine, able to move on a ball and socket joint (Figure e) in the upper part of the corset. The rocket engine
consists of a gas generator (Figure f) and two pipes (Figur e g) rigidly connected with it, which end with jet nozzles
with controlled tips (Figure h). The engine is rigidly con nected to two levers, which are passed under the pilot's ha nds.
Using these levers the pilot inclines the engine forward o r back and to the sides. On the right lever is the thrust c ontrol turning
handle (Figure i), connected with a cable to the regulat or valve (Figure j) to supply fuel to the engine. On the lef t lever
is the steering handle, which controlled the tips of jet no zzles.

9.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212669
Figure: Diagram of the Bell rocket pack (Adapted fr om US Patent 3,243,144 (1966).
The operating principle of the Jetpack is shown in Figu re. The hydrogen peroxide cylinders and compressed ni trogen cylinder are
each at a pressure of ca. 40 atm or 4 MPa). To operate t he pilot turns the engine thrust control handle, an d opens the regulator valve
(3 in Figure). Compressed nitrogen (1 in Figure) di splaces liquid hydrogen peroxide (2 in Figure), which enters the
gas generator (4 in Figure). In the gas generator, th e hydrogen peroxide contacts the catalyst and is de composed. The catalyst
consists of thin silver plates, covered with a layer of samarium nitrate. The resulting hot high-pressure mixture of steam and gas
enters two pipes, which emerge from the gas generator. These pipes are covered with a layer of heat insulat or to reduce loss of heat.
The hot gas enters the jet nozzles, where first they are accelerated, and then expand, acquiring supersoni c speed and creating
reactive thrust. The whole construction is simple and reliable; the rocket engine has no moving parts. Th e pack has two levers,
rigidly connected to the engine installation. Pressing on these levers, the pilot deflects the nozzles ba ck, and the pack flies forward.
Accordingly, raising this lever makes the pack move ba ck. It is possible to lean the engine installation to the sides (because of the
ball and socket joint) to fly sideways.
Figure: The operating principle of rocket engine.
This page titled 9.5: Hydrogen Peroxide Providing a Lift for 007 is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2126709.6: Comparison of Sulfur to Oxygen
Size
Table summarizes the comparative sizes of oxygen and sulfu r.
Table: Comparison of physical characteristics for oxyg en and sulfur.
Element Atomic radius (Å) Covalent radius (Å) Ionic radius (Å)van der Waal radius
(Å)
Oxygen 0.48 0.66 1.40 1.52
Sulfur 0.88 1.05 1.84 1.80
Electronegativity
Sulfur is less electronegative than oxygen (2.4 and 3. 5, respectively) and as a consequence bonds to sulfur ar e less polar than the
corresponding bonds to oxygen. One significant result in that with a less polar S-H bond the subsequent hydr ogen bonding is
weaker than observed with O-H analogs. A further consequ ence of the lower electronegativity is that the S-O bond is polar.
Bonds formed
Sulfur forms a range of bonding types. As with oxygen the -2 oxidation state prevalent. For example, sulfur f orms analogs of
ethers, i.e., thioethers R-S-R. However, unlike oxygen, su lfur can form more than two covalent (non-dative) bo nds, i.e., in
compounds such as SF and SF.
Such hypervalent compounds were originally thought be due to the inclusion of low energy d orbitals in hybrids (e.g., sp d for
SF); however, a better picture involves a combination of s and p ortbitals in bonding (Figure). Any involvement of th e d
orbitals is limited to the polarization of the p orbitals rather than direct hydridization. In this r egard SF represents the archetypal
hypervalent molecule. Finally, sulfur can form multiple b onds, e.g., Me S=O.
Figure: Molecular orbital diagram for SF.
Catenation
Catenation is defined as the ability of a chemical e lement to form a long chain-like structure via a ser ies of covalent bonds.
Oxygen’s extent of catenation is limited to ozone (O) and peroxides (e.g., R-O-O-R). In contrast, the chemi stry of sulfur is rich in4 6
3 2

9.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212670the formation of multiple S-S bonds.
While elemental sulfur exists as a diatomic molecule (i.e., S) in the gas phase at high temperatures, sul fur vapor consists of a
mixture of oligomers (S to S) as a temperature depen dant equilibrium. In the solid state the formation of Sn dominates, and sulfur
exists as a range of polymorphs in which extended S-S bo nding occurs in either rings of 6 to 20 atoms (e.g., Fi gure) or chains
(catenasulfur).
Figure: Structures of two polymorphs of sulfur: (a) cyc lohexasulfur S, (b) cyclooctasulfur S, and (b) cyclod odecasulfur S.
The higher level of catenation for sulfur is due to the greater strength of a S-S bond (226 kJ/mol) as co mpared to the O-O bond
(142 kJ/mol). In general the homoleptic bond streng th is expected to decrease going down a period of the Pe riodic Table. The
reason for the unexpected weakness of the O-O bond is th at the electronegative oxygen atoms repel each othe r and thus weaken the
bond.
This page titled 9.6: Comparison of Sulfur to Oxygen is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew
R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2
3 8
6 8 12

9.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128719.7: Chalconide Hydrides
Dihydrides
The hydrides of sulfur, selenium and tellurium are al l extremely toxic gases with repulsive smells. Hydrogen sul fide (H S) is very
toxic, in fact it is more than 5x as toxic as HCN (Table). Hydrogen sulfide is considered a broad-spectrum poi son, meaning
that it can poison several different systems in the b ody, although the nervous system is most affected. It forms a complex bond with
iron in the mitochondrial cytochrome enzymes, thereb y blocking oxygen from binding and stopping cellula r respiration. Exposure
to low concentrations can result in eye irritation, a sore throat and cough, nausea, shortness of breath, and f luid in the lungs. Longterm, low-level exposure may result in fatigue, loss of ap petite, headaches, irritability, poor memory, and dizzi ness.
Table: Toxicity levels for hydrogen sulfide.
Concentration (ppm) Biological effect
0.00047 Threshold.
10–20 Borderline concentration for eye irritation.
50–100 Eye damage.
100–150Olfactory nerve is paralyzed and the sense of smell disa ppears,
often together with awareness of danger.
320–530 Pulmonary edema with the possibility of death.
530–1000Stimulation of the central nervous system and rapid bre athing,
leading to loss of breathing.
800Lethal concentration for 50% of humans for 5 minutes exposure
(LC50).
+1000immediate collapse with loss of breathing, even after i nhalation of
a single breath.
Each of the hydrides is prepared by the reaction of acid on a metal chalcogenide, e.g., (9.7.1) and (9.7.2). The unstable H Po has
been prepared by the reaction of HCl on Po metal.
The thermal stability and bond strength of the dihydrid es follows the trend:
While H Se is thermodynamically stable to 280 °C, H Te and H Po are thermodynamically unstable.
All the dihydrides behave as weak acids in water. Thus, d issolution of H S is water results in the formation of t he conjugate bases,
(9.7.4) and (9.7.5), with dissociation constants of 10 and 10, respectively.
Sulfanes
The propensity of sulfur for catenation means that wh ile the hydrides of oxygen are limited to water (H O) a nd hydrogen peroxide
(H O), the compounds H S where n = 2 - 6 may all be is olated. Higher homologs are also known, but only as mixt ures. All of the
sulfanes are yellow liquids whose viscosity increases with i ncreased chain length.2
2 2 2
-7 -17
2 2 2 n

9.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212871A mixture of lower sulfanes is prepared by the react ion of sodium sulfides (Na Sn) with HCl, (9.7.6). From this mixture the
compounds H S where n = 2 - 5 are purified by fraction al distillation. However, higher sulfanes are made by t he reaction of either
H S or H S with sulfur chlorides, (9.7.7) and (9.7.8).
This page titled 9.7: Chalconide Hydrides is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2
2 n
2 2 2

9.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128729.8: Oxides and Oxyacids of Sulfur
Alternative spellings of sulfurous and sulfuric acids are based upon the traditional UK spelling of sulphur, i.e., sulphurous and
sulphuric acid.
Sulfur dioxide and sulfurous acid solutions
The combustion of sulfur results in the formation of gaseou s sulfur dioxide, (9.8.1).
The bent structure of SO is shown in Figure, and as a conse quence of the sp hybridization the molecule is polar.
Figure: The structure of sulfur dioxide.
The modest boiling temperature of SO (-10 °C) means th at it is readily liquefied and easily kept as a liq uid at room temperature
under a slight pressure. The liquid is associated by dip ole-dipole attractions due to the polar nature of SO. Liquid SO is a good
solvent due to the polarity of the molecule; as a co nsequence it readily solubalizes polar compounds and salts. It is also convenient
since it is easy to remove from reaction products by evap oration.
Sulfur dioxide is soluble in water forming aqueous sol utions where most of the SO is maintained as a hydrogen -bonded hydrate, in
a similar manner to that observed for aqueous soluti ons of carbon dioxide. At equilibrium in neutral wate r (no added base) a small
fraction reacts, to give a mixture of bisulfite (HSO, Fi gure a) and sulfite (SO, Figure b), (9.8.2). The free a cid does not
to exist.
Figure: The structures of the (a) bisulfite, (b) sulfit e, (c) disulfite, (d) dithionite, and (e) thiosulfate anions.
Bisulfite undergoes a further equilibrium, (9.8.3), to form d isulfite, whose structure is shown in Figure c.
Salts of these anions are known, and complexes of the s ulfite ion are known (Figure), while SO itself can act as a ligand to
heavy metals.Note
2 2
3-322

9.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212872
Figure: The structural modes of sulfite coordination.
The bisulfite ion has strong reducing properties, e.g., (9.8.4) and (9.8.5).
Bisulfite is also reduced by zinc in the presence of additional SO, (9.8.6), to form the highly reducing dithionite anion (Figur e
d). Reaction of bisulfite with elemental sulfur yields the thiosulfate anion (Figure e), (9.8.7)f.
Sulfur trioxide and sulfuric acid
Oxidation of sulfur dioxide in the presence of a catal yst (e.g., platinum) yields sulfur trioxide, (9.8.8), whic h may be condensed to a
liquid at room temperature (Bp = 45 °C).
Liquid SO exists as a mixture of monomer and trimers (Figure a and 4b), while as a solid (Mp = 16.9 °C) it f orms polymers
(Figure c).
Figure: The structure of (a) monomeric, (b) trimeric, and (c) polymeric sulfur trioxide.
The reaction of SO with water results in the formation of sulfuric acid, H SO, as a viscous, hydrogen bonded liquid. Sulfuric acid
is a strong protic acid, which in dilute solutions (i n water) reacts as a dibasic acid, (9.8.9), forming bi sulfate (HSO) and sulfate
(SO) anions. A large number of salts are known for both anions. In addition, sulfate is known to act as a monode ntate or
bidentate ligand in coordination complexes.
The dissolution of SO in concentrated sulfuric acid y ields very corrosive, fuming sulfuric acid, which contains some pyrosulfuric
acid, (9.8.10).
The corrosive properties of sulfuric acid are accen tuated by its highly exothermic reaction with water. B urns from sulfuric acid
are potentially more serious than those of comparabl e strong acids (e.g., hydrochloric acid), as there is ad ditional tissue damage2
3 2 4
WARNING

9.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212872due to dehydration and particularly secondary thermal da mage due to the heat liberated by the reaction with water.
Sulfur as a source of atmospheric pollution and acid rain
Sulfur dioxide is formed as a pollutant during the c ombustion of sulfur containing fuels, in particular co al. While the emission of
SO itself leads to concerns it is its conversion to sul furic acid in the form of acid rain that has been o f concern for several decades.
The pathway for the formation of sulfuric acid in th e atmosphere is depandant on whether the reaction occ urs in dry atmosphere or
in clouds and rain.
Gaseous reactions in a dry atmosphere
In the dry atmosphere, gaseous sulfur dioxide reacts wi th the hydroxide radical (formed by the photochemic al decomposition of
ozone, (9.8.11) and (9.8.12), in the presence of a no n-reactive gas molecule such as nitrogen, (9.8.12). The sulfurous acid, thus
formed reacts with oxygen to generate sulfur trioxide, (9.8.13), which reacts with water to form sulfuric acid, (9.8.14).
Measurements indicate that the conversion rate of SO t o H SO is 4% per hour on a clear sunny day, but the rat e is slower during
the winter.
Liquid phase reactions in clouds and rain
In the liquid phase SO reacts directly with water, (9.8.15). The bisulfite (HSO) is oxidized by hydrogen pero xide forming a
forming bisulfate (HSO) solution, (9.8.16).
Water soluble hydrogen peroxide is formed by the oxidati on of water, (9.8.17).
The HO radical is formed by the photolysis of organic c arbonyl compounds, e.g., formaldehyde in (9.8.18) and (9.8.1 9).
The conversion rate is independent of pH is very fast: almost 100% per hour in summer. However, the conversion is limited by the
supply of hydrogen peroxide, which is often present in much lower levels than SO. Thus, a reduction in sulfu r dioxide emissions
does not always correlate with a reduction of wet acid depos ition.
This page titled 9.8: Oxides and Oxyacids of Sulfur is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2
2 2 4
2 342

9.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2128739.9: Sulfur Halides
Sulfur hexafluoride
Sulfur hexafluoride (SF) is a gas at standard temperat ure and pressure (25 °C, 1 atm). The most common synt hesis involves the
direct reaction of sulfur with fluorine yields SF.
It should be noted that while SF is highly stable, SCl is not formed. The explanation of this difference may be explained by a
consideration of the Born-Haber cycle shown in Figure. A similar cycle may be calculated for SCl; however, a combination
of a higher dissociation energy for Cl and a lower S-Cl b ond energy (Table) provide the rational for why SCl is n ot formed.
Figure: Born-Haber cycle for the formation (ΔH) of SF: where D = dissociation energy for X-Y bond, E = S-F bond
energy, and S* indicates 6 coordinate sulfur.
Table: Comparison of diatomic bond dissociation and S -X bond energy for the fluorine and chlorine analog s.
Bond dissociation energy kJ/mol Bond energy kJ/mol
D 158 E 362
D 262 E 235
The S-F bond length (1.56 Å) is very short and consiste nt with π-bonding in addition to σ-bonding. Like SiF, SF is an example
of a hypervalent molecule (Figure).
Figure: Molecular orbital bonding in SF.
Sulfur hexafluoride is an unreactive, non toxic comp ound. Its inert nature provides one of its applicatio ns, as a spark suppressor.
The hexafluoride is generally resistant to chemical a ttack, e.g., no reaction is observed with potassium hy droxide (KOH) at 500 °C.
The low reactivity is due to SF being kinetically inert du e to:
Coordination saturation precluding associative reaction s with nucleophiles.6
6 6
2 6
f 6 (X-Y) (S-F)
(F-F) (S-F)
(Cl-Cl) (S-Cl)
62-6

9.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212873Coo d at o satu at o p ec ud g assoc at ve eact o s w t uc eop es.
Strong S-F bond (360 kJ/mol) limiting dissociative reaction s.
Thermodynamically SF should react with water (ΔH = -460 kJ/mol), but the rate factors are too great. Sulfur hexafluoride can be
reduced with sodium in liquid ammonia, (9.9.2), or with LiAlH. In each of these reactions the mechanism involv es the formation
of a radical, (9.9.3). The reaction with sulfur triox ide yields SO F, (9.9.4), however, the reactions with carb on or CS only occur at
elevated temperatures (500 °C) and pressure (4000 atm).
Sulfur monochloride pentafluoride
Although the hexachloride is unknown, it is possible to isolate the monochloride derivative (SF Cl) by the o xidative addition of ClF across SF.
Sulfur monochloride pentafluoride is a gas (Bp = -21 °C), but unlike SF it is fairly reactive due to the polarization of the S-Cl
bond (Figure), and as a consequence it reacts with water, (9.9.6).
Figure: Polarization of the S-Cl bond in SF Cl.
Sulfur pentafluoride
Although SF does not exist as a stable molecule, the g aseous dimmer S F (Bp = 29 °C) may be isolated from the photochemical
hydrogen reduction of SF Cl, (9.9.7).
While the sulfur is octahedral in S F (Figure a) the S- S bond is weak and long (2.21 Å versus an expected 2.08 Å for a single
S-S bond). Despite the apparently weak S-S bond, S F shows alm ost no reactivity at room temperature; however, the S- S bond
undergoes homoleptic cleavage at high temperatures. Th e resultant SF radicals disproportionate to give highl y reactive fluoride
radicals, (9.9.8), which is the source of the highly oxidativ e properties of S F.
Figure: Structures of (a) S F and (b) SF.
The SF fragment is stabilized by the addition of an al kyl radical, and thus, there are a large number of RSF derivatives known.
Unlike, the chloride analog, these are very stable.
Sulfur tetrafluoride
Sulfur tetrafluoride (SF) is prepared from sulfur dichlo ride and sodium fluoride in acetonitrile solution at 70 - 80 °C.
The structure of SF (and its substituted derivatives R SF) is based upon a trigonal bipyramidal structure wi th one of the equatorial
sites being occupied by a lone pair (Figure b). Unlike the hexafluoride, sulfur tetrachloride is a highly rea ctive compound. It
hydrolyzes readily, (9.9.10), and is a useful fluorinating agent (Figure).6
2 2 2
5 2 10
2 10
2 10
5.
2 10
2 10 4
5.5
4 3

9.9.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212873
Figure: Examples of the use of SF as a fluorinating age nt.
Sulfur chlorides
The chlorination of molten sulfur yields the fowl smel ling disulfur dichloride (S Cl). If the reaction is carried out with a catalyst
such as FeCl, SnI or I, an equilibrium mixture contai ning sulfur dichloride (SCl) is formed. However, the di chloride dissociates
readily, (9.9.11), although it can be isolated as a d ark red liquid if it distilled in the presence of PCl. The reaction of chlorine at -80
°C with SCl or S Cl allows for the formation of SCl as a yellow crystalline compound which dissociates above - 31 °C. Sulfur
chlorides are readily hydrolyzed. Sulfur chlorides are used to dissolve sulfur (giving species up to S Cl) for the vulcanization of
rubber.
In the vapor phase S Cl has C symmetry (Figure a) while t hat of SCl has C symmetry (Figure b).
Figure: Structures of (a) S Cl and (b) SCl.
This page titled 9.9: Sulfur Halides is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX)
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.4
2 2
3 4 2 2
2 2 2 4
100 2
2 2 2 2 2v
2 2 2

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: The Halogens
10.1: The Group 17 Elements- The Halogens
10.2: Compounds of Fluorine
10.3: Compounds of Chlorine
10.4: Oxyacids of Chlorine
10.5: Bromine Trifluoride as a Solvent
Thumbnail: Chlorine gas in an ampoule. (CC-BY-SA; W. Oelen (http://woelen.homescience.net/science/index.html))
This page titled 10: The Halogens is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron (CNX)
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/21267210.1: The Group 17 Elements- The Halogens
The Group 17 elements have a particular name: the halogens meaning born of salt. This is due to the formation of salts when they
form compounds with a metal. Table lists the derivation of the names of the halogens.
Table: Derivation of the names of each of the halog ens.
Element Symbol Name
Fluorine F Latin fluere meaning to flow
Chlorine Cl Greek khlôros meaning pale green
Bromine Br Greek brómos meaning stench
Iodine I Greek odes meaning violet or purple
Astatine At Greek astatos, meaning unstable
Discovery
Fluorine
The mineral fluorspar (also known as fluorite) consists mainly of calcium fluoride and was describ ed in 1530 by Agricola (Figure
) for its use as a flux. Fluxes are used to promote th e fusion of metals or minerals, and it was from this u se that fluorine
derived its name. In 1670 Heinrich Schwanhard found that when he mixed fluorspar with an acid the fumes produ ced (hydrogen
fluoride) etched the glasses he was wearing. Despite ma ny researchers investigating the chemistry of hydroge n fluoride (HF) the
elemental form of fluorine was not isolated until 188 6 when Henri Moissan (Figure) studied the electrolysis o f a solution of
potassium hydrogen difluoride (KHF) in liquid hydrogen fluoride (HF). The mixture was needed because hydrogen fluoride is a
non-conductor. The device was built with platinum/iridiu m electrodes in a platinum holder and the apparatus was cooled to −50 °C.
Figure: German author Georg Bauer (1494 - 1555), wh ose pen-name was the Latinized Georgius Agricola, was m ost
probably the first person to be environmental consciou s.2

10.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672
Figure: French chemist Ferdinand Frederick Henri Moissan (1852 - 1907) was awarded the Nobel Prize for his wor k with
fluorine.
The generation of elemental fluorine from hydrofluo ric acid proved to be exceptionally dangerous, killin g or blinding several
scientists who attempted early experiments on this halogen. The victims became known as fluorine martyrs.
Chlorine
Archaeological evidence has shown that sodium chloride (known as table salt) has been used as early as 3000 BC and brine (the
saturated water solution) as early as 6000 BC. It is thought that hydrochloric acid was probably known to alchemist Jābir ibn
Hayyān (Figure) around 800 AD, while aqua regia (a mixt ure of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid) began to b e used to
dissolve gold sometime before 1400 AD. Upon dissolving gold in aqua regia, chlorine gas is released along wi th other nauseating
and irritating gases.
Figure: 15 century portrait of Abu Musa Jābir ibn Hay yān (721 - 815), also known by his Latinized name “Ge rber”. He was
a chemist, alchemist, astronomer and astrologer, engine er, geologist, philosopher, physicist, and pharmacist an d physician.
Chlorine was first prepared and studied in 1774 by Ca rl Wilhelm Scheele (Figure), and therefore he is cred ited for its
discovery despite his failing to establish chlorine a s an element, mistakenly thinking that it was the oxi de obtained from the
hydrochloric acid. Regardless of what he believed, Sch eele did isolate chlorine by reacting MnO (as the mi neral pyrolusite) with
HCl, (10.1.1).th

10.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672
Figure: Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele (1742 – 17 86). Isaac Asimov called him "hard-luck Scheele" because he
made a number of chemical discoveries before others wh o are generally given the credit.
Bromine
Bromine was discovered independently by two chemists Antoine Balard (Figure) in 1825 and Carl Jacob Löwig (Figure
) in 1826.
Figure: French chemist Antoine Jérôme Balard (1802 - 1 876).
Figure: German chemist Carl Jacob Löwig (1803 - 1890).
Balard found bromide salts in the ash of sea weed from the salt marshes of Montpellier. The sea weed was used t o produce iodine,
but also contained bromine. Balard distilled the bromi ne from a solution of seaweed ash saturated with chlo rine. The properties of
the resulting substance resembled that of an intermed iate of chlorine and iodine; with those results he t ried to prove that the
substance was iodine monochloride (ICl), but after fai ling to do so he was sure that he had found a new elem ent and named it
muride, derived from the Latin word muria for brine.
In contrast, Löwig isolated bromine from a mineral wat er spring in Bad Kreuznach. Löwig used a solution of the mineral salt
saturated with chlorine and extracted the bromine wit h Et O. After evaporation a brown liquid remained. Unfort unately, the
publication of his results were delayed and Balard publi shed first.2

10.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672Iodine
Iodine was discovered by Bernard Courtois (Figure) in 1811 when he was destroying the waste material from the production
of saltpeter (KNO) during gunpowder production. Saltpete r produced from French niter beds required sodium ca rbonate
(Na CO), which could be isolated from seaweed washed up on the coasts of Normandy and Brittany. To isolate the sodium
carbonate, seaweed was burned and the ash then washed with water; the remaining waste was destroyed by the ad dition of sulfuric
acid (H SO). After adding too much acid, Courtois obse rved a cloud of purple vapor that crystallized on c old surfaces making
dark crystals. Courtois suspected that this was a new el ement but lacked the money to pursue his observations. In supplying
samples to his friends, Charles Desormes and Nicolas Clé ment, he hoped his research was to continue. On 29 Novem ber 1813,
Dersormes and Clément made public Courtois’s discovery, d escribing the substance to a meeting of the Imperial Insti tute of France.
Figure: French chemist Bernard Courtois (1777 - 1838).
Astatine
The existence of eka-iodine had been predicted by Mendeleev (Figure), but astati ne was first synthesized in 1940 by Corson
(Figure), MacKenzie (Figure), and Segrè (Figure) at th e University of California, Berkeley by bombarding
bismuth with alpha particles.
Figure: Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev (1834 - 1907).3
2 3
2 4

10.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672
Figure: Physicist and President of Cornell University, Da le R. Corson (1914 -).
Figure: Physicist Kenneth Ross MacKenzie (1912 - 2002).
Figure: Italian physicist Emilio Segrè (1905 - 1989).
Abundance
The abundance of the halogens is given in Table.

10.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672Table: Abundance of the halogens.
Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
F950 (Earth’s crust), 330 (soil), 1.3 (sea water), 6 x 1 0
(atmosphere)
Cl 130 (Earth’s crust), 50 – 2000 (soil), 1.8 x 10 (sea wa ter)
Br 0.4 (Earth’s crust), 5 – 40 (soil), 65 (sea water)
I0.14 (Earth’s crust), 3 (soil), 0.06 (sea water), 60 x 10
(atmosphere)
At Trace in some minerals
Isotopes
The naturally abundant isotopes of the halogens are listed in Table. All 33 isotopes of astatine are radioactive.
Table: Abundance of the major isotopes of the haloge ns.
Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Fluorine-19 100
Chlorine-35 75.77
Chlorine-36 trace
Chlorine-37 24.23
Bromine-79 50.69
Bromine-81 49.31
Iodine-127 100%
While F is the only naturally abundant isotope of fl uorine, the synthetic isotope, F, has half life of abou t 110 minutes, and is
commercially an important source of positrons for po sitron emission tomography (PET). PET is a nuclear medi cine imaging
technique that produces a 3-D image of processes within the body. The system detects pairs of γ-rays emitte d indirectly by a
positron-emitting radionuclide (tracer), which is introd uced into the body on a biologically active molecule.
Trace amounts of radioactive Cl exist in the environ ment at about 7 x 10 %. Cl is produced in the atmosph ere by the
interaction of cosmic rays with Ar. In the ground Cl i s generated through neutron capture by Cl or muon (an elemental
particle similar to an electron) capture by Ca. Cl d ecays with a half-life of 308,000 years making it sui table for geologic dating
in the range of 60,000 to 1 million years. However, du e to the large amounts of Cl produced by irradiatio n of seawater during
atmospheric detonations of nuclear weapons between 19 52 and 1958, it is also sued as an event marker for 1 950s water in soil and
ground water.
Iodine has 37 isotopes of iodine, but only one, I, is stable. Of the radioactive isotopes, I (half-life 15.7 million years) is used
for radiometric dating of the first 85 million year s of solar system evolution. I is also a product of ur anium and plutonium
fission, and as a consequence of nuclear fuel reproce ssing and atmospheric nuclear weapons tests, the natur al signal has been
swamped. As a consequence it can now be used as a tracer of nuclear waste dispersion into the environment. I was u sed in
rainwater studies to track fission products following the Che rnobyl disaster.
Due to preferential uptake of iodine by the thyroid, isotopes with short half lives such as I can be used for thyroid ablation, a
procedure in which radioactive iodine is administered intravenously or orally following a diagnostic scan. The lower energy
isotopes I and I are used as tracers to evaluate the anatom ic and physiologic function of the thyroid.-4
-3
19 18
36 -11 36
36 36 35
40 36
127 129
123 125

10.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672Industrial production.
Industrial production of fluorine involves the elec trolysis of hydrogen fluoride (HF) in the presence of potassium fluoride (KF)
during which fluorine gas is formed at the anode and hydrogen gas is formed at the cathode (Figure). The p otassium
fluoride (KF) is converted to potassium bifluoride (KHF), (10.1.2), which is the electrolyte and intermediate t o the fluorine and
hydrogen, (10.1.3).
Figure: The fluorine cell room at F2 Chemicals Ltd, P reston, UK.
The HF is formed as a byproduct of the production of p hosphoric acid, since phosphate-containing minerals contain significant
amounts of calcium fluorides, which upon treatment with sulfuric acid release hydrogen fluoride, (10.1.4).
Chlorine is generally manufactured by electrolysis o f a sodium chloride solution (brine). The production of chlorine results in the
co-products caustic soda (sodium hydroxide, NaOH) and hyd rogen gas (H). Chlorine can also be produced by the e lectrolysis of a
solution of potassium chloride, in which case the co-pr oducts are hydrogen and caustic potash (potassium h ydroxide). There are
three industrial methods for the extraction of chlor ine by electrolysis of chloride solutions, all proc eeding by the same reaction at
the cathode, (10.1.5), and anode, (10.1.6), which lead to t he overall reaction, (10.1.7), where M = Na or K.
Bromine exists exclusively as bromide salts in the Ea rth’s crust, however, due to leaching, bromide salts hav e accumulated in sea
water, but at a lower concentration than chloride. Th e majority of bromine is isolated from bromine-rich brines, which are treated
with chlorine gas, flushing through with air. In this treatm ent, bromide anions are oxidized to bromine by the ch lorine gas, (10.1.8).
Two major sources of iodine are used for commercial production: the caliche (a hardened sedimentary dep osit of calcium carbonate
found in Chile) and the iodine containing brines of gas and oil fields in Japan and the United States. The caliche contains sodium
nitrate (NaNO); in which traces of sodium iodate (NaIO) and sodium iodide (NaI) are found. During the productio n of sodium
nitrate the sodium iodate and iodide is extracted. Io dine sourced from brine involves the acidification wi th sulfuric acid to form
hydrogen iodide (HI), which is then oxidized to iodine with chlorine, (10.1.9). The aqueous iodine solution is concentrated by
passing air through the solution causing the iodine t o evaporate. The iodine solution is then re-reduced with sulfur dioxide,
(10.1.10). The dry hydrogen iodide (HI) is reacted with chl orine to precipitate the iodine, (10.1.11).2
3 3

10.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672Physical properties
The physical properties of the halogens (Table) en compasses gases (F and Cl), a liquid (Br), a non-metal lic solid (I), and
a metallic metal (At).
Table: Selected physical properties of the halogens.
Element Mp (°C) Bp (°C) Density (g/cm3)
F -219.62 -188.12 1.7 x 10 @ 0 °C, 101 kPa
Cl -101.5 -34.04 3.2 x 10 @ 0 °C, 101 kPa
Br -7.2 58.8 3.1028 (liquid)
I 113.7 184.3 4.933
At 302 337 ca. 7
Reactivity
All the halogens are highly reactive and are as a co nsequence of the stability of the X ion are strong o xidizing agents (Table
Table: Electrochemical reduction potential for hal ogens.
Reduction Reduction potential (V)
F + 2 e → 2 F 2.87
Cl + 2 e → 2 Cl 1.36
Br + 2 e → 2 Br 1.07
I + 2 e → 2 I 0.53
Elemental fluorine (fluorine gas) is a highly toxic, corrosive oxidant, which can cause ignition of organ ic material. Fluorine gas
has a characteristic pungent odor that is detectable in concentrations as low as 20 ppb. As it is so reactiv e, all materials of
construction must be carefully selected and metal s urfaces must be passivated. In high concentrations, sol uble fluoride salts are
also toxic and skin or eye contact with high concentratio ns of many fluoride salts is dangerous.
Use of chlorine as a weapon
Chlorine gas, also known as bertholite, was first used as a weapon in World War I by Germany o n April 22, 1915 in the Second
Battle of Ypres. At around 5:00 pm on April 22, 1915, th e German Army released one hundred and sixty eight tons of chlorine gas
over a 4 mile front against French and colonial Moro ccan and Algerian troops of the French 45 and 78 divi sions (Figure).
The attack involved a massive logistical effort, as Ge rman troops hauled 5730 cylinders of chlorine gas, wei ghing ninety pounds
each, to the front by hand. The German soldiers also op ened the cylinders by hand, relying on the prevailin g winds to carry the gas
towards enemy lines. Because of this method of disper sal, a large number of German soldiers were injured or killed in the process
of carrying out the attack. Approximately 6,000 French and colonial troops died within ten minutes at Ypres, primarily from
asphyxiation and subsequent tissue damage in the lun gs. Many more were blinded. Chlorine gas forms hydrochl oric acid when
combined with water, destroying moist tissues such as lungs and eyes. The chlorine gas, being denser than air, quickly filled the
trenches, forcing the troops to climb out into heavy enem y fire.2 2 2 2
-3
-3
2- 2- 2- 2- WARNING
th th

10.1.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672
Figure: The gas attack of the Second Battle of Ypres.
As described by the soldiers it had a distinctive smel l of a mixture between pepper and pineapple. It also tasted metallic and stung
the back of the throat and chest. The damage done by chlorine gas can be prevented by a gas mask, or oth er filtration method,
making the fatalities from a chlorine gas attack much lower than those of other chemical weapons. The use a s a weapon was
pioneered by Fritz Haber (Figure) of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin, in collaboration with the Germa n chemical
conglomerate IG Farben, who developed methods for disc harging chlorine gas against an entrenched enemy. It is alleged that
Haber's role in the use of chlorine as a deadly weapon drove his wife, Clara Immerwahr, to suicide. After its f irst use, chlorine was
used by both sides as a chemical weapon (Figure), but it was soon replaced by the more deadly gases phosgene and mustard
gas.
Figure: German scientist and Nobel Prize winner Fritz Haber (1868 - 1934).
Figure: A poison gas attack, in World War I.
Vapor phase
All the halogens form X dimers in the vapor phase in an analogous manner to hydrogen. Unlike dihydrogen, however, the bonding
is associated with the molecular orbital combination of the two p-orbitals (Figure). The bond lengths an d energies are given
in Table.2

10.1.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672
Figure: Molecular orbital diagram for the formation of F.
Table: Bond lengths and energies for halogens.
Element Bond length (Å) Energy (kJ/mol)
F 1.42 158
Cl 1.99 243
Br 2.29 193
I 2.66 151
Solid state
Iodine crystallizes in the orthorhombic space group C mca (Figure). In the solid state, I molecules still co ntain short I-I
bond (2.70 Å).
Figure: The solid state structure of I.
Compounds of the halogens.
The chemistry of the halogens is dominated by the s tability of the -1 oxidation state and the noble ga s configuration of the X
anion.
Oxidation state
The use of oxidation state for fluorine is almost mean ingless since as the most electronegative element, fl uorine exists in the
oxidation state of -1 in all its compounds, except ele mental fluorine (F) where the oxidation state is zero by definition. Despite the
general acceptance that the halogen elements form th e associated halide anion (X), compounds with oxidati on states of +1, +3, +4,
+5, and +7 are common for chlorine, bromine, and iodine (T able).
Table: Examples of multiple oxidation states for the halogens.2

10.1.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212672Element -1 +1 +3 +4 +5 +7
Cl HCl ClF ClF, HClO ClO ClF, ClO HClO
Br HBr BrCl BrF Br O BrF, BrO BrO
I HI ICl IF, ICl I O IO IO
Bibliography
G. Agricola, De Re Metallica, Dover Publications, UK (1950)
K. Christe, Inorg. Chem., 1986, 25, 3721.
This page titled 10.1: The Group 17 Elements- The Halogens is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.3 2 2 5 3-4
3 2 4 5 3-43 3 2 4 3-4-

10.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/21267310.2: Compounds of Fluorine
Elemental fluorine (F) is the most reactive element. Fluorine combines directly with all other elements, exce pt nitrogen and the
lighter noble gases. It also reacts with many compou nds forming fluorides, and many organic compounds inf lame and burn in the
gas. The highly reactive nature is due to the weak F-F bond (thermodynamically unstable), which provides a lo w activation energy
to reactions (kinetically unstable). The ΔG for reacti ons is often large due to the strength of the resulti ng X-F bonds. The weak F-F
bond (158 kJ/mol) is due to the small size (0.5 Å) and high nuclear charge of fluorine that result in a sma ll overlap of the bonding
orbitals and a repulsion between the non-bonding orbi tals (lone pairs) on the two fluorine atoms.
Ionic salts
The ease of formation of F anion is due to the high electron affinity of fluorine (-322 kJ/mol). Since th e fluoride ion is small (1.33
Å) and the least polarizable anion (i.e., hard) it is stable in ionic lattices with metal cations in a high oxidation state (high charge),
e.g., MnF and CrF. In general the highest oxidation sta tes for any metal are found with the fluoride salts. The large ionization
energies needed to produce the cations are recovered by the high lattice energies.
Covalent compounds
The high electronegativity of fluorine means that i t forms a single electron pair bond polar bond with a high ionic character. The
polar nature of the bond means that there is a large inductive effect within a molecule. For example, per fluoroethanol (CF CF OH)
has an acidity comparable to acetic acid.
The high strength of X-F bonds (Table) is also due to the high ionic character (up to 50%) that results i n a high activation
energy for bond breaking. In contrast, the low polari zability of the fluorine means that the inter-molecu lar van der Waals bonds are
very weak. Thus, even with very high molecular weights th e boiling point can be very low, e.g, WF, Bp = 17 °C, Mw = 297.84
g/mol.
Table: Typical bond energies for X-F bonds.
Bond Bond energy (kJ/mol)
C-F 486
N-F 272
P-F 490
A wide range of fluoride complexes may be prepared f rom both metal (FeF, RuF, PtF, and SnF) and non-metal (BF,
SiF, and PF) fluorides. While many fluorides are salt s, when the metal is in its higher oxidation states (e.g., OsF and WF), the
formation of an ionic lattice with the appropriate cation (i.e., Os and W respectively) is energetically unfavorable.
Hydrogen fluoride
Hydrogen fluoride (HF) is converted to highly corrosive hydrofluoric acid upon contact with moisture. Pure h ydrogen fluoride
must be handled in metal or polythene vessels, while aqueous solutions will readily etch and dissolve stand ard laboratory glassware
requiring the use of fluorinated polymer (e.g., Teflon) co ntainers.
Hydrogen fluoride is synthesized by the reaction of a fluoride salt with a concentrated acid, (10.2.1). The HF vapor may be
condensed, and then subsequently purified by distillation.
The H-F bonding in hydrogen fluoride involves an elec tron pair bond with a high degree of ionic character. This results in a very
polar H-F bond and a large dipole moment (1.86 D).
In the vapor phase, hydrogen fluoride is monomeric a bove 80 °C, but at lower temperatures it associates int o oligomers and small
polymers, e.g., cyclic (HF), as a consequence of strong intermolecular hydrogen bonds. As a pure liquid (Mp = -83 °C, Bp = 19.5
°C) hydrogen fluoride is extensively associated by stron g hydrogen bonding to form zig-zag polymers (Figure).2
4 5
3 2
63-6-62-62-462-6-6 6
6+ 6+

10.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212673
Figure: The hydrogen bonding in HF.
Hydrogen fluoride has a high dielectric constant (84.2) and as such is a good solvent for polar molecules. Ho wever, it is not a good
solvent for salts (even fluorides) because it does not solvate cations too well. Despite this, it is useful as a solvent because it is nonoxidizing and easy to evaporate off products.
In a similar manner to water, hydrogen fluoride self-i onizes, (10.2.2). Salts of H F are known and the F- anio n is further solvated
by the HF to form a series of salts, (10.2.3). The comple x anion HF is also formed in aqueous solutions of hydr ogen fluoride (pK
= 0.7).
Hydrogen fluoride is actually a weak acid in aqueous so lution with a low pK = 3.5. In fact, HF is a weaker acid tha t the other
halogen analogs:
This trend is despite the fluorine being more electron egative than the other halogens, but is consistent with the strength of the H-F
bond (568 kJ/mol).
Hydrogen fluoride is used as a non-oxidizing acid for the hydrolysis of proteins and acid catalyzed conde nsation reaction. The
stability of its salt (HF) allow for the study of very stro ng acids, (10.2.5) and (10.2.6).
The acidity of HF may be increased sufficiently by the addition of a fluoride acceptor (e.g., SbF) to facilit ate the reaction with a
weak base such as benzene, (10.2.7).
Finally, hydrogen fluoride can be used in the synthesis of other fluorine-containing compounds:
Organic fluorine compounds
Organic compounds in which some or all of the hydroge n atoms are replaced by fluorine have unique (and o ften important)
properties. The high stability of fluorocarbon compo unds is a consequence of the C-F bond energy (486 kJ/m ol) in comparison
with that of C-H (415 kJ/mol); however, while kineticall y stable, fluorocarbons are not necessarily particula rly thermodynamically
stable.
Replacement of hydrogen with fluorine results in an i ncreased density; since the small size of fluorine m eans that the minimal
distortion or structural change occurs as a result o f the substitution. As with metal salts, the weak inter-mo lecular forces means that
completely fluorinated organic compounds have low bo iling points. One attribute of the low inter-molecula r forces is the low
coefficient of friction for fluoropolymers such as pol ytetrafluoroethylene, commonly known as Teflon (Figure).
Figure: The structure of polytetrafluoroethylene (Te flon).2+

10.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212673Synthetic routes to fluorocarbon compounds
The simplest route to a fluorocarbon compounds involv es the direct replacement of another halogen by a m etal fluoride, (10.2.9).
The driving force for this reaction depends on the f ree-energy difference of MF and MCl, which is related t o the difference in
lattice energies. Thus, the larger the metal cation, t he more favored the reaction. In this regard, AgF and CsF are the most effective
fluorination agent.
Anhydrous hydrogen fluoride (HF) reacts with chlorocarbo n compounds in the presence of a catalyst such as SbC l or CrF,
(10.2.10). However, elevated temperatures (50 – 150 °C) and h igh pressures (50 – 500 psi) are required.
The direct replacement of hydrogen with fluorine is possible if the reaction is carried out under dilute conditions in the presence of
a catalyst, (10.2.11).
Sulfur tetrafluoride (SF) is a particularly selective fluorination agent. It can be used to convert keton es to difluoro compounds,
(10.2.12).
This page titled 10.2: Compounds of Fluorine is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.5 4

10.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/21267410.3: Compounds of Chlorine
Comparison to fluorine
To appreciate the chemistry of chlorine in compariso n to that of fluorine it is necessary to appreciate t he differences and trends
between the elements. As may be seen in Table, chlor ide is significantly larger than fluorine. In additi on while chlorine is an
electronegative element its electronegativity is signi ficantly less than that of fluorine, resulting in less pol ar bonding.
Table: Comparison of physical characteristics for fluo rine and chlorine.
Element Ionic radius (Å) Covalent radius (Å) van der Waal radius (Å) Electronegativity
Fluorine 1.33 0.64 1.47 -4.1
Chlorine 1.81 0.99 1.75 -2.9
The X-Cl bond is an electron pair covalent bond with a highly polar nature. In this regard, chlorine is sim ilar to fluorine. However,
there are two key features with regard to chlorine’s bonding that differentiates it from fluorine.
1. Unlike fluorine, chlorine can form multiple covalent bonds, e.g., ClO and ClF.
2. Unlike fluorine, chlorine can form π-bonds with oxyg en, i.e., Cl=O.
The chloride ion (Cl) forms salts with ionic lattices (e.g., NaCl) but also forms a wide range of complexes, e.g., [Fe(H O) Cl]
and [RhCl]. Chloride also acts as a bridging ligand in which one, two or three chlorides can bridge two metal centers (Figure
Figure: Structures of common halide bridging moieties.
Chloride (and bromide) bridges are usually bent, wher eas fluoride bridges can be either linear or bent. As an example, BeF and
BeCl are isostructural, consisting of infinite chains with bent bridges (Figure). In contrast, transition me tal pentahalides
show different structures depending on the identity of the halide. This, TaCl dimerizes with bent bridge s (Figure a), while
TaF forms a cyclic tetramer with linear fluoride bridges (Figure b).
Figure: The solid state structure of BeX (X = F or Cl).
Figure: The solid state structure of (a) TaCl and (b) TaF.
The halide bridge
The bridging halide bonds can be described by both L ewis and molecular orbital (MO) theory. In a simple pi cture, the lone pair of a
terminal halide can be thought to act as a Lewis base donor ligand to the second Lewis acidic metal cente r. Indeed some bridging
halides are asymmetric consistent with this view; howe ver, the symmetrical ones can be described by a resona nce form. From a
molecular orbital point of view, the bridging halide is represented by a combination of two metal center ed orbitals with two
halogen orbitals.4-3
-2 52+
5 5

10.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212674Hydrogen chloride
Hydrogen chloride (HCl) is prepared by the reaction o f concentrated sulfuric acid (H SO) with either NaCl or concentrated HCl
solution.
Hydrogen chloride is a polar molecule with a dipole o f 1.08 D. However, the lower polarity as compared to tha t of hydrogen
fluoride (1.91 D) is consistent with the physical and che mical properties. Hydrogen chloride is a gas at room te mperature (Mp =
-114.25 °C, Bp = -85.09 °C), and its low boiling point is consistent with weak hydrogen bonding in the liqui d state. While selfionization, (10.3.1), is very small, liquid HCl dissolves s ome inorganic compounds to give conducting solutions, (10.3.2).
Hydrogen chloride is soluble (and reacts) in water, (1 0.3.3). The pK of the reaction (-7.0) is larger than o bserved for fluorine (3.2)
and as such HCl is a stronger acid than HF.
Oxides of Chlorine
Chlorine forms a series of oxides (Table) in which the chlorine has the formal oxidation states +1, +4, + 6, and +7. The
physical properties of the oxides are summarized in Table. While, the oxides of chlorine are not very st able (in fact several
are shock sensitive and are prone to explode) the conjug ate oxyacids are stable.
Table: Physical properties of the oxides of chlorine.
Compound Mp (°C) Bp (°C)
Cl O -116 4
ClO -5.9 10
Cl O -117 44.5
Cl O 3.5 unstable
Cl O -91.5 82
Dichlorine monoxide (Cl O, Figure a) is a yellowish-red gas that is prepared by the reaction of chlorine wit h mercury oxide,
(10.3.4), or with a solution of chlorine in CCl.
Figure: The structure of (a) Cl O, (b) ClO, (c) Cl O, and (d) Cl O.
When heated or subject to a spark, Cl O explodes to Cl and O. Dichlorine monoxide reacts with water to form a n orange-yellow
solution of hypochlorous acid, (10.3.5).
Chlorine dioxide (ClO) is a yellowish gas at room te mperature and is commonly used in industry as an ox idizing agent. The best
synthesis of ClO involves the reduction of potassium chlorate (KClO) by oxalic acid at 90 °C, since the CO formed acts as a2 4
a
2 4
2 6
2 7
2 2 2 4 2 7
2 2 2
2 3 2

10.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212674diluent for the highly explosive ClO. On an industri al scale ClO is made by the exothermic reaction of so dium chlorate with SO
in sulfuric acid, (10.3.6). The photolysis of ClO yield s a dark brown solid with the formula Cl O; however, its facile explosive
decomposition precludes study.
The structure of ClO (Figure b) is equivalent to SO wit h one extra electron, resulting in a paramagnetic un paired electron
species. Unusually, despite the unpaired electron conf iguration, ClO shows no tendency to dimerize. This is u nlike the analogous
NO molecule.
Dichlorine tetraoxide (Cl O) is commonly called chlor ine perchlorate as a consequence of its structure (Fi gure c). Dichlorine
hexaoxide (Cl O) is an unstable red oil that has the ioni c structure in the solid state: [ClO] [ClO].
Dichlorine heptoxide (Cl O) is a relatively stable oi l, that is prepared by the dehydration of perchloric acid at -10 °C, (10.3.7),
followed by vacuum distillation. The structure of Cl O (Figu re d) has been determined by gas phase electron diffracti on.
The reaction of Cl O with alcohols and amines yields a lkyl perchlorates (ROClO) and amine perchlorates (R NC lO),
respectively.
Fluorides of chlorine
Given the isolobal relationship between the halogens i t is not surprising that the mixed dihalogens can be prepared, e.g., ClF, ICl,
and BrCl. Chlorine fluoride is a highly reactive gas (Bp = -100.1 °C) that is a powerful fluorinating agen t, and is prepared by the
oxidation of chlorine by chlorine trifluoride, (10.3.8).
The higher electronegativity of fluorine as compare d to chlorine (Table), and the ability of chlorine to form more than one
bond, means that higher fluorides of chlorine are al so known, i.e., ClF and ClF. Chlorine trifluoride (CF, Bp = 11.75 °C) is a
useful fluorinating agent, that is prepared by the high temperature reaction of elemental chlorine and fluorine, is a useful
fluorinating age. The gaseous pentafluoride (ClF, Bp = -31.1 °C) is prepared by the reaction of potassium c hloride with fluorine,
(10.3.10).
The structure of ClF is T-shaped with two lone pairs o n chlorine (Figure a), while that of ClF is square pyram idal with a
single lone pair on chlorine (Figure b).
Figure: The structures of (a) ClF and (b) ClF.
In general the halogen fluorides are very reactive; explosive reactions occur with organic compounds. They are all powerful
fluorinating agents when diluted with nitrogen, and the or der of reactivity follows:
Like most halogen fluorides, ClF, ClF and ClF all r eact with strong bases (e.g., alkali metal fluorides) to form anions, (10.3.12)
and (10.3.13), and strong acids (e.g., AsF and SbF) to form cations, (10.3.14), (10.3.15), and (10.3.16).2 2 2
2 2 3
2 2
2 4
2 6 2+42 7
2 7
2 7 3 2 3
3 5 3
3 5
3 5
3 5
5 5

10.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212674This page titled 10.3: Compounds of Chlorine is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/21267510.4: Oxyacids of Chlorine
Table lists the various oxyacids of chlorine. The r elative strengths increase with the number of oxygen atoms since the more
there are, the greater is the extent to which the negative c harge on the resulting anion can be delocalized.
Table: Relative acidity of oxyacids of chlorine.
Oxyacid Formula pK
Hypochlorous HOCl 7.5
Chlorous HClO 1.9
Chloric HClO -2
Perchloric HClO -10
Hypochlorous acid
Hypochlorous acid (HOCl) can be made pure in the gas p hase, (10.4.1), while strong acid solutions can be made from Cl O. In
contrast, dilute aqueous solutions are obtained with a suspensi on of mercury oxide to remove the chloride, (10.4.2).
Solutions of the anion, OCl, are obtained by electroly sis of brine solution; allowing the products to mix at low temperature,
(10.4.3).
The anion (hypochlorite) is a good oxidant, (10.4.4) and (10.4.5), but can undergo disproportionation, (10.4.6); slowly at 25 °C, but
fast above 80 °C.
Chlorous Acid
Chlorous acid (HOClO) is prepared by the reaction of C lO with base, (10.4.7), followed by the precipitation of the ClO salt with
barium chloride, (10.4.8). The barium salt is dried and the n reacted with a calculated amount of H SO, (10.4.9).
The pure acid is unknown since it is too unstable, howeve r, salts can be prepared directly, e.g., (10.4.10).
The anion (ClO) is stable in alkaline solutions but in a cid solutions decomposition occurs, (10.4.11).
As with hypochlorite, the chlorite anion is a strong oxidant, (10.4.12).a
2 22 4
2-

10.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212675Chloric Acid
The chloric anion (ClO) is made from the reaction o f chlorine gas with hot alkali (80 °C) or by the ele ctrolysis of hot NaCl
solution.
To obtain a solution of the acid, ClO is precipitate d as the barium salt, (10.4.14), which is removed, drie d, and suspended in water
and treated with a calculated amount of H SO, (10.4.15). The free acid cannot be isolated and a maximum con centration of only
40% can be obtained in water.
The ClO anion is pyramidal both in solid salts and in solution, and many salts are known; however, those with organic cations are
explosive. The anion is a strong oxidizing agent, (10.4. 16) and (10.4.17), and it disproportionates slowly in solutio n, (10.4.18).
Perchloric Acid
The perchlorate anion (ClO) is best made by electrol ytic oxidation of chlorate in aqueous solution, (10.4.19). Fractional
distillation can concentrate the solution to 72.5% which is a constant boiling mixture. This concentrati on is moderately safe to use,
however, 100% perchloric acid may be obtained by dehydratio n with H SO.
Perchloric acid is a very dangerous liquid that will e xplode if traces of metal ions are present. It is als o a very strong oxidizing
agent that will convert organic compounds to CO and H O.
Perchloric acid is a very strong acid that is fully ionized in aqueous solution, such that the salt [H O] [ClO] can be isolated. Many
other perchlorate salts are known, but those with organ ic cations are explosive. Perchlorate salts of metals a re often used when
studying complex formation in aqueous solution, beca use ClO is a very weak ligand (PF is better) and unlikel y to form
complexes itself. However, perchlorate does complex with +3 a nd +4 cations.
This page titled 10.4: Oxyacids of Chlorine is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R. Barron
(CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.332 4
342 4
WARNING
2 2
3 4
4-6-

10.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/21267610.5: Bromine Trifluoride as a Solvent
Bromine trifluoride is a toxic, colorless, and corrosi ve liquid with a pungent choking smell that is solubl e in sulfuric acid but
explodes on contact with water and organic compounds. V apors severely irritate and may burn the eyes, skin, an d respiratory
system. The liquid burns all human tissue and causes severe dam age.
Bromine trifluoride (BrF) has a liquid range simila r to water (Mp = 8.8 °C and Bp = 127 °C), and like wat er it auto ionizes,
(10.5.1).
The products, like those of water’s self-ionization, a re an acid (BrF) and a base (BrF). However, unlike wate r, BrF reacts with
fluoride acids and bases not proton acids and bases. T hus, in BrF a base is a salt that provides F, i.e., p otassium fluoride (KF) is a
base in BrF solution in the same manner as potassiu m hydroxide (KOH) is a base in water. The product from the reaction of a
fluoride donor salt with BrF is the formation of the co njugate base, BrF, (10.5.2).
Other examples of this type of reaction include:
By analogy, an acid in BrF solution is a compound that a cts as a fluoride (F) acceptor, i.e., a Lewis acid, (10.5.5).
What are the products from the reaction of HF with BrF?
Answer
Bromine trifluoride as a fluorinating agent
Bromine trifluoride is a strong fluorinating agent t hat is able to convert a metal (e.g., vanadium) to its associated fluoride
compound, (i.e., VF). A wide range of salts and oxides may be converted to fluorides with the metal in a hi gh oxidation state.
However, it should be noted that BeO, MgO, and Al O form oxo fluor ides rather than the fluoride.
The reaction of silver with BrF yields the monofluori de, while the same reaction with gold yields the triflu oride, Eq. If the
reactions are combined in BrF solution a mixed metal flu oride salt is formed.
A similar reaction occurs with NOCl and V O.
WARNING
2+4-3
3 43Exercise
2 3
2 5
Exercise

10.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212676What are the products from the reaction of BrF with (a) Sb O, (b) KCl, and (c) a mixture of Sb O and KCl?
Answer
(a) SbF, (b) KF, and (c) K[SbF].
Bibliography
J. H. Simons, Inorg. Synth., 1950, 3, 184.
This page titled 10.5: Bromine Trifluoride as a Solvent is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew
R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.3 2 5 2 5
5 6

11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212685CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: Group 18 - The Noble Gases
11.1: The Group 18 Elements- The Noble Gases
Thumbnail: Vial of glowing ultrapure neon. (CC SA; Jurii via http://images-of-elements.com/neon.php).
This page titled 11: Group 18 - The Noble Gases is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Andrew R.
Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/21267911.1: The Group 18 Elements- The Noble Gases
The elements
The Group 18 elements have a particular name Noble ga ses. Noble gas is translated from the German noun Edelgas, first used in
1898 by Hugo Erdmann (1862 - 1910) to indicate their extremely low level of reactivity. The noble gases were often also called the
inert gases, however, since noble gas compounds are now known this name is no longer used. Table lists the derivation of the
names of the Noble gases.
Table: Derivation of the names of each of the Group 18(VIII) elements.
Element Symbol Name
Helium He Greek helios meaning the Sun
Neon Ne From the Greek meaning new one
Argon Ar From the Greek meaning inactive
Krypton KrFrom the Greek kryptos meaning the
hidden one
Xenon XeFrom the Greek xenos], meaning foreigner,
stranger, or guest
Radon Rn From its radioactive nature
Discovery
Helium
The first evidence of helium was the observation by a stronomer Pierre Janssen (Figure) on August 18, 1868 as a bright
yellow line with a wavelength of 587.49 nm in the spect rum of the chromosphere of the Sun. On October 20 of t he same year,
English astronomer Norman Lockyer (Figure) observed a yellow line in the solar spectrum, which he named th e D3
Fraunhofer line because it was near the known D1 and D2 lines of sodium. He concluded that it was caused by a n element in the
Sun unknown on Earth. Lockyer and Edward Frankland (Figure) named the element with the Greek word for the Sun, helios.
Figure: Portrait of French astronomer Pierre Jules César Janssen (1824 - 1907).

11.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212679
Figure: English scientist and astronomer Sir Joseph Norma n Lockyer, FRS (1836 - 1920).
Figure: English chemist Sir Edward Frankland, KCB, FRS (1 825 - 1899).
On March 26, 1895 British chemist Sir William Ramsay (Fig ure) isolated helium on Earth by treating the mine ral cleveite (a
radioactive mineral containing uranium and found in Nor way) with mineral acids.
Figure: Scottish chemist Sir William Ramsay, KCB FRSE (1 852 - 1916).
Neon
Neon was discovered in 1898 by Sir William Ramsay (Figu re) and Morris Travers (Figure). When Ramsay chilled a
sample of air until it became a liquid, then warmed the liquid and captured the gases as they boiled of f. After nitrogen, oxygen, and

11.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212679argon, the three gases that boiled off were krypton, xeno n, and neon.
Figure: English chemist and founding director of the Indian Institute of Science, Morris William Travers (1 872 - 1961).
Argon
In 1785 Henry Cavendish (Figure) suspected that argo n was present in air but it was not isolated until 1894 by Lord Rayleigh
(Figure) and Sir William Ramsay (Figure) in an exper iment in which they removed all of the oxygen, carbon dioxide,
water and nitrogen from a sample of clean air.
Figure: British scientist Henry Cavendish FRS (1731 - 181 0).
Figure: English physicist John William Strutt, 3 Baron R ayleigh, OM (1842 - 1919).rd

11.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212679Krypton
Krypton was discovered in 1898 by Sir William Ramsay (Figure) and Morris Travers (Figure) in residue left from
evaporating nearly all components of liquid air.
In 1960, an international agreement defined the meter (m) in terms of wavelength of light emitted by the Kr isotope
(wavelength of 605.78 nm). This agreement replaced the standard meter located in Paris, which was a metal bar made of a Pt-Ir
alloy, and was itself replaced by a definition based on the speed of light, a fundamental physical constant. I n October 1983, the
Bureau International des Poids et Mesures defined the meter as the distance that light travels in a vacuum during / s.
Xenon
Xenon was discovered by William Ramsay (Figure) and M orris Travers (Figure) on July 12, 1898, shortly after their
discovery of krypton and neon.
Radon
Radon was the fifth radioactive element to be discove red after uranium, thorium, radium and polonium. Disco vered in 1900 by
Friedrich Dorn (Figure) after he noticed that radium compounds emanate a radioactive gas that he named Radium Emanation
(Ra Em). Prior to these experiments, in 1899, Pierre and Marie Curie (Figure) observed that the gas emitted by radium
remained radioactive for a month. Later that year, E rnest Rutherford (Figure) noticed variations when tr ying to measure
radiation from thorium oxide. In 1901, he demonstrate d that the emanations are radioactive, but credited the Curies for the
discovery of the element.
Figure: German physicist Friedrich Ernst Dorn (1848 - 1 916).
Figure: Pierre (1859 - 1906) and Marie Skłodowska-Curi e (1867 - 1934) in their Paris laboratory.Note
1299,792,458

11.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212679
Figure: British-New Zealand chemist and physicist Ernest Rutherford, 1 Baron Rutherford of Nelson, OM, FRS (1871 1937).
Abundance
The abundance of the Noble gases is given in Table.
Table: Abundance of Group 18 elements.
Element Terrestrial abundance (ppm)
He 8 x 10 (Earth’s crust), 4 x 10 (sea water), 5 (atmospher e)
Ne 70 x 10 (Earth’s crust), 0.2 (sea water), 18 (atmospher e)
Ar 1.2 (Earth’s crust), 0.45 (sea water), 0.93 x 10 (atmo sphere)
Kr 10 x 10 (Earth’s crust), 80 x 10 (sea water), 1 (atmosp here)
Xe2 x 10 (Earth’s crust), 100 x 10 (sea water), 90 x 10
(atmosphere)
Isotopes
The naturally abundant isotopes of the Group 18 elements a re listed in Table. All of the isotopes of radon are ra dioactive.st
-3 6
-3
-6 -6
-6 -6 -3

11.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212679Table: Abundance of the non-synthetic isotopes of the Group 18 elements.
Isotope Natural abundance (%)
Helium-3 0.000137
Helium-4 99.999863
Neon-20 90.48
Neon-21 0.27
Neon-22 9.25
Argon-36 0.337
Argon-86 0.063
Argon-40 99.600
Krypton-78 0.35
Krypton-80 2.25
Krypton-81 trace
Krypton-82 11.6
Krypton-83 11.5
Krypton-84 57
Krypton-86 17.3
Xenon-124 0.095
Xenon-126 0.089
Xenon-128 1.91
Xenon-129 26.4
Xenon-130 4.07
Xenon-131 21.2
Xenon-132 26.9
Xenon-134 10.4
Xenon-136 8.86
Radon-222 trace
Unlike most elements, helium's isotopic abundance varie s greatly by origin, due to the different formation p rocesses. The most
common isotope, He, is produced on Earth by a decay o f heavier radioactive elements. It was also formed in enormous quantities
during the Big Bang.
Naturally occurring K with a half-life of 1.25 × 10 ye ars, decays to stable Ar (11.2%) by electron capture and positron
emission, and also to stable Ca (88.8%) via beta decay. T hese properties and ratios are used to determine the age of rocks.
With a half-life of 230,000 years Kr is used for dati ng 50,000 - 800,000 year old groundwater. Kr is an in ert radioactive noble
gas with a half-life of 10.76 years. It is produced in nuclear bomb testing and nuclear reactors. Kr is rele ased during the
reprocessing of fuel rods from nuclear reactors.4
40 9 40
81 85

11.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212679Industrial production of the elements
Helium is extracted by fractional distillation from n atural gas, which contains up to 7% helium. Since heliu m has a lower boiling
point than any other element, low temperature and hig h pressure are used to liquefy nearly all the other gases. The resulting helium
gas is purified by successive exposures to lowering te mperatures. A final purification step with activated charcoal results in
99.995% pure Grade-A helium.
Argon is produced industrially by the fractional dist illation of liquid air, a process that separates liqui d nitrogen, which boils at 77.3
K, from argon, which boils at 87.3 K and oxygen, which b oils at 90.2 K. Xenon is obtained commercially as a by product of the
separation of air into oxygen and nitrogen.
Physical properties
The physical properties of the Group 18 elements are gi ven in Table.
Table: Selected physical properties of the Group 18 e lements.
Element Mp (°C) Bp (°C)
He -272.20 -268.93
Ne -248.59 -246.08
Ar -189.35 -185.85
Kr -157.36 -153.22
Xe -111.7 -108.12
Rn -71.15 -61.85
All of the Noble gases show characteristic spectral lines (Figu re – Figure).
Figure: Spectral lines of helium.
Figure: Spectral lines of neon.
Figure: Spectral lines of argon.
Figure: Spectral lines of krypton.
Figure: Spectral lines of xenon.
Compounds of the Group 18 elements.
Only a few hundred noble gas compounds have been forme d. Neutral compounds of helium and neon have not bee n formed, while
xenon, krypton, and argon have shown only minor reactivity. The reactivity follows the order:
Xenon compounds are the most numerous of the noble ga s compounds. Oxidation states of +2, +4, +6, and +8 with electronegative
elements, e.g., XeF, XeF, XeF, XeO, and Na XeO. Compounds o f xenon bound to boron, hydrogen, bromine, iodine,
beryllium, sulphur, titanium, copper, and silver hav e also been observed but only at low temperatures in noble gas matrices, or in
supersonic noble gas jets.2 4 6 4 4 6

11.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212679Although radon is more reactive than xenon it should form chemical bonds more easily than xenon, however, due to the high
radioactivity and short half-life of radon isotopes, on ly a few fluorides and oxides of radon have been formed.
Krypton is less reactive than xenon, and oxidation sta tes are generally limited to +2, KrF. Compounds in whic h krypton forms a
bond to nitrogen and oxygen are only stable below -60 °C and -90 °C, respectively. Krypton atoms chemical ly bound to other
nonmetals (hydrogen, chlorine, carbon) as well as some l ate transition metals (copper, silver, gold), but on ly at low temperatures in
noble gas matrices, or in supersonic noble gas jets. Similar conditions were used to obtain the first compounds of argon.
Noble gases also form non-covalent compounds, for exa mple clathrates that consist of an atom trapped within cavities of crystal
lattices of organic and inorganic compounds. Noble ga ses can form endohedral fullerene compounds, in which the noble gas atom
is trapped inside a fullerene molecule (Figure).
Figure: A skeletal structure of He@C.
Bibliography
L. Pauling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1933, 55, 1895.
M. Saunders, H. A. Jiménez-Vázquez, R. J. Cross, and R. J. Poreda, Science, 1993, 259, 1428.
This page titled 11.1: The Group 18 Elements- The Noble Gases is shared under a CC BY 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Andrew R. Barron (CNX) via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.2

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/212753Index
A
acetolysis
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
alcoholysis
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
alkaline earth metals
4.1: The Alkaline Earth Elements
aminoboranes
6.10: Boron Compounds with Nitrogen Donors
ammonation
8.3: Hydrides
ammonolysis
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
arsine
8.3: Hydrides
B
beryllium
4.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium
Boranes
6.4: Boron Hydrides
borohydride
6.4: Boron Hydrides
boron hydroxides
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
boron oxides
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
boron oxyanions
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
Bridgman technique
6.12: Electronic Grade Gallium Arsenide
C
calcium
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
carbide lamp
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
combustion
1.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of
Combustion
crown ether
3.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metalscryptands
3.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metals
D
diagonal effect
3.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium
double titration
3.4: Organolithium Compounds
G
gallium
6.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide
gallium arsenide
6.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide
Grignard reagents
4.4: Organometallic Compounds of Magnesium
H
halide bridge
10.3: Compounds of Chlorine
heavy water
2.8: Isotopes of Hydrogen
hydride
2.6: Hydrides
hydrogen bond
2.7: The Hydrogen Bond
hydrogen bridged bond
2.6: Hydrides
I
interstitial hydrides
2.6: Hydrides
L
lithium
3.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium
M
magnesium
4.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium
mercuration
5.4: Organomercury CompoundsN
nuclear fusion
2.9: Nuclear Fusion
O
organolithium compounds
3.4: Organolithium Compounds
organomercury compounds
5.4: Organomercury Compounds
oxygen balance
1.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of
Combustion
ozone
9.2: Ozone
P
Pentaborane(9)
6.4: Boron Hydrides
phosphines
8.3: Hydrides
Portland cement
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
S
skeletal electron pairs (SEP)
6.5: Wade’s Rules
solvation
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
solvolysis
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
solvomercuration
5.4: Organomercury Compounds
specific solvation
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
W
Wade’s Rules
6.5: Wade’s Rules
Z
zinc
5.3: Organometallic Chemistry of Zinc

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/278420Index
A
acetolysis
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
alcoholysis
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
alkaline earth metals
4.1: The Alkaline Earth Elements
aminoboranes
6.10: Boron Compounds with Nitrogen Donors
ammonation
8.3: Hydrides
ammonolysis
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
arsine
8.3: Hydrides
B
beryllium
4.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium
Boranes
6.4: Boron Hydrides
borohydride
6.4: Boron Hydrides
boron hydroxides
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
boron oxides
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
boron oxyanions
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions
Bridgman technique
6.12: Electronic Grade Gallium Arsenide
C
calcium
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
carbide lamp
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
combustion
1.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of
Combustion
crown ether
3.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metalscryptands
3.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metals
D
diagonal effect
3.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium
double titration
3.4: Organolithium Compounds
G
gallium
6.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide
gallium arsenide
6.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide
Grignard reagents
4.4: Organometallic Compounds of Magnesium
H
halide bridge
10.3: Compounds of Chlorine
heavy water
2.8: Isotopes of Hydrogen
hydride
2.6: Hydrides
hydrogen bond
2.7: The Hydrogen Bond
hydrogen bridged bond
2.6: Hydrides
I
interstitial hydrides
2.6: Hydrides
L
lithium
3.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium
M
magnesium
4.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium
mercuration
5.4: Organomercury CompoundsN
nuclear fusion
2.9: Nuclear Fusion
O
organolithium compounds
3.4: Organolithium Compounds
organomercury compounds
5.4: Organomercury Compounds
oxygen balance
1.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of
Combustion
ozone
9.2: Ozone
P
Pentaborane(9)
6.4: Boron Hydrides
phosphines
8.3: Hydrides
Portland cement
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal
S
skeletal electron pairs (SEP)
6.5: Wade’s Rules
solvation
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
solvolysis
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
solvomercuration
5.4: Organomercury Compounds
specific solvation
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
W
Wade’s Rules
6.5: Wade’s Rules
Z
zinc
5.3: Organometallic Chemistry of Zinc

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/279557Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/417162Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: Chemistry of the Main Group Elements (Barron)
Webpages: 102
All licenses found:
CC BY 3.0: 81.4% (83 pages)
CC BY 1.0: 13.7% (14 pages)
Undeclared: 4.9% (5 pages)
By Page
Chemistry of the Main Group Elements (Barron) - CC BY
3.0
Front Matter - CC BY 3.0
TitlePage - CC BY 3.0
InfoPage - CC BY 3.0
Preface - CC BY 3.0
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: General Concepts and Trends - CC BY 3.0
1.1: Fundamental Properties - Oxidation State - CC
BY 3.0
1.2: Fundamental Properties - Ionization Energy - CC
BY 3.0
1.3: Fundamental Properties - Electron Affinity - CC
BY 3.0
1.4: Fundamental Properties - Electronegativity - CC
BY 3.0
1.5: Structure and Bonding - Valence Shell Electron
Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory - CC BY 3.0
1.6: Structure and Bonding - Crystal Structure - CC
BY 3.0
1.7: Structure and Bonding - Stereochemistry - CC
BY 3.0
1.8: Acids, Bases, and Solvents - Choosing a Solvent
- CC BY 3.0
1.9: Chemical Reactivity - The Basics of Combustion
- CC BY 3.0
1.10: Periodic Trends for the Main Group Elements CC BY 3.0
2: Hydrogen - CC BY 3.0
2.1: Discovery of Hydrogen - CC BY 3.0
2.2: The Physical Properties of Hydrogen - CC BY 3.0
2.3: Synthesis of Molecular Hydrogen - CC BY 3.0
2.4: Atomic Hydrogen - CC BY 3.0
2.5: The Proton - CC BY 3.02.6: Hydrides - CC BY 3.0
2.7: The Hydrogen Bond - CC BY 3.0
2.8: Isotopes of Hydrogen - CC BY 3.0
2.9: Nuclear Fusion - CC BY 3.0
2.10: Storage of Hydrogen for Use as a Fuel - CC BY
3.0
3: Group 1 - The Alkali Metals - CC BY 3.0
3.1: The Alkali Metal Elements - CC BY 3.0
3.2: Compounds of the Alkali Metals - CC BY 3.0
3.3: The Anomalous Chemistry of Lithium - CC BY
3.0
3.4: Organolithium Compounds - CC BY 3.0
4: Group 2 - The Alkaline Earth Metals - CC BY 3.0
4.1: The Alkaline Earth Elements - CC BY 3.0
4.2: Calcium the Archetypal Alkaline Earth Metal CC BY 3.0
4.3: Differences for Beryllium and Magnesium - CC
BY 3.0
4.4: Organometallic Compounds of Magnesium - CC
BY 3.0
5: Group 12 - CC BY 3.0
5.1: The Group 12 Elements - CC BY 3.0
5.2: Cadmium Chalcogenide Nanoparticles - CC BY
3.0
5.3: Organometallic Chemistry of Zinc - CC BY 3.0
5.4: Organomercury Compounds - CC BY 3.0
5.5: The Myth, Reality, and History of Mercury
Toxicity - CC BY 3.0
6: Group 13 - CC BY 3.0
6.1: The Group 13 Elements - CC BY 3.0
6.2: Trends for the Group 13 Compounds - CC BY 3.0
6.3: Borides - CC BY 3.0
6.4: Boron Hydrides - CC BY 3.0
6.5: Wade’s Rules - CC BY 3.0

2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/4171626.6: Trends for the Oxides of the Group 13 Elements CC BY 3.0
6.7: Boron Oxides, Hydroxides, and Oxyanions - CC
BY 1.0
6.8: Aluminum Oxides, Hydroxides, and Hydrated
Oxides - CC BY 1.0
6.9: Ceramic Processing of Alumina - CC BY 1.0
6.10: Boron Compounds with Nitrogen Donors - CC
BY 1.0
6.11: Properties of Gallium Arsenide - CC BY 1.0
6.12: Electronic Grade Gallium Arsenide - CC BY 1.0
6.13: Chalcogenides of Aluminum, Gallium, and
Indium - CC BY 1.0
6.14: Group 13 Halides - CC BY 1.0
7: Group 14 - CC BY 3.0
7.1: The Group 14 Elements - CC BY 3.0
7.2: Carbon Black- From Copying to Communication
- CC BY 3.0
7.3: Carbon Nanomaterials - CC BY 3.0
7.4: Nitrogen Compounds of Carbon - CC BY 3.0
7.5: Carbon Monoxide - CC BY 3.0
7.6: Carbon Dioxide - CC BY 3.0
7.7: Suboxides of Carbon - CC BY 1.0
7.8: Carbon Halides - CC BY 1.0
7.9: Comparison Between Silicon and Carbon - CC
BY 1.0
7.10: Semiconductor Grade Silicon - CC BY 1.0
7.11: Oxidation of Silicon - CC BY 1.0
7.12: Applications for Silica Thin Films - CC BY 1.0
8: Group 15 - The Pnictogens - CC BY 3.0
8.1: The Group 15 Elements- The Pnictogens - CC
BY 3.08.2: Reaction Chemistry of Nitrogen - CC BY 3.0
8.3: Hydrides - CC BY 3.0
8.4: Oxides and Oxoacids - CC BY 3.0
8.5: Halides of Phosphorous - CC BY 3.0
9: Group 16 - CC BY 3.0
9.1: The Group 16 Elements- The Chalcogens - CC
BY 3.0
9.2: Ozone - CC BY 3.0
9.3: Water - The Fuel for the Medieval Industrial
Revolution - CC BY 3.0
9.4: Hydrogen Peroxide - CC BY 3.0
9.5: Hydrogen Peroxide Providing a Lift for 007 - CC
BY 3.0
9.6: Comparison of Sulfur to Oxygen - CC BY 3.0
9.7: Chalconide Hydrides - CC BY 3.0
9.8: Oxides and Oxyacids of Sulfur - CC BY 3.0
9.9: Sulfur Halides - CC BY 3.0
10: The Halogens - CC BY 3.0
10.1: The Group 17 Elements- The Halogens - CC BY
3.0
10.2: Compounds of Fluorine - CC BY 3.0
10.3: Compounds of Chlorine - CC BY 3.0
10.4: Oxyacids of Chlorine - CC BY 3.0
10.5: Bromine Trifluoride as a Solvent - CC BY 3.0
11: Group 18 - The Noble Gases - CC BY 3.0
11.1: The Group 18 Elements- The Noble Gases - CC
BY 3.0
Back Matter - CC BY 3.0
Index - CC BY 3.0
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared