CHEMISTRY 143 INTRODUCTORY
CHEMISTRY (BUNAG)

Chemistry 143 - Introductory Chemistry
(Bunag)

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 01/12/2026

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332303TABLE OF CONTENTS
Licensing
1: Introduction to Chemistry
1.1: Defining Chemistry
1.2: History of Chemistry
1.3: Areas of Chemistry
1.4: Pure and Applied Chemistry
1.5: Energy in Chemistry
1.6: Medicine
1.7: Agriculture
1.8: Materials
1.9: Chemistry and the Environment
1.10: Alchemy
1.11: Nature of Science
1.12: Scientific Problem Solving
2: Measurements
2.1: SI Base Units
2.2: Metric Prefixes
2.3: Scientific Notation in Chemistry
2.4: SI Length and Volume Units
2.5: SI Mass and Weight Units
2.6: SI Kinetic Energy Units
2.7: Temperature and Temperature Scales
2.8: Scientific Dimensional Analysis
2.9: Metric Unit Conversions
2.10: Derived Units
2.11: Density
2.12: Accuracy and Precision
2.13: Percent Error
2.14: Measurement Uncertainty
2.15: Significant Figures
2.16: Rounding
2.17: Uncertainty in Multiplication and Division
2.18: Uncertainty in Addition and Subtraction
2.19: Measurements and Problem-Solving (Exercises)
3: Matter and Change
3.1: Substances
3.2: Physical Properties
3.3: Extensive and Intensive Properties
3.4: Solid, Liquid, and Gas
3.5: Physical Change
3.6: Homogeneous Mixture
3.7: Heterogeneous Mixtures

2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3323033.8: Methods for Separating Mixtures
3.9: Elements
3.10: Compounds
3.11: Chemical Change
3.12: Chemical Symbols and Formulas
3.13: Chemical Properties and Chemical Reactions
3.14: Reactants and Products
3.15: Recognizing Chemical Reactions
4: Atomic Structure
4.1: Democritus' Idea of the Atom
4.2: Conservation of Mass
4.3: Law of Definite Proportions
4.4: Law of Multiple Proportions
4.5: Mass Ratio Calculation
4.6: Dalton's Atomic Theory
4.7: Cathode Ray Tube
4.8: Electrons
4.9: Oil Drop Experiment
4.10: Protons
4.11: Neutrons
4.12: Thomson's Atomic Model
4.13: Rutherford's Atomic Model
4.14: Atomic Nucleus
4.15: Atomic Number
4.16: Mass Number
4.17: Isotopes
4.18: Atomic Mass Unit
4.19: Calculating Atomic Mass
4.20: Atomic Structure Practice
5: Electrons in Atoms
5.1: Properties of Light
5.2: Atomic Emission Spectra
5.3: Bohr's Atomic Model
5.4: Spectral Lines of Atomic Hydrogen
5.5: Quantum Mechanical Atomic Model
5.6: Quantum Numbers
5.7: Orbitals
5.8: Aufbau Principle
5.9: Pauli Exclusion Principle
5.10: Electron Configurations
5.11: Valence Electrons
5.12: Noble Gas Configuration
5.13: Hund's Rule and Orbital Filling Diagrams

3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3323036: The Periodic Table
6.1: Early History of the Periodic Table
6.2: Mendeleev's Periodic Table
6.3: Periodic Law
6.4: Modern Periodic Table- Periods and Groups
6.5: Metals
6.6: Nonmetals
6.7: Metalloids
6.8: Blocks of the Periodic Table
6.9: Hydrogen and Alkali Metals
6.10: Alkaline Earth Metals
6.11: Noble Gases
6.12: Halogens
6.13: Transition Elements
6.14: Periodic Trends- Atomic Radius
6.15: Periodic Trends- Ionization Energy
6.16: Ionic Radii
6.17: Metallic and Nonmetallic Character
7: Chemical Nomenclature
7.1: Molecular Formula
7.2: Empirical Formula
7.3: Cations
7.4: Anions
7.5: Transition Metal Ions
7.6: Naming Binary Ionic Compounds
7.7: Stock System Naming
7.8: Formulas for Binary Ionic Compounds
7.9: Polyatomic Ions
7.10: Names and Formulas of Ternary Ionic Compounds
7.11: Naming Binary Molecular Compounds
7.12: Naming Acids
7.13: Names and Formulas of Bases
8: Ionic Bonding
8.1: Electron Dot Diagrams
8.2: Octet Rule
8.3: Cation Formation
8.4: Anion Formation
8.5: Transition Metal Ion Formation
8.6: Ionic Bonding
8.7: Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds
8.8: Metallic Bonding
9: Covalent Bonding
9.1: Energy and Covalent Bond Formation
9.2: Lewis Electron-Dot Structures
9.3: Single Covalent Bonds

4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3323039.4: Multiple Covalent Bonds
9.5: Coordinate Covalent Bond
9.6: Covalent Bonding in Polyatomic Ions
9.7: Resonance
9.8: Exceptions to the Octet Rule
9.9: Bond Energy
9.10: VSEPR Theory
9.11: Molecular Shapes- No Lone Pairs on Central Atoms
9.12: Molecular Shapes - Lone Pair(s) on Central Atom
9.13: Periodic Trends- Electronegativity
9.14: Bond Polarity
9.15: Polar Molecules
9.16: Van der Waals Forces
9.17: Hydrogen Bonding
10: Chemical Reactions
10.1: Word Equations
10.2: Chemical Equations
10.3: Balancing Equations
10.4: Combination Reactions
10.5: Decomposition Reactions
10.6: Combustion Reactions
10.7: Single Replacement Reactions
10.8: Double Replacement Reactions
10.9: Molecular and Ionic Equations
10.10: Net Ionic Equations
10.11: Predicting Precipitates Using Solubility Rules
10.12: Redox Reactions and Ionic Compounds
10.13: Identifying Reaction Types
11: The Mole
11.1: Avogadro's Number
11.2: Conversions Between Moles and Atoms
11.3: Molar Mass
11.4: Conversions Between Moles and Mass
11.5: Conversions Between Mass and Number of Particles
11.6: Percent Composition
11.7: Percent of Water in a Hydrate
11.8: Determining Empirical Formulas
11.9: Determining Molecular Formulas
11.10: Avogadro's Hypothesis and Molar Volume
12: Stoichiometry
12.1: Everyday Stoichiometry
12.2: Mole Ratios
12.3: Mass-Mole and Mole-Mass Stoichiometry
12.4: Mass-Mass Stoichiometry
12.5: Limiting Reactant

5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33230312.6: Determining the Limiting Reactant
12.7: Theoretical Yield and Percent Yield
13: The Behavior of Gases
13.1: Compressibility
13.2: Factors Affecting Gas Pressure
13.3: Boyle's Law
13.4: Charles's Law
13.5: Gay-Lussac's Law
13.6: Combined Gas Law
13.7: Avogadro's Law
13.8: Ideal Gas Law
13.9: Calculating the Molar Mass of a Gas
13.10: Gas Stoichiometry
13.11: Real and Ideal Gases
13.12: Mole Fraction
13.13: Gas Collection by Water Displacement
13.14: Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures
13.15: Diffusion and Effusion and Graham's Law
13.16: Conversions Between Moles and Gas Volume
13.17: Gas Density
13.18: Volume-Volume Stoichiometry
13.19: Mass-Volume and Volume-Mass Stoichiometry
13.20: Mole Road Map
14: Thermochemistry
14.1: Chemical Potential Energy
14.2: Heat
14.3: Exothermic and Endothermic Processes
14.4: Heat Capacity and Specific Heat
14.5: Specific Heat Calculations
14.6: Enthalpy
14.7: Calorimetry
14.8: Thermochemical Equations
14.9: Stoichiometric Calculations and Enthalpy Changes
14.10: Heats of Fusion and Solidification
14.11: Heats of Vaporization and Condensation
14.12: Multi-Step Problems with Changes of State
15: Water
15.1: Structure of Water
15.2: Structure of Ice
15.3: Physical Properties of Water
15.4: Solute and Solvent
15.5: Dissolving Process
15.6: Liquid-Liquid Solutions
15.7: Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes
15.8: Dissociation

6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33230315.9: Strong and Weak Electrolytes
15.10: Suspensions
15.11: Colloids
16: Solutions
16.1: Solute-Solvent Combinations
16.2: Rate of Dissolution
16.3: Saturated and Unsaturated Solutions
16.4: How Temperature Influences Solubility
16.5: Supersaturated Solutions
16.6: Henry's Law
16.7: Percent Solutions
16.8: Molarity
16.9: Solution Stoichiometry
16.10: Preparing Solutions
16.11: Dilution
16.12: Molality
16.13: The Lowering of Vapor Pressure
16.14: Freezing Point Depression
16.15: Boiling Point Elevation
16.16: Electrolytes and Colligative Properties
16.17: Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure
16.18: Calculating Molar Mass
16.19: Stoichiometry Map
17: Equilibrium
17.1: Reversible Reaction
17.2: Chemical Equilibrium
17.3: Equilibrium Constant
17.4: Calculations with Equilibrium Constants
17.5: Le Châtelier's Principle
17.6: Effect of Concentration
17.7: Effect of Temperature
17.8: Effect of Pressure
17.9: Nonreversible Reactions
17.10: Le Châtelier's Principle and the Equilibrium Constant
18: Acids and Bases
18.1: Properties of Acids
18.2: Properties of Bases
18.3: Arrhenius Acids
18.4: Arrhenius Bases
18.5: Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases
18.6: Brønsted-Lowry Acid-Base Reactions
18.7: Lewis Acids and Bases
18.8: Ion-Product of Water
18.9: The pH Scale
18.10: Calculating pH of Acids and Bases

7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33230318.11: The pOH Concept
18.12: Strong and Weak Acids and Acid Ionization Constant \(\left(K_\text{a} \right)\)
18.13: Strong and Weak Bases and Base Ionization Constant
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
18.15: Calculating \(K_\text{a}\) and \(K_\text{b}\)
18.16: Calculating pH of Weak Acid and Base Solutions
18.17: Neutralization Reaction and Net Ionic Equations for Neutralization Reactions
18.18: Titration Experiment
18.19: Titration Calculations
18.20: Titration Curves
18.21: Indicators
18.22: Hydrolysis of Salts- Equations
18.23: Buffers
19: Nuclear Chemistry
19.1: Discovery of Radioactivity
19.2: Nuclear Decay Processes
19.3: Detection of Radioactivity
19.4: Half-Life
19.5: Background Radiation
19.6: Nuclear Fission Processes
19.7: Nuclear Power Generation
19.8: Nuclear Fusion
19.9: Penetrating Ability of Emissions
19.10: Effects of Radiation
19.11: Radioisotopes in Medical Diagnosis and Treatment
19.12: PET Scans
Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/417466Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: Introduction to Chemistry
1.1: Defining Chemistry
1.2: History of Chemistry
1.3: Areas of Chemistry
1.4: Pure and Applied Chemistry
1.5: Energy in Chemistry
1.6: Medicine
1.7: Agriculture
1.8: Materials
1.9: Chemistry and the Environment
1.10: Alchemy
1.11: Nature of Science
1.12: Scientific Problem Solving
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 1: Introduction to Chemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320061.1: Defining Chemistry
Figure (Public Domain; User:Phanton/Wikipedia via https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/F...tive_Soaps.jpg)
How does soap relate to chemistry?
Chemistry affects every area of our lives. Here is j ust one example of chemistry in action – the making of soaps. Soap was once
made by boiling animal fat in ashes – the product was hard on the skin and not very pleasant to use. Today, soap manufacture
involves complicated chemical processes to provide a wide variety of soaps for different skin types. Col ors and odors can be
custom-made for that individual experience.
"What is this made of? How can we produce this materia l quickly and at a low cost? Will this product harm us or help us?"—these
are all questions that can be answered using the science o f chemistry.
What is Chemistry?
Science is a general term used to describe the princ ipled, rigorous study of the natural world. Many interco nnected disciplines fall
under this broader concept. For example, physics is t he study of motion and forces. Biology is the study of living things. Geology
is the study of the Earth and the rocks and minerals of which it is comprised. Chemistry is the study of t he composition of matter
and the changes that matter undergoes. Matter is any thing that has mass and takes up space. Virtually eve rything around us is
matter, including both living and nonliving things. Chemistry affects nearly everything we see and ever y action we take. Chemistry
explains why milk that is left in the refrigerator f or too long turns sour. Chemistry explains why certain pollutants called
chlorofluorocarbons have done lasting damage to the o zone layer of our planet. Chemistry explains why the leaves of deciduous
trees turn from green in the summer to various shades o f red and yellow in the autumn (Figure below).
Figure: Chemical reactions in the leaves of deciduous trees cause them to change color from green to red, o range, or yellow
before dropping to the ground. (Public Domain; User:Jo ngleur100/Wikimedia Commons via
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/F...untry_lane.jpg)
Chemistry touches every area of our lives. The medi cines we take, the food we eat, the clothes we wear—all of these materials and
more are, in some way or another, products of chemistry.

1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332006Chemists look at the world in two ways, often simultane ously. The two worlds of the chemist are the macroscopic world and the
microscopic world. Macroscopic refers to substances and objects tha t can be seen, touched, and measured directly. Microsco pic
refers to the small particles that make up all matter. Chemists must observe matter and do experiments mac roscopically; then make
generalizations and propose explanations that are m icroscopic in nature. For example, anyone can observe the physical change in
appearance that occurs as an iron object, such as a tractor, is left out in the elements and gradually turns to rust. However, a chemist
looking at the rusting tractor considers the individ ual atoms that make up the iron, and how they are ch anging as a result of
exposure to oxygen in the air, and water from rain. T hroughout the study of chemistry, there is often a s witch back and forth
between the macroscopic and microscopic worlds.
Figure: Rusting artillery shells. (the US Marine Corps, Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:USMC-060507-M7799R-003.jpg; License: Public Domain)
Summary
Chemistry is the study of matter and the changes it under goes.
Chemistry considers both macroscopic and microscopic in formation.
Review
1. Give two examples of chemistry in your everyday life.
2. What is the macroscopic world?
3. What is the microscopic world?
Explore More
1. Read the label on a prepared food product (for exampl e: bread, cereal, dessert). List all of the ingredients in the product. Look
up each ingredient on the Internet and write down what that material is doing in the food product.
2. Select your favorite hobby or activity. List all of the items you use in that activity or hobby. For each item, fi nd out how
chemistry has contributed to the creation or better oper ation of that item.
This page titled 1.1: Defining Chemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
Importance of Chemistry in Life, Every dImportance of Chemistry in Life, Every d

1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320061.1: Scope of Chemistry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320071.2: History of Chemistry
Where did chemistry come from? Early "chemists" focuse d on practical problems—how to make dyes and perfumes, soap
manufacture, uses of metals, and glass production, amon g others. The goal was not to understand the physical wo rld—that came
later. People just wanted to make things that would improve their lives in some way.
History of Chemistry
The history of chemistry is an interesting and challenging one. Very early chemists were often motivated mainly by t he
achievement of a specific goal or product. Making perf ume and soaps did not require much theory, just a good recipe and careful
attention to detail. There was no standard way of namin g materials (and no periodic table that everyone cou ld agree on). However,
the science developed over the centuries.
Major progress was made in putting chemistry on a soli d foundation when Robert Boyle (1637-1691) began his research in
chemistry. He developed the basic ideas for the behavi or of gases; gases could thereafter be described mat hematically. Boyle also
helped pioneer the idea that small particles could combine to form molecules. Many years later, John Dalt on used these ideas to
develop the atomic theory.
Figure: Robert Boyle. (Public Domain; Johann Kerseboo m via Wikipedia)
The field of chemistry began to develop rapidly in the 1700s. Joseph Priestley (1733-1804) isolated and characterized several
gases: oxygen, carbon monoxide, and nitrous oxide. It was later discovered that nitrous oxide ("laughing ga s") worked as an
anesthetic. This gas was used for that purpose for the first time in 1844 during a tooth extraction. Other g ases discovered during
that time were chlorine, by C.W. Scheele (1742-1786) and nitrogen, by Antoine Lavoisier (1743-1794). Lavoisi er has been
considered by many scholars to be the "father of chemi stry".
Chemists continued to discover new compounds in the 1800s. The science also began to develop a more theore tical foundation.
John Dalton (1766-1844) put forth his atomic theory i n 1807. This idea allowed scientists to think about c hemistry in a much more
systematic way. Amadeo Avogadro (1776-1856) laid the gr oundwork for a more quantitative approach to chemist ry by calculating
the number of particles in a given amount of a gas. A lot of effort was put forth in studying chemical r eactions. These efforts led to
new materials being produced. Following the invention of the battery by Alessandro V olta (1745-1827), the f ield of
electrochemistry (both theory and application) deve loped through major contributions by Humphry Davy (17 78-1829) and Michael
Faraday (1791-1867). Other areas of the discipline also progressed rapidly.
The History of Atomic Chemistry: CrashThe History of Atomic Chemistry: Crash

1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332007It would take a large book to cover developments in c hemistry during the twentieth century and up to toda y. One major area of
expansion was in the area of the chemistry of living processes. Research in photosynthesis in plants, the di scovery and
characterization of enzymes as biochemical catalysts, elucidation of the structures of biomolecules suc h as insulin and DNA —
these efforts gave rise to an explosion of information in the field of biochemistry.
The practical aspects of chemistry were not ignored. T he work of V olta, Davy, and Faraday eventually led to the development of
batteries that provided a source of electricity to power a number of devices.
Figure: Battery developed by V olta. (Credit: Adolph e Ganot; Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:V oltaic_pile_b attery.png)
Charles Goodyear (1800-1860) discovered the process o f vulcanization, allowing a stable rubber product to be produced for the
tires of all the vehicles that we have today. Louis Pas teur (1822-1895) pioneered the use of heat steriliz ation to eliminate unwanted
microorganisms in wine and milk. Alfred Nobel (1833-1896) invented dynamite. After his death, the fortune he m ade from this
product was used to fund the Nobel Prizes in science a nd the humanities. J.W. Hyatt (1837-1920) developed t he first plastic. Leo
Baekeland (1863-1944) developed the first synthetic resin, which is widely used for inexpensive and sturdy dinnerware.
Figure: Dynamite explosion in Panama, Central America (1908). (The Field Museum Library; Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ExplosionInProg ress.jpg; License: Public Domain)

1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332007Summary
Many civilizations contributed to the growth of chemistry.
A lot of early chemical research focused on practical u ses.
Basic chemistry theories were developed during the ninetee nth century.
New materials and batteries are products of modern chemistry.
Review
1. Who invented the first battery?
2. What contribution to chemistry did Robert Boyle make?
3. Who invented dynamite?
4. What was the first synthetic resin used for?
Explore More
Use this resource to answer the following questions: http://www.columbia.edu/itc/chemistr.../chemhist.html
1. Who published the atomic theory?
2. What elements are proposed by Aristotle?
3. Who discovered the proton?
4. What new elements did Marie Curie discover?
5. Who is called the "Father of Modern Chemistry"?
This page titled 1.2: History of Chemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.2: History of Chemistry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Pioneers in ChemistryPioneers in Chemistry

1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320081.3: Areas of Chemistry
The study of modern chemistry has many branches, but can generally be broken down into five main discipline s, or areas of study:
Physical chemistry
Organic chemistry
Inorganic chemistry
Analytical chemistry
Biochemistry
Physical Chemistry
Physical chemistry is the study of macroscopic propert ies, atomic properties, and phenomena in chemical sys tems. As examples, a physical chemist may study the
rates of chemical reactions, the energy transfers t hat occur in reactions, or the physical structure of m aterials at the molecular level.
Organic Chemistry
Organic chemistry is the study of chemicals containing carbon. Carbon is one of the most abundant elements on Earth and is capable of forming a tremendously
vast number of chemicals (over twenty million so far). Most chemicals found in every living organism are base d on carbon.
Inorganic Chemistry
Inorganic chemistry is the study of chemicals that do not, in general, contain carbon. Inorganic chemicals are commonly found in rocks and minerals. One current
important area of inorganic chemistry deals with the design and properties of materials involved in energy and information technology.
Analytical Chemistry
Analytical chemistry is the study of the composition of matter. It focuses on separating, identifying, and quantifying chemicals in samples of matter. An anal ytical
chemist may use complex instruments to analyze an unkn own material, in order to determine its various componen ts.
: Measurement of trace metals using atomic spectroscopy. (Bill Shrout, Environmental Protection Agency
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:EPA_GULF_BREEZE_LABORATORY, _THE_MICROBIOLOGY_LAB._AN_ATOMIC_ABSORPTION_SYSTEM,_WH ICH_MEASURES_MINUTE_QUAN
69.tif; License: Public Domain)
Biochemistry
Biochemistry is the study of chemical processes that o ccur in living things. Research may cover basic cell ular processes up to understanding disease states, so th at
better treatments can be developed.
Figure: Measuring hormone concentrations. (Fred W. B aker III, U.S. Department of Defense; Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Defense.gov_pho to_essay_090506-D-1852B-019.jpg; License: Public Domain)
In practice, chemical research is often not limited t o just one of the five major disciplines. A chemist ma y use biochemistry to isolate a particular chemical foun d
in the human body such as hemoglobin, the oxygen carr ying component of red blood cells. He or she may then proceed to analyze the hemoglobin using methods
that would pertain to the areas of physical or analyt ical chemistry. Many chemists specialize in areas tha t are combinations of the main disciplines, such as
bioinorganic chemistry or physical organic chemistry.

1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332008Summary
Five areas of chemistry are described:
Physical chemistry
Organic chemistry
Inorganic chemistry
Analytical chemistry
Biochemistry
Review
Match the project with the proper chemistry discipline.
Match the project with the proper chemistry disciplin e.
a. measuring mercury in seawater 1. biochemistry
b. studying enzymes in cells 2. organic chemistry
c. measuring the electrical properties of solutions 3. inorga nic chemistry
d. synthesizing new carbon compounds 4. physical chemistry
e. making new compounds for energy processes 5. analytical chemi stry
Explore More
1. Do an internet search using one of the five chemis try areas as a search term. List two significant contri butions made to chemistry by that area.
This page titled 1.3: Areas of Chemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the
style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
1.4: Areas of Chemistry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320091.4: Pure and Applied Chemistry
"How did chemistry develop? What is happening in the f ield of chemistry today? What can I do with a chemist ry degree?"—these
are all good questions, and should be asked by studen ts interested in chemistry. Research in chemistry (or any other field, for that
matter) is interesting and challenging. But there are dif ferent directions a student can take as they explore resea rch opportunities.
Pure and Applied Research
The study of modern chemistry can be split into two ty pes of research: pure and applied. Chemists who study pure chemistry do
research primarily to advance mankind's understandin g of chemistry. Pure chemistry is concerned with a gr eater understanding of
the theories behind how matter is changing in chemica l reactions. Pure chemists tend to be less concerned wit h direct applications
of the research that they are doing. That is not to say that pure chemistry can never lead to a real-worl d application but, rather, that
a potential application is not the primary motivati on for doing the research in the first place. Applied chemistry is chemistry that is
directed toward a specific practical goal or application. The video below further describes applied research.
Pure Research Examples
The early history of chemistry contains many exampl es of pure research. The ancient Greek philosophers de bated the composition
of matter (earth? air? fire? water? all of the above?). They weren’t going to do anything with their knowl edge – they just wanted to
know. Studies on the elements (especially after Mendel eev’s periodic table was published) were primarily “pure ” research types of
experiments. Does this element exist? What are its pr operties? The scientists did not have any practical a pplication in mind, but
were curious about the world around them. Below are some example s of questions that where pure research would be used:
How was the universe formed?
Is there life on Mars?
What are protons, neutrons, and electrons composed of?
What are the properties of boron?
Applied Research Examples
There is a great deal of "applied" research taking place today. In general, no new science principles are discovered, but existing
knowledge is used to develop a new product. Research on laundry detergents will probably not give us any new c oncepts about
soap, but will help us to develop materials that get our clothes cleaner, use less water, and create lower am ounts of pollution.
Petroleum companies use applied research to find bett er ways to power vehicles, better lubricants to cut down o n engine wear, and
better ways to lower air pollution. These companies will use information that is readily available to come up with new pro ducts.
V IDEO - What is Applied Research?V IDEO - What is Applied Research?

1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332009
Figure: U.S. Air Force Technical Sergeant Shanice Spe arman at Aerospace Fuels Laboratory NCO prepares fuel sa mples for
flashpoint testing. (Public Domain; Airman 1st Class Greg Erwin via https://www.kadena.af.mil/News/Photo...oto/2001869405)
"In-Between" Examples
The line between pure chemistry and applied chemistr y is not always distinct. What may start out as simply a sking a question may
result is some very useful information. If scientists are studying the biochemistry of a microorganism tha t causes a disease, they
may soon find information that would suggest a way to make a chemical that would inactivate the microorgan ism. The compound
could be used to learn more about the biochemistry, but could also be used to cure the disease.
Hemoglobin is a protein in red blood cells that trans ports oxygen in the bloodstream. Scientists studied h emoglobin simply to learn
how it worked. Out of this research came an understandin g of how the protein changes shape when oxygen attache s to it. This
information was then applied to help patients with sick le cell anemia, a disorder caused by an abnormal he moglobin structure that
makes hemoglobin molecules clump up when oxygen leav es the protein. Basic knowledge of protein structure led to an improved
understanding of a wide-spread disease and opened the doo r for development of treatments.
Summary
Pure research focuses on understanding basic properties an d processes.
Applied research focuses on the use of information to cr eate useful materials.
Sometimes there is no clear line between pure and applied research.
Review
1. What is pure research?
2. What is applied research?
3. Give one example of pure research.
4. Give on example of applied research.
5. Is it always easy to classify research as pure or appl ied? Explain your answer.
This page titled 1.4: Pure and Applied Chemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.5: Pure and Applied Chemistry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320101.5: Energy in Chemistry
What are some types of chemical reactions?
Some chemical reactions can be very calm and boring, while other reactions release a great deal of energy. Dynamite is a chemical
that can explode violently. Here we see dynamite being used to move boulders to clear a path for a road. T he chemical reactions
involved here release tremendous amounts of energy very quickly.
Dynamite was invented by Alfred Nobel in 1866. Nitroglycer in, a very unstable explosive, was already known. Nobel mixed the
nitroglycerin with silica to stabilize it and form a solid material. He made a fortune with this discover y and established the Nobel
Foundation, which funds the Nobel Prizes every year.
Figure (Mass Communication Specialist 2nd Class Aaron Bur den, U.S. Navy; Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:US_Navy_090422- N-7130B-318.jpg; License: Public Domain)
Energy in Chemical Bonds
Chemical reactions either require energy or release energy. The amount of energy needed or released depends upon the structure
of the molecules that are involved in the reaction. So me reactions need to be heated for long periods of t ime in order for change to
take place. Other reactions release energy, allowing h eat to be given off to the surroundings. This energ y can be used in a variety of
ways.
Heating
Coal, natural gas, oil—these materials can be burned to produce heat. The reaction with oxygen releases a great deal of energy that
can warm homes and offices. Wood is another example of a chemical (yes, a very complicated one) that wil l release energy when
burned.
Transportation
A major use for petroleum products is fuel for cars, trucks, airplanes, trains, and other vehicles. The che micals used are usually a
mixture of compounds containing several carbon atom s in a chain. When the material is ignited, a massive amount of gas is created
almost instantaneously. This increase in volume will m ove the pistons in an internal combustion engine to provide power. A jet
plane works on a similar principle—air comes into th e front of the engine and mixes with the jet fuel. Th is mixture is ignited and
the gases formed create a lot of pressure to push the plane forward. The idea can be seen even more clearly in the case of a rocket
launch. The ignition of the fuel (either solid-state or liquid) creates gases produced under great pressure that push the rocket up.
Figure: Rocket launch. (NASA; Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Apollo_15_laun ch.jpg; License: Public
Domain)

1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332010Batteries
A major source of energy produced by chemical reacti ons involves batteries. There are many types of batter ies that operate using a
variety of chemical reactions. The general principle behind these reactions is the release of electrons th at can then flow through a
circuit, producing an electrical current.
Figure: Car battery. (Public Domain; Toshinori Baba v ia Wikipedia)
Batteries are used in a wide variety of applications, amo ng them:
1. flashlights
2. watches
3. computers
4. cars
5. hybrid vehicles (provide some power to wheels)
6. cell phones
Batteries in cars, computers, cell phones, and other de vices are usually rechargeable. An electric current is passed through the
battery to provide electrons that reverse (at least p artially) the chemical reactions originally used to create the electric current.
Eventually, however, the system can no longer be recharged and the battery has to be discarded.
Hand-Warmers
Hikers, campers, and other outdoor recreationists tak e advantage of chemical reactions to keep their hand s warm. Small containers
of chemicals can undergo reactions to generate heat that can be used to avoid frostbite. Some products con tain iron filings that will
react with air to release thermal energy. These types of warmers cannot be reused. Other systems rely on hea t being released when
certain chemicals crystallize. If the warmer is placed in ve ry hot water after use, the system can be regenerated.
What is Energy REALL Y?!What is Energy REALL Y?!

1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332010Summary
Some chemical reactions release energy, some require energy.
Energy released by chemical reactions can be used in a varie ty of ways.
Review
1. Who invented dynamite?
2. How was the nitroglycerin made more stable?
3. What kind of energy is released when we burn natural gas?
4. How does burning gasoline power a car?
5. How do batteries create energy?
6. Explain how a hand-warmer works.
This page titled 1.5: Energy in Chemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.6: Energy in Chemistry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/section/1.6/primary/lesson/energy-in-chem istry-chem/.

1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320111.6: Medicine
How has chemistry made a contributions to medicine?
Diabetes mellitus is a disease characterized by the body's inability to use glucose (a component of table sugar). Glucose is needed
to provide biochemical energy for all the cells of the body. When the body cannot make energy using gluc ose, it begins to break
down fat and protein to provide the needed energy, ev entually leading to death. Diabetes is the result of th e pancreas losing the
ability to make insulin, a protein that helps gluco se to enter the body's cells and be used for biochem ical energy. A key piece of the
puzzle surrounding our understanding of diabetes cam e when Frederick Sanger, a British biochemist, carried out experiments that
gave him the structure of the insulin molecule. Sanger used basic chemistry techniques and reactions, and took twelve years to
complete his research. Today, automated instruments b ased on his approach can perform the same analysis in a matter of days.
Sanger was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1958 for hi s insulin research.
Chemistry in Medicine
Major contributions to health care have been made by chemistry. The development of new drugs involves che mical analysis and
synthesis of new compounds. Many recent television program s advertise the large number of new drugs produced by chemi sts.
The development of a new drug for any disease is lon g and complicated. The chemistry of the disease must be studied, as well as
how the drug affects the human body. A drug may work we ll in animals, but not in humans. Out of one hundred drugs that offer the
possibility of treating disease, only a small handful actua lly turn out to be both safe and effective.
Chemistry contributes to the preparation and use of materials for surgery (sutures, artificial skin, and s terile materials). The sutures
used in many surgeries today do not have to be remov ed, because they simply dissolve in the body after a period of time.
Replacement blood vessels for heart and other types o f surgery are often made of chemicals that do not re act with the tissues, so
they will not be rejected by the body. Artificial skin c an be used to replace human skin for burn patients.
Figure: Surgical procedure. (Mass Communication Special ist 3rd Class Matthew Jackson, U.S. Navy; Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Orif_surgery.jp g; License: Public Domain)
All About Antibiotics - Speaking of CheAll About Antibiotics - Speaking of Che

1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332011Clinical laboratory testing uses a wide variety of c hemical techniques and instrumentation for analysis. Clinical laboratory testing
allows us to answer commonly asked questions such as "is your cholesterol high?" and "do you have diabetes?" Some laboratory
tests use simple techniques. Other processes involve com plex equipment and computer analysis data, in order to perform
measurements on large numbers of patient samples.
Figure: Blood samples for laboratory testing. (Photogra pher’s Mate 3rd Class Jeremy L. Grisham, U.S. Navy; Sourc e:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:US_Navy_060105- N-8154G-010.jpg; License: Public Domain)
Laboratory testing has come to the local drug store or grocery store because of developments in chemistry. You can test your blood
glucose using a simple portable device that runs a ch emical test on the blood sample and tells you how muc h glucose is present,
allowing a diabetic patient to regulate how much insu lin to administer (chemistry is also used to produce the insulin and the
disposable syringe that administers the drug).
Figure: Blood glucose testing device. (Courtesy Christo pher Tidy (User:Christidy/Wikipedia); Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Glucose_meters.j pg; License: Public Domain)
Getting "Under the Skin " of Chemistry ' s Getting "Under the Skin " of Chemistry ' s

1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332011How useful is worm spit? It turns out that worm spit, al so known as silk, is a very useful material in medicine. In this video by
Science Friday, Dr. David Kaplan describes how silk is used in a variety of medical applications.
Summary
Chemistry finds many applications in the healthcare field.
Development of medicines involves many complicated che mistry processes.
Chemistry is used to create materials used in surgery.
Much of laboratory testing is based on chemistry techniq ues.
Review
1. What chemical is missing in the diabetic patient?
2. Who discovered the structure of insulin?
3. What two things need to be studied to develop a new drug?
4. List two areas where chemistry has helped surgical patient s
5. What blood test can be performed using material purchas ed from your local drugstore?
This page titled 1.6: Medicine is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.7: Medicine by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.Science Friday: The Medical Wonders of Worm Spit
The Medical Wonders of Worm SpitThe Medical Wonders of Worm Spit

1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320121.7: Agriculture
How does chemistry aid the success of crops?
In the spring, many people begin to plant their garde ns. They see ads in catalogs or shop the gardening sect ion of a local store to get ideas. The right
place in the garden is selected, seeds or plants are put in the soil, and then they wait. Whether it is a small home garden or a large thousand acre farm,
chemistry contributes greatly to the success of the crop.
Agriculture
Crops need four things for good growth: sunlight, water, nutrients from the soil, and protection from predators such as inse cts. Chemistry has made
major contributions within water usage, nutrient availab ility, and plant protection. Water purification uses a nu mber of chemical and physical techniques
to remove salts and contaminants that would pollute the soil. Chemical analysis of soil allows the grower to see wh at nutrients are lacking, so that they
can be added. In the spring, grocery stores, hardware stores, and gardening centers have high stacks of bags containi ng fertilizers and weed killers that
enrich the soil and keep down unwanted plants. These same stores also provide a number of sprays or solid treatments for insects that might otherwise
eat the plants.
The Pow er of N: Apply ing Nitrogen Chemistry in The Pow er of N: Apply ing Nitrogen Chemistry in

1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332012
Figure: Idaho wheat field. (the U.S. Department of Agriculture; Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Wheat_harvest.j pg; License:
Public Domain)
Water Purification
Fresh water is essential for good crops. In some areas of the worl d, there is enough rain to accomplish this task. In ot her locales, water must be provided
so that the crops will grow. Worldwide, irrigation covers abo ut of farm land and produces some of crops. Obtaining clea n water in many parts
of the world is made possible by the process of desalinization.
: Desalinization equipment. (Lance Cpl. Willard J. Lat hrop, U.S. Marine Corps; Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:US_Navy_060220
ne_Equipment_Specialist,_Cpl._Xzavia_Granger_assigned_ to_the_31st_Marine_Expeditionary_Unit_%2528MEU%2529_ Service_Support_Group_31,_prepares_a_chlorine_s
blic Domain)
Desalinization involves to the treatment of sea water to remove salts; the resulting water can then be used for i rrigation without contaminating the soil
with materials that harm the growing plants.
Soil Nutrients
In many areas of the world, the soil is deficient in essen tial nutrients. A number of minerals such as phosphorus, potassium, calcium, and magnesium
may not be present in large enough amounts for plants to grow well. Nitrogen is also extremely important for good crops.
Figure: Man spreading chemicals on soil. (CDC/Dawn Arl otta; Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Man_applying_f ertilizer.jpg;
License: Public Domain)
Soil analysis is available from a variety of labs. Local un iversity extension services can provide valuable informa tion as to the composition of a soil, and
will also make suggestions as to the types and amounts o f needed nutrients. Fertilizers can be purchased and added to the soil to enrich it and ensure
better yield of crops.
Insect Control
Even if the crop grows well, there is still the possibilit y of insect or pest damage. The insect or pest can consu me the crop or can damage it to the point
where it will not grow well. Infestations of army worms can do major damage to corn and grain crops. Aphids and boll we evils are major predators of
cotton crops. Failure to control these pests results in widesprea d crop damage and financial loss for the farmer.

1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332012
Figure: Potato pests. (Public Domain; John Curtis via Wikipedia)
A wide variety of pesticides have been developed by chemists and other scientists to deal with pests. The basic approach is to develop pesti cides that
interfere with some biochemical process in the pest. Ideal ly, the pesticide will not affect other living organisms, but this is not always the case. It is very
important to read the labels and observe all precautions when u sing pesticides.
Summary
Obtaining clean water in many parts of the world is made possibl e by the process of desalinization.
Plant nutrients are very important for good plant growth.
Chemical analysis of soil can tell he farmer or gardener what nutrients are needed.
Chemists have developed many pesticides that will kill pla nt predators such as the army worm and the boll weevil.
Review
1. List three things crops need for good growth.
2. How much of the water used in farming is provided by irrigati on?
3. What fraction of crops are grown using irrigation?
4. Why do nutrients need to be added to the soil?
5. How do pesticides work?
This page titled 1.7: Agriculture is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to
the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
1.8: Agriculture by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

1.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320131.8: Materials
How does chemistry affect the clothing that we wear?
Chemistry research is often full of surprises. One s uch surprise came to Stephanie Kwolek of the DuPont chem ical company when
she was working on materials known as polymers. These ch emicals had been around for a while and were being us ed for new types
of textiles. Kwolek was looking for a strong and rigid p etroleum product. She came up with a material that did not look like your
average polymer; she played a hunch and had it made into threads. This new material had stiffness about n ine times that of any
known polymers of the time. Further research and devel opment led to the production of Kevlar, a material n ow widely used in body
armor. Kevlar also found a range of application in racing s ails, car tires, brakes, and fire-resistant clothing worn by firefighters.
Materials
Electronics
Chemists are involved in the design and production of new materials. Some of the materials that chemists ha ve helped discover or
develop in recent years include polymers, ceramics, a dhesives, coatings, and liquid crystals. Liquid cryst als are used in electronic
displays, as in watches and calculators. The silicon-ba sed computer chip has revolutionized modern society, and chemists have
played a key role in the design and continued impro vement of these chips. The calculator shown below uses both a liquid crystal
display and chips inside the device.
Figure: Calculator with liquid crystal display. (Publi c Domain; Nom (User:Cjp24/Wikimedia Commons) via Wikipedia)
Superconductors
Many chemists are currently working in the field of s uperconductivity. Superconductors are materials that a re able to conduct
electricity with efficiency, meaning that no energy is lost during the electrical transmission, as happ ens with conventional
conduction materials like copper cable. The challenge is to design materials that can act as superconducto rs at normal temperatures,
as opposed to only being able to superconduct at very low t emperatures.
Clothing
The fibers that compose the materials for our cloth ing are either natural or human-made. Silk and cotton are examples of natural
fibers. Silk is produced by the silkworm and cotton is g rown as a plant. Human-made fabrics include nylon, or lon, and a number of
other polymers. These materials are made from hydro carbons found in petroleum products. Synthetic polym ers are also used in
shoes, rain gear, and camping items. Synthetic fabrics tend to be lighter than the natural ones, and can be treated to be more waterresistant and durable.
Materials originally developed as textiles are finding a wide variety of other uses. Nylon is found in a numbe r of plastic utensils.
Taking advantage of its strength and light weight, nylon is a component of ropes, fishing nets, tents, and parachutes.
Figure: Nylon spatula. (Public Domain; User:Vanischenu /Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)

1.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332013Summary
Chemists produce materials for electronics, supercondu ctors, textiles, and other applications.
Review
Use the link below to answer the following questions:
1. Who developed Kevlar?
2. Where are liquid crystals used?
3. What is a superconductor?
4. What are synthetic polymers made from?
This page titled 1.8: Materials is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.9: Materials by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

1.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320141.9: Chemistry and the Environment
What are the effects of waste within our environment?
Where to dump the garbage? Where to put the waste mat erials we don’t want, after we have made what we do want? Fo r many
years we just dumped the waste in the nearest lake, riv er, empty spot of ground, and didn’t worry about it. Ho wever, as we learn
more about the effects of chemicals on living system s, we have become more concerned about the effects of a ll this dumping. In
many cases, we just didn’t know what the long-term eff ects would be. Today, dumping is generally illegal and offenders pay heavy
penalties of fines and jail sentences.
Environment
Many chemicals that were once commonly used were later d iscovered to be harmful to the environment, to human health, or to
both. The element lead was once a common additive to gasoline and to paint. Plumbing pipes were once typically made of lead.
Only since the 1970s has the danger of lead become app arent. It causes brain damage; small children (who mi ght chew on objects
painted with lead-based paint) are particularly suscep tible. The use of lead in gasoline, paint, and plumbing pipes is now banned;
new materials are being developed to replace hazardous le ad components.
Lead is still widely used in car batteries. In recent years, battery recycling has become common—about of car batteries are
recycled today. The used batteries go to a processing plant where they are crushed and placed in a tank. The lead sinks to the
bottom, to be separated and melted. The plastic can then be used in a number of applications. The battery acids are treated with
chemicals to neutralize them before they are disposed o f.
Environmental PollutionEnvironmental Pollution

1.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332014
Figure: Batteries for recycling. (Public Domain; User: Lack Thereof/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
How Chemists Help the Environment
Chemists are involved in all aspects of environmenta l protection. In the case of lead, chemists measured t he amount of lead in soil,
paint, plumbing, blood, and other materials. Chemists stu died the chemical processes in the body to see how lea d did its damage.
Methods for removal of lead from the body were develo ped with the help of chemists. New gasoline products were developed that
fostered fuel efficiency and smooth running of engines, without the presence of lead.
Chemists continue to look for threats to our health and the environment—and to search for alternatives— so that harmful chemicals
can be replaced with others that will do the job as effect ively, but without the harm.
Summary
Environmental contamination is a major problem today.
Lead contamination has serious harmful effects on the bod y.
Chemists contribute in many ways to helping with issues o f lead contamination.
Review
1. Where was lead found in products?
2. What is a hazard of lead?
3. What happens to the lead in used car batteries?
4. List two ways chemists help with issues related to lead contamin ation.
This page titled 1.9: Chemistry and the Environment is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.10: The Environment by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

1.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320151.10: Alchemy
A common area of technology to societies of the pas t was metallurgy. Useful tools could be made with metal lurgy that would last
for a long time. Weapons could stay sharp longer with improved metals. Precious metals, such as gold and s ilver, could be refined
and used for jewelry or for money. Because it was fairl y rare, gold was considered to be very valuable, and b ecame a common
means of paying for goods and services.
However, mining for gold is a slow, dirty, and dangerous process. Not everyone owns a gold mine—in both the ancie nt Egyptian
society and during the Roman Empire, the gold mines were the property of the state, not an individual or group. There were few
ways for most people to legally get any gold for themselv es.
Alchemy
Chemistry is a subject that has its roots in the anc ient tradition known as alchemy, from which it derives its name. Alchemy was a
combination of philosophy and science that had both practical and mystical aspects. The goals of alchem y were varied and difficult
to summarize. In many ways, the alchemists sought to a chieve perfection, through such actions as the pursuit of the philosopher’s
stone and the elixir of life (Figure below). The philo sopher’s stone, it was believed, was a substance that wa s capable of being used
to turn base metals (such as lead) into gold. It was a lso believed that it could be used to achieve rejuve nation and perhaps
immortality. While alchemists did not ultimately succ eed in these quests, their work provided the foundat ion for the modern study
of chemistry.
Figure: This painting by Joseph Wright (1771) is titled “The Alchymist, In Search of the Philosopher’s Stone.” (Public
Domain; Joseph Wright of Derby / Derby Museum and Art Gallery via https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/F..._Alchemist.jpg)
Many of the specific approaches that alchemists used when they tried changing lead into gold are vague an d unclear. Each
alchemist had their own code for recording data. The processes were kept secret so that others could not p rofit from them. Different
scholars developed their own set of symbols as they re corded the information they came up with. Many alchemi sts were not very
honest, and sometimes took advantage of noblemen by taking money and claiming to be able to make gold f rom lead, then left
town in the middle of the night. On occasion, the nobl eman would detect the fraud and have the alchemist hu ng. By the 1300s,
several European rules had declared alchemy to be ill egal, and set out strict punishments for those practicing th e alchemical arts.
Figure: Alchemist recipe. (Public Domain; Kenelm Digb y via Wikipedia)

1.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332015Alchemist Contributions to Chemistry
Alchemists laid the groundwork for many chemical proc esses, such as the refining of ores, the production of gunpowder, the
manufacture of glass and ceramics, leather tanning, and the production of inks, dyes, and paints. Alchemi sts also made the first
attempts at organizing and classifying substances so that they could better understand their reactions and be able to predict the
products of their experiments. This eventually led t o the modern periodic table, which you will learn abo ut in a later chapter.
Alchemy began to fully evolve into chemistry in the 1 7 century, with a greater emphasis on rational though t and experimentation
and less emphasis on spirituality and mysticism.
The alchemists were never successful in changing lead i nto gold, but modern nuclear physics can accomplish th is task. Lead is
subjected to nuclear bombardment in a particle acce lerator. A small amount of gold can be obtained by this process. However, the
cost of the procedure is far more than that of the amount of gold obtained. So, the dream of the alchemis ts has never (and will
never) come true.
Summary
Gold has been considered valuable by all civilizations.
The alchemists tried to find the philosopher's stone that wou ld allow them to make gold from lead.
The alchemists did not successfully transform lead int o gold.
The alchemists laid the ground work for many advances to the new science of chemistry.
Review
1. Why is gold considered to be valuable?
2. Who owned the gold mines during the ancient Egyptian and Roman civilizations?
3. What is the elixir of life?
4. What contributions to modern chemistry were made by th e alchemists?
This page titled 1.10: Alchemy is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.3: Alchemy by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.th
The Science Of Alchemy | Future5The Science Of Alchemy | Future5

1.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320161.11: Nature of Science
What can be accomplished through team work?
Most jobs to day involve a fair amount of meetings an d team involvement. It doesn’t matter what you do, you will spend a certain
amount of time meeting with other people, sharing what you have done, planning projects, and organizing the work. Hardly
anybody works by him or herself these days – everybody is p art of a larger group.
The Nature of Science
Today’s scientists rarely work alone. Rather, most scien tists collaborate with one another as part of a group e ffort, no matter the
setting. The majority of research scientists work eith er for a company such as DuPont Chemical Company in Wi lmington,
Delaware or for one of many universities, such as the Ca lifornia Institute of Technology. Working as part of a group has many
advantages. Most scientific problems are so complex and t ime-consuming, that one person could not hope to addr ess all of the
issues by himself or herself. Instead, different mem bers of a research group are each tasked with a particu lar small aspect of a
larger research problem. Collaboration between member s of the group is frequent. This occurs informally in the laboratory on an
everyday basis. Research groups typically have regular meetings where one or more members of the group may g ive a presentation
to the others on the status of the research that the y are doing. Progress normally occurs in small steps ra ther than grand, sweeping
discoveries, and that progress is helped along by the teamwor k that comes from working as part of a group.
Modern scientific research is usually expensive. Lab equipment, chemicals, research space, and the upkeep of technical
instrumentation all costs money. So research groups nee d to raise money in order to continue their research. Much of that money
comes from government sources, such as the National Sc ience Foundation or the National Institute of Health, es pecially in the case
of research being done at universities. Private compa nies can fund their own research, but may also seek ou tside funding as well.
Scientists write grants explaining the goals of their research along with projected costs, and funding agen cies make decisions on
which research projects they would like to fund. The l ong-term viability of most research labs depends on the ability to get and
maintain funding.
Communicating Results
Suppose that your research is a success. What now? Scienti sts communicate their results to one another and to th e public at large in
several ways. One is to publish their research finding s in one of many publications called scientific journals. There are many
hundreds of scientific journals covering every field of science imaginable. In chemistry, there is the “Jo urnal of the American
Chemical Society,” the “Journal of Physical Chemistry,” and the “Inorganic Chemistry,” to name just a few. Som e journals have a
very narrow scope while others publish articles from m any different sciences and appeal to a wider audienc e. Examples of the latter
include the journals “Science” and “Nature.” Journal a rticles are often very complex and detailed. They mu st be accurate, since the
research field as a whole uses these journal article s as a way to make scientific progress. Therefore, jou rnal articles are only
published after having been extensively reviewed by o ther professional scientists in the same field. Revie wers have the power to
make suggestions about the research or possibly questio n the validity of the author’s conclusions. Only when t he reviewers are
This Thing Called Science Part 2: T estinThis Thing Called Science Part 2: T estin

1.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332016satisfied that the research is correct, will the journ al publish the article. In this way, all scientists ca n trust the research findings that
they read about in journals.
Scientists also communicate with one another by prese nting their findings at international conferences. So me scientists are chosen
to give a lecture at a conference, typically about research that has already been published. Many other s cientists at the same
conference will present their work at poster sessions. These poster sessions are more informal and may ofte n represent research
that is still in progress.
Figure: Scientific presentation. (Public Domain; Journa list 1st Class Dave Kaylor, U.S. Navy via Wikipedia)
A Shot in the Dark: Alternative Uses for Squid Ink
Squid ink is commonly thought of as a defensive mecha nism used by squids, but could there be other uses? In this video by
Science Friday, Dr. Stephanie Bush talks about possible othe r functions of squid ink.
Snowflake Safari
Next snowstorm, grab a magnifying glass and look carefu lly at snowflakes. Bullet rosettes, stellar plates and ca pped columns
are just a few of the many varieties of snow crystals. In this video by Science Friday, physicist Kenneth Lib brecht shares
A Brief History of Science (2013)A Brief History of Science (2013)
Science Friday
A Shot in the Dark: Alternative Uses foA Shot in the Dark: Alternative Uses fo

1.11.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332016secrets about snowflakes.
Summary
Scientific research today is a team effort.
Support for research usually comes from grants.
Findings are shared in meetings, conferences, and scientifi c publications.
Review
1. How is most scientific research carried out today?
2. How is research usually supported?
3. How do scientists share their findings?
This page titled 1.11: Nature of Science is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
Snow  ake SafariSnow  ake Safari

1.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320171.12: Scientific Problem Solving
How can we use problem solving in our everyday routines?
One day you wake up and realize your clock radio did not turn on to get you out of bed. You are puzzled, s o you decide to find out
what happened. You list three possible explanations:
1. There was a power failure and your radio cannot turn on.
2. Your little sister turned it off as a joke.
3. You did not set the alarm last night.
Upon investigation, you find that the clock is on, so there is no power failure. Your little sister was spendin g the night with a friend
and could not have turned the alarm off. You notice that the alarm is not set—your forgetfulness made you late. You have used the
scientific method to answer a question.
Scientific Problem Solving
Humans have always wondered about the world around them. One of the questions of interest was (and still is): what is this world
made of? Chemistry has been defined in various ways as the stu dy of matter. What matter consists of has been a sourc e of debate
over the centuries. One of the key areas for this debate in t he Western world was Greek philosophy.
The basic approach of the Greek philosophers was to dis cuss and debate the questions they had about the worl d. There was no
gathering of information to speak of, just talking. As a result, several ideas about matter were put forth, b ut never resolved. The
first philosopher to carry out the gathering of dat a was Aristotle (384-322 B.C.). He recorded many observa tions on the weather, on
plant and animal life and behavior, on physical mot ions, and a number of other topics. Aristotle could pr obably be considered the
first "real" scientist, because he made systematic observa tions of nature and tried to understand what he was seeing.
Figure: Aristotle. (Public Domain; Raphael via Wikipedia)
Inductive and Deductive Reasoning
Two approaches to logical thinking developed over th e centuries. These two methods are inductive reasoning and deductive
reasoning. Inductive reasoning involves getting a collection of specific examples and drawing a general conclusion from them.
Deductive reasoning takes a general principle and the n draws a specific conclusion from the general conce pt. Both are used in the
development of scientific ideas.
Inductive reasoning first involves the collection of data: "If I add sodium metal to water, I observe a v ery violent reaction. Every
time I repeat the process, I see the same thing happe n." A general conclusion is drawn from these observati ons: the addition of
sodium to water results in a violent reaction.
In deductive reasoning, a specific prediction is mad e based on a general principle. One general principle is that acids turn blue
litmus paper red. Using the deductive reasoning proce ss, one might predict: "If I have a bottle of liquid labeled 'acid', I expect the
litmus paper to turn red when I immerse it in the liquid."

1.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332017The Idea of the Experiment
Inductive reasoning is at the heart of what is now ca lled the " scientific method." In European culture, this approach was developed
mainly by Francis Bacon (1561-1626), a British scholar. He advocated the use of inductive reasoning in every area of life, not just
science. The scientific method, as developed by Bacon and others, involves several steps:
1. Ask a question - identify the problem to be considered.
2. Make observations - gather data that pertains to the ques tion.
3. Propose an explanation (a hypothesis) for the observat ions.
4. Make new observations to test the hypothesis further.
Figure: Sir Francis Bacon. (Public Domain; Paul van Some r via Wikipedia)
Note that this should not be considered a "cookbook" for scientific research. Scientists do not sit down with their daily "to do" list
and write down these steps. The steps may not necessar ily be followed in order. But this does provide a gen eral idea of how
scientific research is usually done.
When a hypothesis is confirmed repeatedly, it event ually becomes a theory—a general principle that is o ffered to explain natural
phenomena. Note a key word— explain, or explanation. A theory offers a description of why something happ ens. A law, on the
other hand, is a statement that is always true, but off ers no explanation as to why. The law of gravity says a rock will fall when
dropped, but does not explain why (gravitational theo ry is very complex and incomplete at present). The ki netic molecular theory
of gases, on the other hand, states what happens when a ga s is heated in a closed container (the pressure inc reases), but also
explains why (the motions of the gas molecules are incr eased due to the change in temperature). Theories do not get "promoted" to
laws, because laws do not answer the "why" question.
Deductive & Inductive ResearchDeductive & Inductive Research

1.12.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332017Summary
The early Greek philosophers spent their time talking about nature, but did little or no actual exploration or investi gation.
Inductive reasoning - to develop a general conclusion fr om a collection of observations.
Deductive reasoning - to make a specific statement based on a general principle.
Scientific method - a process of observation, developing a hypothesis, and testing that hypothesis.
Review
1. What was the basic shortcoming of the Greek philosophers approach to studying the material world?
2. How did Aristotle improve the approach?
3. Define “inductive reasoning” and give an example.
4. Define “deductive reasoning” and give an example.
5. What is the difference between a hypothesis and a theory?
6. What is the difference between a theory and a law?
This page titled 1.12: Scientific Problem Solving is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
1.12: Scientific Problem Solving by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
The scienti c methodThe scienti c method

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Measurements
Measurement is the assignment of a number to a chara cteristic of an object or event, which can be compared with other objects or
events.
2.1: SI Base Units
2.2: Metric Prefixes
2.3: Scientific Notation in Chemistry
2.4: SI Length and V olume Units
2.5: SI Mass and Weight Units
2.6: SI Kinetic Energy Units
2.7: Temperature and Temperature Scales
2.8: Scientific Dimensional Analysis
2.9: Metric Unit Conversions
2.10: Derived Units
2.11: Density
2.12: Accuracy and Precision
2.13: Percent Error
2.14: Measurement Uncertainty
2.15: Significant Figures
2.16: Rounding
2.17: Uncertainty in Multiplication and Division
2.18: Uncertainty in Addition and Subtraction
2.19: Measurements and Problem-Solving (Exercises)
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 2: Measurements is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

2.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320192.1: SI Base Units
How long is a yard?
It depends on whom you ask, and when you asked the que stion. Today we have a standard definition of the yard, which you can see
marked on every football field. If a football playe r moves the ball ten yards, they get a first down, and it doesn't matter whether
they are playing in Los Angeles, Dallas, or Green Bay. At one time, however, that yard was arbitrarily defined as t he distance from
the tip of the king's nose to the end of his outstretc hed hand. Of course, the problem in that case is simpl e: new king, new distance
(and then you have to re-mark all those football fields).
SI Base Units
All measurements depend on the use of units that are we ll known and understood. The English system of measurement units
(inches, feet, ounces, etc.) are not used in science because of the difficulty in converting from one un it to another. The metric
system is used because all metric units are based on multip les of 10, making conversions very simple. The metric system was
originally established in France in 1795. The International System of Units is a system of measurement based on the metric
system. The acronym SI is commonly used to refer to this system and stands for the French term, Le Système International
d'Unités. The SI was adopted by international agreement in 1960 an d is composed of seven base units, listed in Table.
Table: SI Base Units of Measurement
Quantity SI Base Unit Symbol
Length meter
Mass kilogram
Temperature kelvin
Time second
Amount of a Substance mole
Electric Current ampere
Luminous Intensity candela
The first units are frequently encountered in chemi stry. All other measurement quantities, such as volume, force, and energy, can be
derived from these seven base units.
Figure: Meter Standard. (Public Domain; US Department of Commerce; National Institute of Stan dards and Technology via
Wikipedia; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Standard_kilogr am,_2.jpg)
Figure: Kilogram standard (Public Domain; National In stitute of Standards and Technology via
Wikipedia)

2.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332019The map below shows the adoption of the SI units in cou ntries around the world. The United States has legally a dopted the metric
system for measurements, but does not use it in every day practice. Great Britain and much of Canada use a combination of metric
and imperial units.
Figure: Areas of the world that use the metric system (green). (Public Domain; User:Canuckguy/Wikipedia and
User:AzaToth/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Summary
The SI system is based on multiples of ten.
There are seven basic units in the SI system.
Five of these seven SI units are commonly used in chemistry.
Review
1. What does SI stand for?
2. When was this system adopted by the international co mmunity?
3. Which of the units are commonly used in chemistry?
This page titled 2.1: SI Base Units is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.1: SI Base Units by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
Module 3: International Sy stem Units, BModule 3: International Sy stem Units, B

2.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320202.2: Metric Prefixes
Figure (Public Domain; Joseph Wright of Derby via Wikipedia)
What do Latin and Greek have to do with modern science?
Isn’t it hard enough to learn English terms? For hund reds of years, the languages of the educated class were Latin and Greek. In
part, because the literature of philosophy was Latin and Greek. Even the medieval Bibles were written in th ose two languages – the
first English translation was in the late 1380s. Using Latin and Greek allowed scholars from different coun tries to communicate
more easily with one another. Today we still see many Latin phrases in legal communications (“pro bono” m eaning to do
something “for the good” and not charge legal fees), scientific naming of biological species, and Latin is used for the annual
student speech at Harvard University graduations. Not bad for a “dead” language.
Metric Prefixes
Conversions between metric system units are straightf orward because the system is based on powers of ten. For e xample, meters,
centimeters, and millimeters are all metric units of le ngth. There are 10 millimeters in 1 centimeter and 100 centimeters in 1 meter.
Metric prefixes are used to distinguish between units of different si ze. These prefixes all derive from either Latin or Gr eek terms.
For example, mega comes from the Greek word, meaning "great".
Table lists the most common metric prefixes and th eir relationship to the central unit that has no pr efix. Length is used as an
example to demonstrate the relative size of each prefix ed unit.
Table: SI Prefixes
Prefix Unit Abbreviation Meaning Example
giga 1,000,000,000 1 gigameter
mega 1,000,000 1 megameter
kilo 1,000 1 kilometer
hecto 100 1 hectometer
deka 10 1 dekameter
1 1 meter
deci 1/10 1 decimeter
centi 1/100 1 centimeter
milli 1/1,000 1 millimeter
micro 1/1,000,000 1 micrometer
nano 1/1,000,000,000 1 nanometer
pico 1/1,000,000,000,000 1 picometer

2.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332020There are more prefixes - some of them rarely used. Have you ever heard of a zeptometer?
There are a couple of odd little practices with the use of metric abbreviations. Most abbreviations are lowercase. The lowercase " "
is used for meter, instead of " ". However, when it come s to volume, the base unit "liter" is abbreviated as " " and not " ". So, 3.5
milliliters is written as.
As a practical matter, whenever possible, you should expr ess the units in a small and manageable number. If you are measuring the
weight of a material that weighs, this is easier than saying that it weighs or. All three are correct, but the
units in this case make for a small and easily managed number. However, if a specific problem needs grams inst ead of kilograms,
go with the grams for consistency.
Summary
Metric prefixes derive from Latin or Greek terms.
Metric prefixes are used to make the units manageable.
Review
1. What is the prefix for “thousand”?
2. What is the prefix for 0.01?
3. How would you write 500 milliliters?
4. How many decimeters in one meter?
5. You have a mass that weighs 1.2 hectograms. How many grams does it weigh?
This page titled 2.2: Metric Prefixes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.2: Metric Prefixes by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
05 - Metric Sy stem Pre xes05 - Metric Sy stem Pre xes

2.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332020

2.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320212.3: Scientific Notation in Chemistry
Figure (Public Domain; NASA via Wikipedia)
How far is the Sun from Earth?
Astronomers are accustomed to very large numbers. While the moon is only from earth at its maximum distance, the sun is much further
away. Proxima Centauri, the star nearest the earth, is away—and this is just the start of long distances. On
the other end of the scale, some biologists deal with very small numbers: a typical fungus could be as small as 30 micrometers in
length, and a virus might only be 0.03 micrometers long.
Scientific Notation
Scientific notation is a way to express numbers as the p roduct of two numbers: a coefficient and the number 10 raised to a power. It is a very useful
tool for working with numbers that are either very larg e or very small. As an example, the distance from Earth t o the Sun is about 150,000,000,000
meters—a very large distance indeed. In scientific nota tion, the distance is written as. The coefficient i s the 1.5 and must be a number
greater than or equal to 1, and less than 10. The powe r of 10, or exponent, is 11 because you would have to multiply 1.5 by to get the correct
number. Scientific notation is sometimes referred as exp onential notation. A summary of SI units is given in the table below.
Table: SI Prefixes
Prefix Unit Abbreviation Exponential Factor Meaning Example
giga 1,000,000,000 1 gigameter
mega 1,000,000 1 megameter
kilo 1,000 1 kilometer
hecto 100 1 hectometer
deka 10 1 dekameter
1 1 meter
deci 1/10 1 decimeter
centi 1/100 1 centimeter
milli 1/1,000 1 millimeter
micro 1/1,000,000 1 micrometer
nano 1/1,000,000,000 1 nanometer
pico 1/1,000,000,000,000 1 picometer
When working with small numbers, we use a negative expo nent. So 0.1 meters is meters, 0.01 is and so forth. The table above
gives examples of smaller units. Note the use of the leading zero (the zero to the left of the decimal point). That di git is there to help you see the
decimal point more clearly. The figure 0.01 is less l ikely to be misunderstood than.01, where you may not se e the decimal.

2.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320210:00
0:00
Summary
Scientific notation allows us to express very large or ver y small numbers in a convenient way.
Scientific notation uses a coefficient (a number betwee n 1 and 10) and a power of ten sufficient for the actua l number.
Review
1. What is scientific notation?
2. What do we use scientific notation for?
3. What is a leading zero?
4. Express 150,000,000 in scientific notation.
5. Express 0.000043 in scientific notation.
This page titled 2.3: Scientific Notation in Chemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.3: Scientific Notation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

2.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320222.4: SI Length and Volume Units
Figure (Public Domain; User:Żeglarz/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
How were sailors able to measure the depths of seas?
Back in the days before all the electronic gadgets f or measuring depth and locating undersea objects exist ed, the "fathom" was the
unit of measurement for depth. A rope was knotted ever y six feet and the end was dropped over the side of the ship. You could tell
how deep the water was by how many knots went under the water before the rope hit bottom. Today we just turn on an instrument
and read the depth to a high level of accuracy.
Length and Volume
Length is the measurement of the extent of something along its greatest dimension. The SI basic unit of length, or linear measure,
is the meter. All measurements of length may be made in meters, t hough the prefixes listed in various tables will ofte n be more
convenient. The width of a room may be expressed as about 5 meters, whereas a large distance, such as th e distance between
New York City and Chicago, is better expressed as 1150 k ilometers. Very small distances can be expressed in units such as the
millimeter or the micrometer. The width of a typical hu man hair is about 20 micrometers.
Volume is the amount of space occupied by a sample of mat ter. The volume of a regular object can be calculate d by multiplying its
length by its width and height. Since each of those is a linear measurement, we say that units of volume are derived from units of
length. The SI unit of volume is the cubic meter, whi ch is the volume occupied by a cube that measures o n each side. This
very large volume is not convenient for typical use in a chemistry laboratory. A liter is the volume of a cube that measures
on each side. A liter is thus equal to both, and to. A smaller unit of volume that is
commonly used is the milliliter (—note the capital, which is a standard practice). A milliliter is the v olume of a cube that
measures on each side. Therefore, a milliliter is eq ual to a cubic centimeter. There are in, which is the same
as saying that there are in.

2.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332022
Figure: A typical water bottle is 1 liter in volume. (Public Domain; User:Kenyon/Wikimedia Commons
via Wikipedia)
Figure: This Rubik's cube is on each side and has a vol ume of or. (CC by 2.0; Bram Van Damme
(Flickr: Bramus!) via Flickr)
Figure: A graduated cylinder is often used to measure volume in the laboratory, and comes in a variety of sizes. (Public
Domain; User:Darrien/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
Summary
Length is the measurement of the extent of something alon g its greatest dimension.
V olume is the amount of space occupied by a sample of mat ter.
V olume can be determined by knowing the length of each si de of an item.
Review
1. Define length.
2. Define volume.
3. An object measures 6.2 cm×13.7 cm×26.9 cm6.2 cm×13.7 cm ×26.9 cm. Which value is the length of the object?
4. How big is a mL?
This page titled 2.4: SI Length and V olume Units is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.4: Length and Volume by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

2.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320232.5: SI Mass and Weight Units
Figure (Public Domain; NASA via Wikipedia)
How is he floating?
One of the many interesting things about travel in ou ter space is the idea of weightlessness. If something is not fastened down, it
will float in mid-air. Early astronauts learned that weightlessness had negative effects on bone structure. If there was no pressure on
the legs, those bones would begin to lose mass. Weight provided by gravity is needed to maintain healthy b ones. Specially designed
equipment is now a part of every space mission, so the astronaut s can maintain good body fitness.
Mass and Weight
Mass is a measure of the amount of matter that an objec t contains. The base SI unit of mass is the kilogram o r kg, which was
originally defined as the mass of of liquid water at (the volume of a liquid changes slightly with tempe rature). The kilogram
is the only SI base unit that contains a prefix. This is because wh en the first physical standard for mass was created in 1 799, the
methods to measure the mass of something as small as a gram did not exist. In the laboratory, mass is mea sured with a balance
(figure below), which must be calibrated with a standard mass so that its measurements are accurate.
Figure: An analytical balance makes very sensitive mass measurements in a laboratory, usually in grams. (Public Domain; US
Drug Enforcement Administration via Wikipedia)
Other common units of mass are the gram and the milli gram. A gram is 1/1000th of a kilogram, meaning that there are in
. A milligram is 1/1000th of a gram, so there are in.
Mass is often confused with the term weight. Weight is a measure of force that is equal to the gravitat ional pull on an object. The
weight of an object is dependent on its location. On t he moon, the force due to gravity is about one sixth that of the gravitational
force on Earth. Therefore, a given object will weigh si x times more on Earth than it does on the moon. Sinc e mass is dependent
only on the amount of matter present in an object, mass does not change with location. Weight measurement s are often made with a
spring scale by reading the distance that a certain object pulls down and stretches a spring.

2.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332023Summary
Mass is a measure of the amount of matter that an object c ontains.
Weight is a measure of force that is equal to the gravi tational pull on an object.
Mass is independent of location, while weight depends on lo cation.
Review
1. Define mass.
2. Define weight.
3. If I weigh 180 pounds on Earth, what will I weigh on the moo n?
This page titled 2.5: SI Mass and Weight Units is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.5: Mass and Weight by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
The Difference Betw een Mass and WeiThe Difference Betw een Mass and Wei

2.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320242.6: SI Kinetic Energy Units
Figure (Public Domain; User:Dlls/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Have you ever watched a cat in action?
When a cat is chasing something, its moves very fast. A person may comment, "that cat has a lot of energy" —which is more correct
than they might realize! One form of energy is seen when an object is moving, and this type of energy is the basis for many
chemical processes.
SI Kinetic Energy Units
An object's kinetic energy is the energy due to motion. Kinetic energy can be de fined mathematically as:
where is kinetic energy, is mass, and is velocity.
Energy is defined as the capacity to do work or to produce h eat. As discussed previously, kinetic energy is one type of energy and
is associated with motion. Another frequently encount ered energy is potential energy, a type of energy that is stored in matter and
released during a chemical reaction. The joule is the SI unit of energy and is named after English physicist James Prescott Joule
(1818-1889). If we go back to the equation for kineti c energy written above, we can put units in: for mass and for velocity
squared. Then, in terms of SI base units, a joule is e qual to a kilogram times meter squared, divided by a second squared
. Another common unit of energy that is often used is the calorie, which is equivalent to.
Figure: James Prescott Joule. (Public Domain; John Collie r via Wikipedia)
Introduction to Kinetic Energy w ith ExaIntroduction to Kinetic Energy w ith Exa

2.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332024Summary
Energy is the capacity to do work or to produce heat.
Kinetic energy is energy due to motion.
Potential energy is energy stored in matter.
The joule is the SI unit of energy and equals.
Review
1. What is kinetic energy?
2. What is the mathematical equation for kinetic energy?
3. What is potential energy?
4. What is the SI unit for energy?
This page titled 2.6: SI Kinetic Energy Units is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.6: Kinetic Energy by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

2.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320252.7: Temperature and Temperature Scales
Figure (CC0; Tantien3 via Pixabay / Public Domain)
An ice cube in your hand feels cold, but why?
The particles of matter in a hot object are moving much faster than the particles of matter in a cold o bject. An object’s kinetic
energy is the energy due to motion. The particles of matte r that make up the hot stove have a greater amount o f kinetic energy than
those in the ice cube.
Temperature and Temperature Scales
Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the p articles in matter. In everyday usage, temperature i ndicates a
measure of how hot or cold an object is. Temperature is an important parameter in chemistry. When a substa nce changes from solid
to liquid, it is because there was an increase in the t emperature of the material. Chemical reactions usua lly proceed faster if the
temperature is increased. Many unstable materials (such as enzymes) will be viable longer at lower temperatures.
Figure: The glowing charcoal on the left represents h igh kinetic energy, while the snow and ice on the ri ght are of much lower
kinetic energy. (Charcoal: CC-BY 2.0; Snow: Public D omain; Charcoal: Serge Melki; Snow: User:Haymanj/Wikim edia Commons
via Charcoal: http://www.flickr.com/photos/sergemelki/3106924114; Snow:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Snow_Gum1.JPG)
Temperature Scales
The first thermometers were glass and contained alcoh ol, which expanded and contracted as the temperature c hanged. The German
scientist Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit used mercury in th e tube, an idea put forth by Ismael Boulliau. The Fa hrenheit scale was first
developed in 1724 and tinkered with for some time af ter that. The main problems with this scale are the ar bitrary definitions of
temperature. The freezing point of water was defined as and the boiling point as. The Fahrenheit scale is t ypically not
used for scientific purposes.
Figure: Daniel Gabriel Fahrenheit. (Public Domain; A nonymous via Wikipedia)
The Celsius scale of the metric system is named afte r Swedish astronomer Anders Celsius (1701-1744). The Celsius scale sets the
freezing point and boiling point of water at and, respectively. The distance between those two points is d ivided into 100

2.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332025equal intervals, each of which is one degree. Another te rm sometimes used for the Celsius scale is "centigrade" because there are
100 degrees between the freezing and boiling points of wate r on this scale. However, the preferred term is "Celsius".
Figure: Anders Celsius. (Public Domain; Olof Arenius via Wikipedia)
The Kelvin temperature scale is named after Scottish p hysicist and mathematician Lord Kelvin (1824-1907). I t is based on
molecular motion, with the temperature of, also known as absolute zero, being the point where all molecul ar motion ceases.
The freezing point of water on the Kelvin scale is, wh ile the boiling point is. Notice that there is no "de gree" used
in the temperature designation. Unlike the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales, where temperatures are referred to as "degrees " or
"degrees ", we simply designated temperatures in the Kelvin scale as kelvins.
Figure: Lord Kelvin. (Public Domain; Anonymous via Wikipedia)
As can be seen by the 100 kelvin difference between th e two, a change of one degree on the Celsius scale is equivalent to the
change of one kelvin on the Kelvin scale. Converting fro m one scale to another is easy, as you simply add or subtrac t 273.
Different T emperature ScalesDifferent T emperature Scales

2.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332025
Figure: Comparison between Kelvin and Celsius temperat ure Scales. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Laura Guerin via CK-12 Foundation)
Summary
Temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles in matter.
The Fahrenheit scale defines the freezing point of water a s and the boiling point as.
The Celsius scale sets the freezing point and boiling p oint of water at and, respectively.
The Kelvin scale is based on molecular motion, with the te mperature of —also known as absolute zero—being the poin t
where all molecular motion ceases.
Review
1. What is absolute zero on the Celsius temperature scal e?
2. What are the freezing and boiling points of water in the Ce lsius scale?
3. Convert the following Kelvin temperatures to degrees C elsius.
a. 188 K
b. 631 K
4. Temperature in degrees Fahrenheit can be converted to C elsius by first subtracting 32, then dividing by 1.8. Wha t is the Celsius
temperature outside on a warm day (88°F)?
5. Why is the Celsius scale sometimes called “centigrade ”?
This page titled 2.7: Temperature and Temperature Scales is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.7: Temperature and Temperature Scales by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Converting Fahrenheit, Celsius, & KelvinConverting Fahrenheit, Celsius, & Kelvin

2.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320262.8: Scientific Dimensional Analysis
Conversion Factors
Many quantities can be expressed in several differen t ways. The English system measurement of 4 cups is also equal to 2 pints, 1
quart, and of a gallon.
Notice that the numerical component of each quantity is different, while the actual amount of material th at it represents is the same.
This is because the units are different. We can establi sh the same set of equalities for the metric system:
The metric system's use of powers of 10 for all conversio ns makes this quite simple.
Whenever two quantities are equal, a ratio can be written th at is numerically equal to 1. Using the metric examples a bove:
The is called a conversion factor. A conversion factor is a ratio of equivalent measu rements. Because both and
represent the exact same length, the value of the co nversion factor is 1. The conversion factor is read as "1 meter per 100
centimeters". Other conversion factors from the cup meas urement example can be:
Since the numerator and denominator represent equal q uantities in each case, all are valid conversion factors.
Scientific Dimensional Analysis
Conversion factors are used in solving problems in whic h a certain measurement must be expressed with differen t units. When a
given measurement is multiplied by an appropriate co nversion factor, the numerical value changes, but the actual size of the
quantity measured remains the same. Dimensional analysis is a technique that uses the units (dimensions) of th e measurement in
order to correctly solve problems. Dimensional analysis is be st illustrated with an example.
How many seconds are in a day?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
1 day = 24 hours
1 hour = 60 minutes
1 minute = 60 seconds
Unknown
The known quantities above represent the conversion f actors that we will use. The first conversion factor will have day in the
denominator so that the "day" unit will cancel. The se cond conversion factor will then have hours in the de nominator, while the
third conversion factor will have minutes in the deno minator. As a result, the unit of the last numerator will be seconds and that
will be the units for the answer.
Step 2: Calculate.Example

2.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332026Applying the first conversion factor, the " " unit canc els and. Applying the second conversion factor, the " " unit
cancels and. Applying the third conversion factor, th e " " unit cancels and. The unit that
remains is " " for seconds.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Seconds is a much smaller unit of time than days, so it ma kes sense that there are a very large number of seconds i n one day.
Summary
A conversion factor is a ratio of equivalent measureme nts.
Dimensional analysis is a technique that uses the units (dimen sions) of the measurement to solve problems.
Review
1. What is a conversion factor?
2. What is dimensional analysis?
3. How many meters are in 3.7 km?
4. How many kg in 12980 g?
Explore More
Use the link below to answer the following questions: http://www.felderbooks.com/papers/units.html
1. What do we always need to express measurements correctl y?
Atom Bombs and Dimensional Analy sis Atom Bombs and Dimensional Analy sis
Intro to Unit Conversion (Chemistry, PhyIntro to Unit Conversion (Chemistry, Phy

2.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320262. What does dimensional analysis tell you?
3. How do you know that you have set the problem up incorre ctly?
4. How do you know that you have set the problem up correct ly?
This page titled 2.8: Scientific Dimensional Analysis is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.8: Dimensional Analysis by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

2.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320272.9: Metric Unit Conversions
Figure (Credit: Courtesy of the US Army; Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flickr_-_The_U.S._Army__Track_practice.jpg; License: Public Domain)
How can a number of track laps be converted to a distance in meters?
You are training for a 10-kilometer run by doing la ps on a 400-meter track. You ask yourself how many t imes you need to run
around the track in order to cover ten kilometers (...more than you realize). By using dimensional analysis, you can easily
determine the number of laps needed to cover the distanc e.
Metric Unit Conversions
The metric system's many prefixes allow quantities to be expressed in many different units. Dimensional ana lysis is useful to
convert from one metric system unit to another.
A particular experiment for science class requires o f a solution. The science teacher knows that he will need to make
enough solution for 40 experiments to be performed thr oughout the day. How many liters of solution should he prep are?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
1 experiment requires
Unknown
Since each experiment requires of solution and the t eacher needs to prepare enough for 40 experiments, m ultiply 120
by 40 to get of solution needed. Now you must convert to by using a conversion factor.
Step 2: Calculate.
Note that the conversion factor is arranged so that th e unit is in the denominator and thus cancels out, l eaving as the
remaining unit in the answer.
Step 3:Think about your result.
A liter is much larger than a milliliter, so it makes sens e that the number of liters required is less than the number of milliliters.
Two-Step Metric Unit Conversions
Some metric conversion problems are most easily solve d by breaking them down into more than one step. Whe n both the given
unit and the desired unit have prefixes, one can fir st convert to the simple (un-prefixed) unit, followed by a conversion to theExample

2.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332027desired unit. The following example will illustrate thi s method.
Convert to.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
You may need to consult a table for the multiplicati on factor represented by each metric prefix. First co nvert to, then
convert to.
Step 2: Calculate.
Each conversion factor is written so that the unit o f the denominator cancels with the unit of the numera tor of the previous
factor.
Step 3: Think about your result.
A micrometer is a smaller unit of length than a cent imeter, so the answer in micrometers is larger than t he number of
centimeters given.
Summary
Dimensional analysis can be used to carry out metric unit c onversions.
Review
1. Perform the following conversions.
a. 0.074 km to m
b. 24,600 μg to g
c. 4.9 × 107 μg to kg
d. 84 dm to mmExample
How to Convert Units - Unit Conversion How to Convert Units - Unit Conversion

2.9.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332027This page titled 2.9: Metric Unit Conversions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.9: Metric Unit Conversions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

2.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320282.10: Derived Units
Figure (Public Domain; User:Joegrimes/Wikipedia via Commons Wikimedia, Farm landly sander [commons.wikimedia.org])
How has farming evolved?
As farming becomes more expensive and less profitable (at least for small farms), farmers might decide to sell their land to builders
who want to erect commercial or residential properties. In order to sell, an accurate property title is need ed. The dimensions of the
farm must be determined, and the acreage calculated from those dimensions.
Dimensional Analysis and Derived Units
Some units are combinations of SI base units. A derived unit is a unit that results from a mathematical combina tion of SI base
units. We have already discussed volume and energy as two exam ples of derived units. Some others are listed in the table below:
Derived SI Units
Quantity Symbol Unit Unit Abbreviation Derivation
Area square meter
V olume cubic meter
Density kilograms/cubic meter\(\frac{\text{mass}}
{\text{volume}}\0
Concentration moles/liter
Speed (velocity) meters/second
Acceleration meters/second/second
Force newton
Energy joule
Using dimensional analysis with derived units requires s pecial care. When units are squared or cubed as with area or volume, the
conversion factors themselves must also be squared. Shown below is the conversion factor for cubic centimeters and cu bic meters.
Because a cube has 3 sides, each side is subject to th e conversion of to. Since 100 cubed is equal to 1 m illion,
there are in. Two convenient volume units are the l iter (which is equal to a cubic decimeter) and the m illiliter, which is
equal to a cubic centimeter. The conversion factor would be:
There are thus in, which is the same thing as saying there ar e in.

2.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332028
Figure: There are in. Since a is equal to a and a is equal to a, we can say that there are
in. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Convert to.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
This problem requires multiple steps and the techniqu e for converting with derived units. Simply proceed o ne step at a time:
to to.
Step 2: Calculate.
Numerically, the steps are to divide 3.6 by, followed by multiplying by. You may find that you can short en the problem
by a step by first determining the conversion facto r from to, and using that instead of first converti ng to. There are
in.
In this case, 3.6/1000 gives the same result of 0.0036.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Cubic millimeters are much smaller than cubic centimeter s, so the final answer is much less than the original num ber of.Example

2.10.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332028Summary
A derived unit is a unit that results from a mathematical combination of SI base units.
Calculations involving derived units follow the same princ iples as other unit conversion calculations.
Review
1. What is a derived unit?
2. Convert 0.00722 km to m
3. Convert 129 cm to L
4. Convert 4.9 × 105 μm to mm
This page titled 2.10: Derived Units is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.10: Derived Units by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
Measurement derived unitsMeasurement derived units
Derived units, scalars and vectors - A leDerived units, scalars and vectors - A le
3 3
3 3

2.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320292.11: Density
Figure (CC BY 2.0; Tony Hisgett (Flickr:ahisgett) via Flickr)
How do logs stay afloat in water?
After trees are cut, logging companies often move the raw material down a river to a sawmill where it can be shaped into building materials or other
products. The logs float on the water because they are le ss dense than the water they are in. Knowledge of density is important in the characterization
and separation of materials. Information about density all ows us to make predictions about the behavior of matte r.
Density
A golf ball and a table tennis ball are about the s ame size. However, the golf ball is much heavier than t he table tennis ball. Now imagine a similar
size ball made out of lead. That would be very heavy indeed! What are we comparing? By comparing the mas s of an object relative to its size, we are
studying a property called density. Density is the ratio of the mass of an object to its v olume.
Density is an intensive property, meaning that it doe s not depend on the amount of material present in the sample. Water has a density of.
That density is the same whether you have a small glass of water or a swimming pool full of water. Density is a pr operty that is constant for the
particular identity of the matter being studied.
The SI unit of density is kilograms per cubic meter, sin ce the and the are the SI units for mass and length r espectively. In everyday
usage in a laboratory, this unit is awkwardly large. Most solids and liquids have densities that are convenien tly expressed in grams per cubic
centimeter. Since a cubic centimeter is equal to a m illiliter, density units can also be expressed as. Gas es are much less dense than
solids and liquids, so their densities are often report ed in. Densities of some common substances at are listed i n the table below.
Table: Densities of Some Common Substances
Liquids and Solids Density at Gases Density at
Ethanol 0.79 Hydrogen 0.084
Ice 0.917 Helium 0.166
Corn oil 0.922 Air 1.20
Water 0.998 Oxygen 1.33
Water 1.000 Carbon dioxide 1.83
Corn syrup 1.36 Radon 9.23
Aluminum 2.70
Copper 8.92
Lead 11.35
Mercury 13.6
Gold 19.3
Since most materials expand as temperature increases, the density of a substance is temperature dependent, and usually decreases as temperature
increases.
Ice floats in water, and it can be seen from the table tha t ice is less dense. Corn syrup, being more dense, woul d sink if placed in water.

2.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332029An sample of zinc metal has a volume of. Calculate th e density of zinc.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
V olume
Unknown
Use the equation for density,, to solve the problem.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
If of zinc has a mass of about 7 grams, then 2 and a half will have a mass about 2 and a half times as gre at. Metals are expected to
have a density greater than that of water, and zinc's density falls within the range of the other metals l isted above.
Since density values are known for many substances, density can be used to determine an unknown mass or an unknown volume. Dimensional
analysis will be used to ensure that units cancel approp riately.
1. What is the mass of of aluminum?
2. What is the volume of of aluminum?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Density
1. V olume
2. Mass
Unknown
1. Mass
2. V olume
Use the equation for density,, and dimensional analysi s to solve each problem.
Step 2: Calculate.
In problem 1, the mass is equal to the density multipli ed by the volume. In problem 2, the volume is equal to t he mass divided by the density.
Step 3: Think about your results.
Because a mass of of aluminum is, the mass of about should be about 2.5 times larger. The of aluminum is substantially
more than its density, so that amount should occupy a relatively large volume.Example
Example

2.11.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320290:00
0:00
Summary
Density is the ratio of the mass of an object to its vol ume.
Gases are less dense than either solids or liquids.
Both liquid and solid materials can have a variety of densities.
For liquids and gases, the temperature will affect the de nsity to some extent.
Review
1. Define “density.”
2. Are gases more or less dense that liquids or solids at roo m temperature?
3. How does temperature affect the density of a material?
4. A certain liquid sample has a volume of 14.7 mL a nd a mass of 22.8 grams. Calculate the density.
5. A material with a density of 2.7 grams/mL occupies 35.6 mL. How many grams of the material are there?
6. A certain material has a density of 19.3 g/mL. What is the material?
This page titled 2.11: Density is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to
the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.11.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320293.11: Density by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

2.11.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332029

2.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320302.12: Accuracy and Precision
Figure (Public Domain; Daniel Arizpe via Commons Wikimedia, High School Basketball Game [commons.wikimedia.org])
How do professional basketball players improve their shooting accuracy?
Basketball is one of those sports where you need to hit the target. A football field goal kicker might have room for some deviation from a straight
line – for college and pro football there is an 18 fo ot 6 inch space for the ball to go through. In basketba ll, the basket is only 18 inches across and the
ball is a little less than 10 inches across – not much room for error. The ball has to be on target in order t o go into the basket and score.
Accuracy and Precision
In everyday speech, the terms accuracy and precision are frequently used interchangeably. However, their scie ntific meanings are quite different.
Accuracy is a measure of how close a measurement is to the correct or accepted value of the quantity being measur ed. Precision is a measure of how
close a series of measurements are to one another. Precise measurements are highly reproducible, even if the meas urements are not near the correct
value. Darts thrown at a dartboard are helpful in illust rating accuracy and precision.
Figure: The distribution of darts on a dartboard show s the difference between accuracy and precision. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung
via CK-12 Foundation)
Assume that three darts are thrown at the dartboard, with th e bulls-eye representing the true, or accepted, value of what is being measured. A dart
that hits the bulls-eye is highly accurate, whereas a dart that lands far away from the bulls-eye displays poor a ccuracy. The figure above
demonstrates four possible outcomes:
a. The darts have landed far from each other and far from th e bulls-eye. This grouping demonstrates measurements th at are neither accurate nor
precise.
b. The darts are close to one another, but far from the bulls-eye. This grouping demonstrates measurements that are precise, but not accurate. In a
laboratory situation, high precision with low accuracy o ften results from a systematic error. Either the measurer makes the same mistake
repeatedly, or the measuring tool is somehow flawed. A po orly calibrated balance may give the same mass readi ng every time, but it will be far
from the true mass of the object.
c. The darts are not grouped very near to each other, b ut are generally centered around the bulls-eye. This demonstrates poor precision, but fairly
high accuracy. This situation is not desirable in a la b situation because the "high" accuracy may simply b e random chance and not a true indicator
of good measuring skill.
d. The darts are grouped together and have hit the bull s-eye. This demonstrates high precision and high accurac y. Scientists always strive to
maximize both in their measurements.

2.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332030
Figure: Students in a chemistry lab are making carefu l measurements with a series of volumetric flasks. Accura cy and precision are critical in
every experiment. (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foundation via CK-12 Foundation)
0:00
0:00

2.12.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332030Summary
Accuracy is a measure of how close a measurement is to th e correct or accepted value of the quantity being me asured.
Precision is a measure of how close a series of measurem ents are to one another.
Review
1. Define accuracy.
2. Define precision.
3. What can be said about the reproducibility of prec ise values?
This page titled 2.12: Accuracy and Precision is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
3.12: Accuracy and Precision by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

2.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320312.13: Percent Error
Figure (Public Domain; Vald Kliper via Wikipedia)
How does an electrical circuit work?
A complicated piece of electronic equipment may con tain several resistors that have the role of control ling the voltage and current
in the electrical circuit. If there is too much cur rent, the apparatus malfunctions. Conversely, too lit tle current means the system
simply will not perform. The resistor values are always gi ven with an error range. A resistor may have a stated value of 200 ohms,
but a error range, meaning the resistance could be an ywhere between 195 and 205 ohms. By knowing these valu es, an
electronics person can design and service the equipment to make sure that it functions properly.
Percent Error
An individual measurement may be accurate or inaccur ate, depending on how close it is to the true value. Sup pose that you are
doing an experiment to determine the density of a sa mple of aluminum metal. The accepted value of a measurement is the true or
correct value based on general agreement with a reli able reference. For aluminum, the accepted density is. The
experimental value of a measurement is the value that is measured duri ng the experiment. Suppose that in your experiment, y ou
determine an experimental value for the aluminum de nsity to be. The error of an experiment is the difference between
the experimental and accepted values.
If the experimental value is less than the accepted value, the error is negative. If the experimental valu e is larger than the accepted
value, the error is positive. Often, error is reporte d as the absolute value of the difference in order to avoid the confusion of a
negative error. The percent error is the absolute value of the error, divided by the accep ted value, and multiplied by.
To calculate the percent error for the aluminum den sity measurement, we can substitute the given values of for the
experimental value and for the accepted value.
If the experimental value is equal to the accepted v alue, the percent error is equal to 0. As the accuracy of a measurement decreases,
the percent error of that measurement rises.

2.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332031Summary
Definitions of accepted value and experimental values a re given.
Calculations of error and percent error are demonstrated.
Review
1. Define accepted value.
2. Define experimental value
3. What happens as the accuracy of the measurement decrea ses?
This page titled 2.13: Percent Error is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.13: Percent Error by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
Error and Percent ErrorError and Percent Error

2.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320322.14: Measurement Uncertainty
Figure (CC BY-SA 4.0; Tony Webster via Commons Wikimedia, Police Line Crime Scene [commons.wikimedia.org])
How do police officers identify criminals?
After a bank robbery has been committed, police will a sk witnesses to describe the thieves. They will usually ge t an answer such as
"medium height". Others may say something along the lin es of "between 5 foot 8 inches and 5 foot 10 inches". In both cases, there
is a significant amount of uncertainty about the height of the criminals.
Measurement Uncertainty
Some error or uncertainty always exists in any measurement. The amount of uncert ainty depends both upon the skill of the
measurer and upon the quality of the measuring tool. While some balances are capable of measuring masse s only to the nearest
, other highly sensitive balances are capable of meas uring to the nearest, or even better. Many measuring t ools, such as
rulers and graduated cylinders, have small lines which need to be carefully read in order to make a measur ement. The figure below
shows two rulers making the same measurement of an object (ind icated by the blue arrow).
Figure: Uncertainty in measurement. (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
With either ruler, it is clear that the length of the object is between and. The bottom ruler contains no millimeter markings.
With that ruler, the tenths digit can be estimated a nd the length may be reported as. However, another pe rson may judge that
the measurement is or perhaps. While the 2 is known for certain, the value of the tenths digit is uncertain.
The top ruler contains marks for tenths of a centimet er (millimeters). With this ruler, the same object m ay be measured as.
The measurer is capable of estimating the hundredths digit because he can be certain that the tenths dig it is a 5. Again, another
measurer may report the length to be or. In this case, there are two certain digits (the 2 and the 5), with the
hundredths digit being uncertain. Clearly, the top ruler i s a superior ruler for measuring lengths as precisely as p ossible.

2.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332032Summary
Uncertainty exists in all measurements.
The degree of uncertainty is affected in part by the qu ality of the measuring tool.
Review
1. What is uncertainty in measurements?
2. Why is the top ruler more reliable in measuring length than the bottom ruler?
3. How could the top ruler be made more accurate?
This page titled 2.14: Measurement Uncertainty is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.14: Measurement Uncertainty by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
How T o Master Calculating UncertaintyHow T o Master Calculating Uncertainty

2.15.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320332.15: Significant Figures
Figure (Public Domain; User:WhisperToMe/Wikimedia Comm ons via Wikipedia)
How fast do you drive?
As you enter the town of Jacinto City, Texas, a sign tells you that the speed limit is 30 miles per hour. But wh at if you happen to be
driving 31 miles an hour? Are you in trouble? Probabl y not, because there is a certain amount of leeway bu ilt into enforcing the
regulation. Most speedometers do not measure the vehic le speed very accurately and could easily be off by a mile or so (on the
other hand, radar measurements are much more accura te). So, a couple of miles per hour difference won't matter that much.
However, if you stretch the limits any further, you may en d up receiving a traffic ticket.
Significant Figures
The significant figures in a measurement consist of all the certain digits in that measurement, plus one uncertain or estimated digit.
In the ruler illustration below, the bottom ruler ga ve a length with 2 significant figures, while the top r uler gave a length with 3
significant figures. In a correctly reported measurem ent, the final digit is significant but not certain. Insignificant digits are not
reported. With either ruler, it would not be possible to report the length at, as there is no possible way that the thousandths
digit could be estimated. The 3 is not significant and would not be reported.
Figure: Measurement with two different rulers. (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
When you look at a reported measurement, it is neces sary to be able to count the number of significant f igures. The table below
details the rules for determining the number of signi ficant figures in a reported measurement. For the ex amples in the table, assume
that the quantities are correctly reported values of a measured quantity.
Figure: Significant Figure Rules
Rule Examples
1. All nonzero digits in a measurement are significant.237 has three significant figures.
1.897 has four significant figures.
2. Zeros that appear between other nonzero digits are always
significant.39,004 has five significant figures.
5.02 has three significant figures.
3. Zeros that appear in front of all of the nonzero digits are called
left-end zeros. Left-end zeros are never significant.0.008 has one significant figure.
0.000416 has three significant figures.
4. Zeros that appear after all nonzero digits are cal led right-end
zeros. Right-end zeros in a number that lacks a decima l point are
not significant.140 has two significant figures.
75,210 has four significant figures.
5. Right-end zeros in a number with a decimal point a re
significant. This is true whether the zeros occur befor e or after the
decimal point.620.0 has four significant figures.
19.000 has five significant figures.

2.15.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332033It needs to be emphasized that to say a certain digi t is not significant, does not mean that it is not imp ortant or can be left out.
Though the zero in a measurement of 140 may not be significant, the value cannot simply be reported as 1 4. An insignificant zero
functions as a placeholder for the decimal point. Wh en numbers are written in scientific notation, this be comes more apparent. The
measurement 140 can be written as with two significan t figures in the coefficient. For a number with left-en d zeros, such
as 0.000416, it can be written as with 3 significant f igures. In some cases, scientific notation is the only way to correctly
indicate the correct number of significant figures. In order to report a value of 15,000,000 with four sig nificant figures, it would
need to be written as. The right-end zeros after the 5 are significant. The original number of 15,000,000 only has two
significant figures.
Summary
Significant figures give an indication of the certain ty of a measurement.
Rules allow decisions to be made about how many digits to use in any given situation.
Review
1. What does a significant figure tell us?
2. What is a left-end zero?
3. What is a right-end zero?
4. What does an insignificant zero do?
This page titled 2.15: Significant Figures is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.16: Significant Figures by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
How to Find Signi cant Figures (Easy MHow to Find Signi cant Figures (Easy M

2.16.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320342.16: Rounding
Figure (Public Domain; Nancy Heise via Wikipedia)
Have you ever been fishing
People who fish often are a little unreliable when it comes to describing what fish they caught and how much it weighed. It's easier
to say that the fish weighed ten pounds than it is t o accurately describe the weight of 8 pounds 11 ounces. Ten pounds is "close
enough" when a fisherman is talking about their catch.
Rounding
Before dealing with the specifics of the rules for de termining the significant figures in a calculated res ult, we need to be able to
round numbers correctly. To round a number, first decide how many significant figures the number should have. Once you know
that, round to that many digits, starting from the l eft. If the number immediately to the right of the l ast significant digit is less than
5, it is dropped and the value of the last significa nt digit remains the same. If the number immediately to the right of the last
significant digit is greater than or equal to 5, the las t significant digit is increased by 1.
Consider the measurement. Right now, the measuremen t contains six significant figures. How would we successiv ely
round it to fewer and fewer significant figures? Follow th e process as outlined in Table.
Table: Rounding examples
Number of Significant Figures Rounded Value Reasoning
6 207.518 All digits are significant
5 207.52 8 rounds the 1 up to 2
4 207.5 2 is dropped
3 208 5 rounds the 7 up to 8
2 2108 is replaced by a 0 and rounds the 0 up to
1 200 1 is replaced by a 0
Notice that the more rounding that is done, the less reliable the figure is. An approximate value may be sufficient for some
purposes, but scientific work requires a much higher level of detail.

2.16.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332034Summary
Rounding involves the adjustment of a value to account for the proper number of significant digits.
Rules exist for rounding numbers.
Review
1. Why do we round numbers?
2. What do we need to know before we round a number?
3. What is “rounding up”?
4. What is “rounding down”?
This page titled 2.16: Rounding is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.15: Rounding by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Rounding DecimalsRounding Decimals

2.17.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320352.17: Uncertainty in Multiplication and Division
Figure (Public Domain; Adrian Pingstone (User:Arpingsto ne/Wikimedia Commons) via Wikipedia)
Who should report the numbers - you or your calculator?
Calculators do just what is asked of them—no more an d no less. However, they sometimes can get a little out of hand. If you
multiply 2.48 times 6.3, you get an answer of 15.687, a value that ignores the number of significant figure s in either number.
Division with a calculator is even worse. When you divi de 12.2 by 1.7, the answer you obtain is 7.176470588. Ne ither piece of data
is accurate to nine decimal places, but the calcula tor does not know that. The human being operating the instrument has to make the
decision about how many places to report.
Uncertainty in Multiplication and Division
The density of a certain object is calculated by div iding the mass by the volume. Suppose that a mass of i s divided by a
volume of. The result on a calculator would be:
The value of the mass measurement has four significa nt figures, while the value of the volume measurement has only three
significant figures. For multiplication and division pr oblems, the answer should be rounded to the same number of significant
figures as the measurement with the least number of sig nificant figures. Applying this rule results in a dens ity of, with
three significant figures—the same as the volume measurem ent.
Perform the following calculations, rounding the answers t o the appropriate number of significant figures.
A.
B.
Calculating Uncertainty (Error V alues) inCalculating Uncertainty (Error V alues) in
Example

2.17.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332035Solution
Step 1: Plan the problem.
Analyze each of the measured values to determine how many significant figures should be in the result. Perfo rm the calculation
and round appropriately. Apply the correct units to t he answer. When multiplying or dividing, the units a re also multiplied or
divided.
Step 2: Calculate.
A. Round to two significant figures because 0.048 has two.
B. Round to three significant figures because 5.81 has th ree.
How many significant figures should the answer contain?
Answer
=418; 3 significant figures
Summary
For multiplication and division problems, the answer shoul d be rounded to the same number of significant figures as the
measurement with the least number of significant figures.
Review
1. Perform the calculation and round your answer with the co rrect number of significant figures.
a. 78.2 ÷ 32 cm
b. 3.0 m/s × 9.21 s
2. What happens to units in multiplication and division p roblems?
This page titled 2.17: Uncertainty in Multiplication and Division is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.18: Significant Figures in Multiplication and Division by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.Exercise

2.18.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320362.18: Uncertainty in Addition and Subtraction
Figure (Public Domain; User:Septagram/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
How old do you think this calculator is?
Calculators are great devices. Their invention has a llowed for quick computation at work, school, and othe r places where
manipulation of numbers needs to be done rapidly an d accurately. But they are only as good as the numb ers put into them. The
calculator cannot determine how accurate each set of numbers is, and the answer given on the screen must be assessed by the user
for reliability.
Uncertainty in Addition and Subtraction
Consider two separate mass measurements: and. The f irst mass measurement,, is known only to the tenths
place, or to one digit after the decimal point. Ther e is no information about its hundredth place and so that digit cannot be assumed
to be zero. The second measurement,, is known to the hundredth s place, or to two digits after the decimal point.
When these masses are added together, the result on a calculator is. Reporting the answer as suggests
that the sum is known all the way to the hundredths pl ace. However, that cannot be true because the hundredth s place of the first
mass was completely unknown. The calculated answer needs to be rounded in such a way as to reflect the certain ty of each of the
measured values that contribute to it. For addition and subtraction problems, the answer should be rounde d to the same number of
decimal places as the measurement with the least numbe r of decimal places. The sum of the above masses woul d be properly
rounded to a result of.
Determine the combined molecular mass of a glucose molecu le and a maltose molecule.
Glucose molecule =
Maltose molecule =
Solution
When adding and subtracting we know to look at the le ast number of decimals in our starting values; in t his case 342.3 has
only 1 digit after the decimal, so we need to round our answer to the same place.
\(522.456\to 522.5\frag{g}{mol}
When working with whole numbers, pay attention to the last significant digit that is to the left of the de cimal point, and round your
answer to that same point. For example, consider the su btraction:. The calculated result is. However, the
first measurement is known only to the hundreds place, as the 5 is the last significant digit. Rounding the result to that same point
means that the correct result is.Example

2.18.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332036What is =?
Solution
To determine where to round our answer, we look at our st arting numbers to see which has the fewest number of de cimal
places. They both have 0 so we round to the nearest whole n umber, 4740.
Summary
For addition and subtraction problems, the answer should b e rounded to the same number of decimal places as the measure ment
with the least number of decimal places.
Review
1. What is the basic principle to use in working with additio n and subtraction?
2. What do you pay attention to when working with whole numbers?
This page titled 2.18: Uncertainty in Addition and Subtraction is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
3.17: Significant Figures in Addition and Subtraction by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.Example
Add and Subtract w ith Signi cant FigurAdd and Subtract w ith Signi cant Figur

2.19.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3323072.19: Measurements and Problem-Solving (Exercises)
These are homework exercises to accompany Chapter 1 of the University of Kentucky's LibreText for CHE 103 - Chemistry for
Allied Health. Solutions are available below the questions.
Questions
1.1: Measurements Matter
(click here for solutions)
Q1.1.1
Express the following values in scientific notation.
a. 150,000,000
b. 0.000043
c. 332000
d. 0.0293
e. 932
f. 0.1873
g. 78,000
h. 0.0001
i. 4500
j. 0.00290
k. 6281
l. 0.00700
Q1.1.2
Express the following values in decimal notation.
a. 3.8 x 10
b. 9.21 x 10
c. 7.91 x 10
d. 2.5 x 10
e. 3.42 x 10
f. 5.4 x 10
g. 3 x 10
h. 7.34 x 10
i. 9.8 x 10
j. 6 x 10
k. 4.20 x 10
l. 4.20 x 10
Q1.1.3
What SI base unit would be appropriate for each measurement?
a. the length of a room
b. the amount of carbon in a diamond
c. the mass of NaCl in a bottle
Q1.1.4
List the meaning of each abbreviation of the base units.
a. m
b. K-3
-2
-8
-3
-4
-6

2.19.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307c. kg
d. s
e. mol
Q1.1.5
What is the the derived unit from the SI base units fo r the relationship of each pair of quantities?
a. mass and volume
b. distance and time
c. amount of substance and volume
d. area
Q1.1.6
Give the meaning and name of each metrix prefix abbrevia tion.
a. M
b. m
c. n
d. d
Q1.1.7
Give the abbreviation and meaning of each metrix prefix.
a. kilo
b. centi
c. micro
d. giga
Q1.1.8
Name the prefix with the following numerical meaning.
a. 1/10
b. 1,000,000
c. 1/1,000,000
d. 1/100
e. 1
Q1.1.9
Convert each temperature to the missing one between Celsius a nd Fahrenheit.
a. 77°F
b. 212°F
c. 37°C
d. 22°C
e. 95°F
f. 15°C
g. 0°F
h. 0°C
i. –10°C
j. –10°F
1.2 Significant Figures

2.19.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307(click here for solutions)
Q1.2.1
Explain the similarities and differences between accuracy and precision.
Q1.2.2
The density of a copper sample was determined by thre e different students (shown below). Each performed the measurement three
times and is reported below (all values in units of g/cm). T he accepted value for the density of copper is 8.92 g/cm.
a. Determine if each student's data is accurate, precise, ne ither or both.
b. What is the average density based on Justin's data?
c. What is the average density based on Jane's data?
Jane: 8.94, 8.89, 8.91
Justin: 8.32, 8.31, 8.34
Julia: 8.64, 9.71, and 9.10
Q1.2.3
Determine the number of significant figures in each of the following values.
a. 406
b. 3.00
c. 3.20
d. 0.25
e. 0.0689
f. 0.002910
g. 3941
h. 46.250
i. 30.21
j. 0.10300
Q1.2.4
Write each value with three significant figures, use scien tific notation if necessary.
a. 34500
b. 24
c. 0.0345
d. 0.012
e. 612.8
f. 98.22
g. 0.14928
h. 300
Q1.2.5
Give three examples of exact numbers.
Q1.2.6
Find the result of each of the following calculations and repo rt the value with the correct number of significant figur es.
a. 0.23 + 12.2 =
b. 13 - 1.03 =
c. 0.839 + 0.28925 =
d. 28 + 34.4 =
e. 0.8 + 2.3 =
f. 34.9 - 0.583 =3 3

2.19.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307g. 21 - 0.132 =
h. 0.840 + 0.9334
Q1.2.7
Find the result of each of the following calculations and repo rt the value with the correct number of significant figur es.
a. 34 x 0.12 =
b. 68.2 / 0.78 =
c. 3.29 x 10 x 16.2 =
d. 0.8449 x 29.7 =
e. 5.92 x 10 / 0.628 =
f. 3.00 x 2.6 =
g. 2.50 x 9.331 =
h. 3.20 / 12.75 =
1.3 Scientific Dimensional Analysis
(click here for solutions)
Q1.3.1
What is a conversion factor?
Q1.3.2
What is the conversion factor between each pair of units?
a. feet and inches
b. mL and cm
c. kg and g
d. cm and m
e. mm and cm
f. inches and centimeters
g. grams and pounds
h. g and µg (mcg)
Q1.3.3
Complete each of the following conversions.
a. 34 cm to m
b. 3.7 ft to in
c. 345 mg to Mg
d. 5.3 km to mm
e. 4.0 L to mL
f. 3.45 x 10 mm to km
g. 78 cm to mL
h. 0.85 kg to dg
i. 13 pints to gallon
j. 0.35 L to cm
Q1.3.4
Complete each of the following conversions.
a. 342 cm to dm
b. 2.70 g/cm to kg/L
c. 34 mi/hr to km/min
d. 0.00722 km to m4
3 3
2 2

2.19.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307e. 4.9 x 10 mcm to mm
f. 80. km/hr to mi/hr
1.4 Percentages
(click here for solutions)
Q1.4.1
Solve each of the following.
a. What percent of 35 is 8.2?
b. What percent of 56 is 12?
c. What percent of 923 is 38?
d. What percent of 342 is 118?
Q1.4.2
Solve each of the following?
a. What is 42% of 94?
b. What is 83% of 239?
c. What is 16% of 45?
d. What is 38% of 872?
Q1.4.3
Solve each of the following?
a. 42 is 34% of what number?
b. 73 is 82% of what number?
c. 13 is 57% of what number?
d. 75 is 25% of what number?
e. 25 is 15% of what number?
f. 98 is 76% of what number?
Q1.4.4
A patient originally weighs 182 pounds and loses 15.0% of t heir body weight. What is their final weight?
Q1.4.5
A patient's original weight was 135 pounds and they lose 12 pounds. What percent of their body weight did they lose?
Q1.4.6
A patient needs to increase their calcium supplement by 25% a week. If they are currently taking a 300. mg supplement, how much
more will they need to take?
Q1.4.7
An infant's birth weight is 7 pounds, 1 ounce. Her disch arge weight is 6 pounds, 13 ounces. What percent of h er birth weight did
she lose?
Q1.4.8
A patient needs a 20.% decrease in their medication do sage from 125 mg. What will his dosage be after the decreas e?
Answers
1.1: Measurements Matter
Q1.1.1
a. 1.5 × 105 3 3

2.19.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307b. 4.3 × 10
c. 3.32 × 10
d. 2.93 × 10
e. 9.32 × 10
f. 1.873 × 10
g. 7.8 × 10
h. 1 × 10
i. 4.5 × 10
j. 2.9 × 10
k. 6.281 × 10
l. 7 × 10
Q1.1.2
a. 0.0038
b. 921000
c. 0.0791
d. 2500000
e. 0.0000000342
f. 540000
g. 0.003
h. 734
i. 0.00098
j. 60000000
k. 0.00000420
l. 4200000
Q1.1.3
a. meter
b. mole
c. kilogram
Q1.1.4
a. meter
b. Kelvin
c. kilogram
d. second
e. mole
Q1.1.5
a. kg/m
b. m/s
c. mol/m is based on SI base units, but mol/L is also accept able
d. m
Q1.1.6
a. Mega, 10
b. milli, 10
c. nano, 10
d. deci, 10
Q1.1.7–5
–2
–1
–4
–3
–3
–3
–9
–1

2.19.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307a. k, 10
b. c, 10
c. µ (or mc), 10
d. G, 10
Q1.1.8
a. deci
b. mega
c. micro
d. centi
e. none (base unit)
Q1.1.9
a. 77°F = 25°C
b. 212°F = 100°C
c. 37°C = 98.6°F
d. 22°C = 72°F
e. 95°F = 35°C
f. 15°C = 59°F
g. 0°F = –18°C
h. 0°C = 32°F
i. –10°C = 14°F
j. –10°F = –23°C
1.2 Significant Figures
Q1.2.1
Accuracy is a measure of how close the values are close to the correct value while precision is a measure o f how close values are to
each other.
Q1.2.2
a.
Jane: 8.94, 8.89, 8.91 - accurate and precise
Justin: 8.32, 8.31, 8.34 - precise
Julia: 8.64, 9.71, and 9.10 - neither accurate nor precise
a. 8.32 g/cm
b. 8.91 g/cm
Q1.2.3
a. 3
b. 3
c. 3
d. 2
e. 3
f. 4
g. 4
h. 5
i. 4
j. 5
Q1.2.43
–2
–6

2.19.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307a. 3.45 × 10
b. 2.40 × 10
c. 3.45 × 10
d. 1.20 × 10
e. 613 or 6.13 × 10
f. 9.82 × 10
g. 0.149 or 1.49 × 10
h. 300. or 3.00 × 10
Q1.2.5
Answers will vary. 12 eggs, 100 cm = 1 m, 1 inch = 2.54 cm, 4 pe ople
Q1.2.6
a. 0.23 + 12.2 = 12.43 = 12.4
b. 13 - 1.03 = 11.97 = 12
c. 0.839 + 0.28925 = 1.12825 = 1.128
d. 28 + 34.4 = 62.4 = 62
e. 0.8 + 2.3 = 3.1
f. 34.9 - 0.583 = 34.317 = 34.3
g. 21 - 0.132 = 20.868 = 21
h. 0.840 + 0.9334 = 1.7734 = 1.773
Q1.2.7
a. 34 x 0.12 = 4.08 = 4.1
b. 68.2 / 0.78 = 87.4358974 = 87
c. 3.29 x 10 x 16.2 = 5.32980 × 10 = 5.33 × 10
d. 0.8449 x 29.7 = 25.09353 = 25.1
e. 5.92 x 10 / 0.628 = 9.4267515 × 10 = 9.43 × 10
f. 3.00 x 2.6 = 7.8
g. 2.50 x 9.331 = 23.3275 = 23.3
h. 3.20 / 12.75 = 0.25098 = 0.251
1.3 Scientific Dimensional Analysis
Q1.3.1
A conversion factor is a relationship between two units. The value in the numerator has some equivalence to the value in the
denominator.
Q1.3.2
a. 1 foot = 12 inches
b. 1 mL = 1 cm
c. 1 kg = 1000 g or 1 × 10 kg = 1 g
d. 100 cm = 1 m or 1 cm = 1 × 10 m
e. 10 mm = 1 cm
f. 1 inch = 2.54 cm
g. 454 grams = 1 pound
h. 1 g = 1 × 10 µg (mcg) or 1 × 10 g = 1 µg (mcg)
Q1.3.3
a.
b.
c. 4
–2
–2
–1
4 5 5
3 3 3
–3
–2
6 –6

2.19.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
Q1.3.4
a. or
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
1.4 Percentages
Q1.4.1
a.
b.
c.
d.
Q1.4.2
a.
b.
c.
d.
Q1.4.3
a.
b.

2.19.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332307c.
d.
e.
f.
Q1.4.4
Q1.4.5
Q1.4.6
Q1.4.7
Convert both weights to ounces, find the ounces lost, and then find the percent lost.
Birth weight:
Discharge weight:
Weight lost:
Percent lost from original brith weight.
Q1.4.8

2.19.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3323072.19: Measurements and Problem-Solving (Exercises) is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Matter and Change
3.1: Substances
3.2: Physical Properties
3.3: Extensive and Intensive Properties
3.4: Solid, Liquid, and Gas
3.5: Physical Change
3.6: Homogeneous Mixture
3.7: Heterogeneous Mixtures
3.8: Methods for Separating Mixtures
3.9: Elements
3.10: Compounds
3.11: Chemical Change
3.12: Chemical Symbols and Formulas
3.13: Chemical Properties and Chemical Reactions
3.14: Reactants and Products
3.15: Recognizing Chemical Reactions
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 3: Matter and Change is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

3.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320383.1: Substances
Have you ever had the experience of opening the refrigerator and seeing something that you don't recognize?
Not an unfamiliar food, but something that has chang ed over the time period it was in the refrigerator. Y ou are not sure just what it
is, so you call it "stuff". Likely, after looking at it, you know it's not a good idea to eat it, so you t hrow it out. If you're not sure just
what it is, you certainly do not want to put it in your bod y.
Substances
Silver and ordinary table salt are two examples of ch emical substances. A substance is matter that has a uniform and defi nite
composition. All samples of substances, sometimes called p ure substances, have identical properties. When chem ists run a
chemical reaction, they want to use pure materials so they know exactly what they are dealing with. They kno w that the reaction
involves a specific substance, so they expect the same reaction to give the same results each time that it is run.
One characteristic of a substance is that it cannot b e separated into components by physical separation techniques. The compound
acetylsalicylic acid (the active ingredient in aspir in) is a substance because it is a chemical compound th at cannot be further
reduced to other materials by physical means. However, the aspirin that contains the acetylsalicylic acid is a mixture. In addition to
the active pain-relieving ingredient, aspirin also m ay contain waxes, corn starch, and cellulose, among othe r ingredients. These
added materials bind the tablet components into a solid pill and influence how rapidly the material dissolves.
Figure: Aspirin tablets. (Pixabay License; Heung Soon vi a Pixabay)
Substances may be either elements or pure compounds. They may also be solid, liquid, or gas. Some of the elements (such as
silver) exist in the solid form. Other elements (merc ury) exist as liquids at room temperature. Elements s uch as helium and radon
exist as gases at room temperature. A compound such as water will take the form of a solid, a liquid, or a ga s, depending on the
temperature.
Summary
A substance is a pure material with a uniform and definite composition.
A substance cannot be separated into components using phy sical means.
A substance can be a solid, a liquid, or a gas, dependent on temperature.
Review
1. Define substance.
2. Can salt be a substance?
3. Is aspirin a substance?
This page titled 3.1: Substances is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.2: Pure Substances by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

3.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320393.2: Physical Properties
Why are drag car standards constantly reinforced?
Drag racing is a highly competitive (and expensive) sport. There are a variety of classes of vehicles, ran ging from stock classes
(dependent on car weight, engine size, and degree of engine modification) all the way up to the Top Fuel c lass. Cars in the Top Fuel
class may weigh over two thousand pounds, and are capab le of top speeds of well over 300 miles per hour at t he end of the quartermile. The standards for each class are well-defined, a nd frequent checks are made of engine dimensions an d components to ensure
that the rules are followed.
Physical Properties
A physical property is a characteristic of a substance that can be obse rved or measured without changing the identity of th e
substance. Silver is a shiny metal that conducts elect ricity very well. It can be molded into thin sheets—a property called
malleability. Salt is dull, brittle, and conducts elec tricity when it has been dissolved into water (which it does quite easily). Physical
properties of matter include color, hardness, malle ability, solubility, electrical conductivity, density, melting point, and boiling
point.
For the elements, color does not vary much from one el ement to the next. The vast majority of elements are colorless, silver, or
gray. Some elements do have distinctive colors: sulfur a nd chlorine are yellow, copper is (of course) copper -colored, and elemental
bromine is red.
Density can be a very useful parameter for identifying an element. Of the materials that exist as solids at roo m temperature, iodine
has a very low density compared to zinc, chromium, and tin. Gold has a very high density, as does platinum.
Hardness helps determine how an element (especially a metal) might be used. Many elements are fairly soft (silver and gold, for
example) while others (such as titanium, tungsten, and chromium) are much harder. Carbon is an interesting example of hardness.
In graphite (the "lead" found in pencils) the carbon is very soft, while the carbon in a diamond is roughly sev en times as hard.
Figure: Pencil (Public Domain; Public Domain via
Wikipedia)
Figure: Diamond ring (Public Domain; User:Ikkyu2/Wiki media Commons via
Wikipedia)
Melting point and boiling point are somewhat unique i dentifiers, especially in the case of compounds. In a ddition to giving some
idea as to the identity of the compound, important info rmation can be obtained about the purity of the materi al.

3.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332039Summary
A physical property is a characteristic of a substance t hat can be observed or measured without changing the id entity of the
substance.
Physical properties include color, density, hardness, melting point, and boiling point.
Review
1. What is a physical property?
2. What color are most metals?
3. Is titanium harder or softer than gold?
This page titled 3.2: Physical Properties is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.3: Physical Properties by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Properties of Matter - Phy sical and CheProperties of Matter - Phy sical and Che

3.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320403.3: Extensive and Intensive Properties
How much is twenty dollars really worth?
You agree to mow someone's lawn for twenty dollars (it's a fairly large yard). When they pay you, they give you a $20 bill. It
doesn't matter whether the bill is brand new or old, dirty, and wrinkled—all of these bills have the same value of $20. If you want
more $20 bills, you have to mow more lawns. You can't say, "this particular bill is actually worth more tha n $20." To have more
money, you have to put in more work.
Extensive Properties
Some properties of matter depend on the size of the sample, while some do not. An extensive property is a property that depends
on the amount of matter in a sample. The mass of an object is a measure of the amount of matter that an object contains. A small
sample of a certain type of matter will have a small mass, while a larger sample will have a greater mass. Another extensive
property is volume. The volume of an object is a measure o f the space that is occupied by that object.
The figure below illustrates the extensive property o f volume. The pitcher and glass both contain milk. The pitcher holds
approximately two quarts and the glass will hold about 8 ounces of milk. The same milk is in each containe r. The only difference is
the amount of milk contained in the glass and in the pitc her.
Figure: Milk pitcher and glass. (Public Domain; Zenon Niewada (Wikimedia: Pitcherman) via Wikipedia)
Intensive Properties
The electrical conductivity of a substance is a prop erty that depends only on the type of substance. Silv er, gold, and copper are
excellent conductors of electricity, while glass and plastic are poor conductors. A larger or smaller pi ece of glass will not change
this property. An intensive property is a property of matter that depends only on the type of matter in a sample and not on the
amount. Other intensive properties include color, temper ature, density, and solubility.
Figure: Copper wire. (Credit: User:Inductiveload/Wik imedia Commons; Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tinned_Copper_ Wire_anaglyph.jpg)
The copper wire shown in the picture below has a certa in electrical conductivity. You could cut off the sma ll end that sticks out, and
it would have the same conductivity as the entire lo ng roll of wire shown here. The conductivity is a prop erty of the copper metal
itself, not of the length of the wire.

3.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332040Summary
An extensive property is a property that depends on the am ount of matter in a sample.
Mass and volume are examples of extensive properties.
An intensive property is a property of matter that depend s only on the type of matter in a sample and not on the amo unt.
Color, temperature, and solubility are examples of intensiv e properties.
Review
1. Define extensive property.
2. Give two examples of extensive properties.
3. Define intensive property.
4. Give two examples of intensive properties.
This page titled 3.3: Extensive and Intensive Properties is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.4: Extensive and Intensive Properties by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Intensive Extensive ProperitesIntensive Extensive Properites

3.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320413.4: Solid, Liquid, and Gas
Why is the state of water different in each picture?
Water can take many forms. At low temperatures (below), water is a solid. When at "normal" temperatures (betwee n and
), it is a liquid. At temperatures above, water is a gas (stea m).
Figure (Public Domain; Iceberg: Rear Admiral Harley D. Nygren, NOAA; Beach: User:Wicki/Wikimedia Common s;
V olcano: E. Klett, US Fish and Wildlife Service via Iceberg: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ice_berg.jpg; Beach:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ocean_Spokojny.JPG; V olcano: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dds40097_large.jpeg)
The state of water depends on the temperature. Each stat e (solid, liquid, and gas) has its own unique set of physica l properties.
Matter and its States
Matter typically exists in one of three states: solid, liquid, or gas. There is a fourth state of matter called plasma, which rarely
exists on earth, but we will omit this from our current d iscussion. The state a given substance exhibits is also a physical property.
Some substances exist as gases at room temperature (oxy gen and carbon dioxide), while others, like water and m ercury metal, exist
as liquids. Most metals exist as solids at room temperature. All substances can exist in any of these three states.
Liquid
Liquids have the following characteristics:
No definite shape (takes the shape of its container).
Has definite volume.
Particles are free to move over each other, but are still attracted to each other.
A familiar liquid is mercury metal. Mercury is an ano maly. It is the only metal we know of that is liquid at room temperature.
Mercury also has an ability to stick to itself (surfac e tension), which is a property that all liquids exhibi t. Mercury has a relatively
high surface tension, and this makes it very unique. Here you c an see mercury in its common liquid form.
Figure: Mercury. (the EPA; Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mercury-elemen t.jpg; License: Public Domain)
If we heat liquid mercury to its boiling point of, and contain it under the right pressure conditions, we would notice all
particles in the liquid state go into the gas state.
Gas
Gases have the following characteristics:
No definite shape (takes the shape of its container).
No definite volume.
Particles move in random motion with little or no attractio n to each other.
Highly compressible.

3.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332041Solid
Solids are defined by the following characteristics:
Definite shape (rigid).
Definite volume.
Particles vibrate around fixed axes.
If we were to cool a sample of liquid mercury to its f reezing point of, and had it contained under the r ight pressure
conditions, we would notice all of the liquid particles wo uld go into the solid state.
As you can see in the video, mercury can be solidifie d when its temperature is brought to its freezing po int. However, when
returned to room temperature conditions, mercury does not exist in solid state for long, and returns back to its more common liquid
form.
Plasma
Plasma is a state of matter that resembles a gas but has certain properties that gases do not have. Lik e a gas, plasma consists of
particles of matter that can pull apart and spread o ut, so it lacks a fixed volume and a fixed shape. Unlike a gas, plasma can conduct
Sculpting in Solid Mercury, w ith Liquid NSculpting in Solid Mercury, w ith Liquid N
Particulate Nature of Matter and ChangParticulate Nature of Matter and Chang

3.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332041electricity and respond to a magnetic field. That’s because plasma consists of electrically charged part icles called ions, instead of
uncharged particles such as atoms or molecules.
Plasma are defined by the following characteristics:
particles are charged ions and free electrons
no definite shape
no definite volume
conducts electricity
responds to magnetic field
Summary
Three states of matter exist: solid, liquid, and gas.
Solids have a definite shape and volume.
Liquids have a definite volume, but take the shape of t heir container.
Gases have no definite shape or volume.
Review
1. How many states of matter are there?
2. What is a solid?
3. What is a liquid?
4. What is a gas?
This page titled 3.4: Solid, Liquid, and Gas is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.5: States of Matter by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

3.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320423.5: Physical Change
How does a car go from new and shiny to old and beaten up?
Want to buy a car – cheap? Notice there is no specif ication such as “in good condition” or “needs a lit tle work.” The car above is
pretty beat up. The body is damaged, the windows are br oken, and the interior is probably torn up. But this is still a car. It has all
the components of a car, even though you would not wan t to buy it in the present condition. But change th at condition and you
have a (possibly) useable car.
Figure (CC BY 2.0; User: Paul / Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Physical Change
As an ice cube melts, its shape changes as it acquires the ability to flow. However, its composition does not change. Melting is an
example of a physical change. A physical change is a change to a sample of matter in which some properties of the material
change, but the identity of the matter does not. Physica l changes can further be classified as reversible or irreversible. The melted
ice cube may be refrozen, so melting is a reversible physical change. Physical changes that involve a chan ge of state are all
reversible. Other changes of state include vaporization (liquid to gas), freezing (liquid to solid), and condensation (gas to liquid).
Dissolving is also a reversible physical change. When s alt is dissolved into water, the salt is said to have entered the aqueous state.
The salt may be regained by boiling off the water, leavi ng the salt behind.
Figure: Melting ice in the Beaufort Sea. (Public Doma in; Rear Admiral Harley D. Nygren, NOAA via Wikipedia)
When a piece of wood is ground into sawdust, that chan ge is irreversible since the sawdust cannot be reconst ituted into the same
piece of wood that it was before. Cutting grass or pul verizing a rock are examples of irreversible physical changes. Chopping wood
for a fire also represents an irreversible physical change, since the pieces cannot be put back together to form the t ree.

3.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332042
Figure: Chopping wood is an irreversible physical chan ge. (Pixabay License; stevepb via Pixabay)
Physical Changes vs. Chemical Changes
What is the difference between physical and chemical cha nges? Watch the video to find out.
Summary
A physical change is a change to a sample of matter in whic h some properties of the material change, but the iden tity of the
matter does not.
A physical change can be reversible where the original form of the matter can be restored, or irreversible where t he original
form cannot be restored.
Melting ice and grinding wood into sawdust are examples of ph ysical changes.
Review
1. Define physical change.
2. Why is melting an ice cube a reversible physical chan ge?
3. Give an example of an irreversible physical change.
This page titled 3.5: Physical Change is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.6: Physical Change by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
Chemical and Phy sical ChangesChemical and Phy sical Changes

3.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320433.6: Homogeneous Mixture
How do you like your coffee?
Many people enjoy a cup of coffee at some point duri ng the day. Some may drink it black, while others may put cream (or some
dairy substitute) and sugar in their coffee. High-end coffee drinks can be purchased at espresso stands (either sit-down or drivethrough). Whatever the coffee drinker's preference, t hey want the coffee to be the same at the beginning as it is at the end of the
drink. They don't want the components to separate out, but wa nt their drink to be uniform from top to bottom.
Mixtures
Ordinary table salt is called sodium chloride. It is co nsidered a substance because it has a uniform and definite composition. Al l
samples of sodium chloride are chemically identical. Water is also a pure substance. Salt easily dissolves in water, but salt water
cannot be classified as a substance because its comp osition can vary. You may dissolve a small or large amount of salt into a given
amount of water. A mixture is a physical blend of two o r more components, each of which retains its own identi ty and properties in
the mixture. Only the form of the salt is changed when it is dissolved i nto water. It retains its composition and properties.
Homogenous Mixtures
A homogeneous mixture is a mixture in which the composition is un iform throughout the mixture. The salt water described above
is homogeneous because the dissolved salt is evenly d istributed throughout the entire salt water sample. Often it is easy to confuse
a homogeneous mixture with a pure substance because th ey are both uniform. The difference is that the comp osition of the
substance is always the same. The amount of salt in the salt water can vary from one sample to another. All s olutions would be
considered homogeneous because the dissolved material is p resent in the same amount throughout the solution.
One characteristic of mixtures is that they can be sep arated into their components. Since each part of the mixture has not reacted
with another part of the mixture, the identities of the d ifferent materials are unchanged.
The science of macaroni salad: What' s iThe science of macaroni salad: What' s i

3.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332043Summary
A homogeneous mixture is a mixture in which the composit ion is uniform throughout the mixture.
All solutions would be considered homogeneous.
Review
1. What is a mixture?
2. What is a homogeneous mixture?
3. Are all solutions homogeneous mixtures?
4. Can homogeneous mixtures be separated into their com ponents?
This page titled 3.6: Homogeneous Mixture is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.8: Homogeneous Mixture by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Mixture sMixture s

3.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320443.7: Heterogeneous Mixtures
What is the best way to eat a bag of jelly beans? Ma ny people open the bag and eat all the candy, no mat ter what flavor each piece
is. Others pick through the collection. They may say, " I don't like the orange ones." Or maybe they only ca re for the lemon ones.
There are different kinds of jelly beans in the mixture a nd people will eat what they want and get rid of the rest.
Heterogeneous Mixtures
A heterogeneous mixture is a mixture in which the composition is not uniform throughout the mixture. Vegetable soup is a
heterogeneous mixture. Any given spoonful of soup will contain varying amounts of the different vegetables and other components
of the soup.
A phase is any part of a sample that has a uniform compositi on and properties. By definition, a pure substance or a homogeneous
mixture consists of a single phase. A heterogeneous mixture consists of two or more phases. When oil and wat er are combined, they
do not mix evenly, but instead form two separate layers. Each of the layers is called a phase.
Figure: Oil and water do not mix, instead forming tw o distinct layers called phases. The oil phase is less dense than the water
phase, and so the oil floats on top of the water. (CC BY 2.0; Flickr: Yortw via Flickr)
In the case of vegetable soup, one phase would be the liquid soup itself. This phase has vitamins, minerals, and other components
dissolved in the water. This phase would be homogeneou s. The carrots, peas, corn, or other vegetables represen t other phases of the
soup.The various vegetables are not mixed evenly in the so up, but are spread around at random.
There are a large number of heterogeneous mixtures a round us. Soil is composed of a variety of substances, and is often of different
composition depending on the sample taken. One shovelf ul may come up with dirt and grass, while the next sho velful could
contain an earthworm.
Smog is another example of a heterogeneous mixture. T his murky collection of pollutants can be a mixture of water and
contaminants from burning gasoline or plastics, mixe d with nitric oxide derivatives and ozone. You can s ee that the smog
distribution in the air illustrated below is not evenly spr ead out, but varies from one part of the atmosphere to anot her.
Figure: Smog in New York City. (Public Domain; Dr. E dwin P. Ewing, Jr./CDC via Wikipedia)

3.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332044Summary
A heterogeneous mixture is a mixture in which the comp osition is not uniform throughout the mixture.
A phase is a separate layer in a heterogeneous mixture.
Review
Use the link below to answer the following questions:
1. Define a heterogeneous mixture.
2. Why is vegetable soup a heterogeneous mixture?
3. How many phases are in a heterogeneous mixture?
This page titled 3.7: Heterogeneous Mixtures is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.9: Heterogeneous Mixtures by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Mixture sMixture s
Homogenenous and Heterogeneous MiHomogenenous and Heterogeneous Mi

3.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320453.8: Methods for Separating Mixtures
Figure (CC by 2.0; Marcin Chady via Flicker photo, Marcin Chady [www.flickr.com])
How did gold miners search for gold?
Beginning in the late 1840s, thousands of prospectors rushed to California in search of gold. One of the ap proaches taken to isolate
the gold from the soil was called "panning". Dirt would be placed in the pan and covered with water. After th orough mixing, the
pan is gently swirled to remove dissolved material whil e the heavier gold settles to the bottom of the pan. The gold is then
separated from the mixture of soil and water.
Separation of Mixtures
Not everyone is out searching for gold (and not many of those searchers is going to get much gold, eithe r). In a chemical reaction,
it is important to isolate the component(s) of inter est from all the other materials so they can be furt her characterized. Studies of
biochemical systems, environmental analysis, pharmaceut ical research – these and many other areas of resear ch require reliable
separation methods.
Here are a number of common separation techniques:
Chromatography
Chromatography is the separation of a mixture by passing it in solu tion or suspension, or as a vapor (as in gas chromatog raphy),
through a medium in which the components move at dif ferent rates. Thin-layer chromatography is a special type of
chromatography used for separating and identifying m ixtures that are or can be colored, especially pigments.
Distillation
Distillation is an effective method to separate mixtures that ar e comprised of two or more pure liquids. Distillation is a purification
process where the components of a liquid mixture are vaporized and then condensed and isolated. In simple distillation, a mixture
is heated, and the most volatile component vaporizes at the lowest temperature. The vapor passes through a cooled tube (a
condenser), where it condenses back into its liquid state. The condensate that is collected is called distillate.
Figure: Distillation apparatus. (Public Domain; Pearso n Scott Foresman via Commons Wikimedia, Distillation Apparatus
[commons.wikimedia.org])
In the figure above, we see several important pieces of equipment. There is a heat source, a test tube wit h a one-hole stopper
attached to a glass elbow, and rubber tubing. The ru bber tubing is placed into a collection tube, which i s submerged in cold water.
There are other more complicated assemblies for dist illation that can also be used, especially to separa te mixtures which are
comprised of pure liquids, with boiling points that are clo se to one another.

3.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332045Evaporation
Evaporation is a technique used to separate out homogeneous mi xtures that contain one or more dissolved salts. The method
drives off the liquid components from the solid comp onents. The process typically involves heating the mix ture until no more
liquid remains. Prior to using this method, the mixtu re should only contain one liquid component, unless it is not important to
isolate the liquid components. This is because all liquid components will evaporate over time. The evap oration method is suitable
to separate a soluble solid from a liquid.
In many parts of the world, table salt is obtained from the evaporation of sea water. The heat for the process comes from the sun.
Figure: Once the sea water in these evaporation ponds has evaporated, the salt can be harvested. (CC BY 3.0; Sandip Dey
(Wikimedia: Dey.sandip) via Commons Wikimedia, Salt pans in Marakkanam, India [commons.wikimedia.org])
Filtration
Filtration is a separation method used to separate out pure sub stances in mixtures comprised of particles—some of wh ich are large
enough in size to be captured with a porous material. Particle size can vary considerably, given the type of mixture. For instance,
stream water is a mixture that contains naturally oc curring biological organisms like bacteria, viruses, and protozoa. Some water
filters can filter out bacteria, the length of which are on the order of 1 micron. Other mixtures, like s oil, have relatively large
particle sizes, which can be filtered through something li ke a coffee filter.
Figure: Filtration. (Public Domain; Mariana Ruiz Vil larreal (Wikimedia: LadyofHats) via Commons Wikimedia, Filtration
Diagram [commons.wikimedia.org])

3.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332045Summary
Mixtures can be separated using a variety of techniques.
Chromatography involves solvent separation on a solid m edium.
Distillation takes advantage of differences in boiling poi nts.
Evaporation removes a liquid from a solution to leave a so lid material.
Filtration separates solids of different sizes.
Review
1. Why is it important to separate materials from a mixture?
2. What is chromatography?
3. What is distillation
4. What is filtration?
5. What is evaporation?
6. What technique would you use to separate sand from water? There are two possibilities.
7. What technique would you use to separate alcohol from wa ter?
This page titled 3.8: Methods for Separating Mixtures is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.10: Separating Mixtures by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Separating mixturesSeparating mixtures

3.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320463.9: Elements
Figure (Public Domain; Sidney Paget via Wikipedia)
Who is Sherlock Holmes?
The famous fictional British detective Sherlock Holmes supposedly often made the statement "elementary, my dear Watson". In reality, the closest he
ever came to that line was an exchange with Watson in the short story "The Crooked Man". Holmes demonstrated s hrewd insight into Watson's activities
of the day. When asked how he knew what Watson was doing, Holmes simply replies "Elementary". Regardless of ex actly how stated it, Sherlock
Holmes was simply referring to what the Free Dictionary defi nes as "relating to, or constituting the basic, essen tial, or fundamental part".
Elements
An element is the simplest form of matter that has a unique set of properties. It is a pure substance that cannot be broken down into different types of
substances. As of 2010, there are 118 known elements. Ni nety eight of the elements are naturally occurring on earth, while the other 20 elements have
been made synthetically in a lab. The names of all t he elements can be found on the periodic table.
Figure: The Periodic Table. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher AuYeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Examples of well-known elements include oxygen, iron, a nd gold (see the figure below). Elements cannot be brok en down into a simpler substance.
Likewise, one element cannot be chemically converted into a different element.
Figure: Chemical elements are the simplest of substances. (A) An oxygen tank like this is used by people who ne ed breathing assistance. (B) A
simple skillet can be made from cast iron. (C) Gold ba rs are formed and used for monetary purposes. (Credit: (A) Leon Brocard (Flickr: acme); (B)
User:Evan-Amos/Wikimedia Commons; (C) Agnico-Eagle Min es Limited; Source: (A) http://www.flickr.com/photos/acme/8532536; (B)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cast-Iron-Pan.jp g; (C) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Gold_Bars.jpg;
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coypel_Democri tus.jpg License: (A) CC-BY 2.0; (B) Public Domain; (C) Public Domain)
Some elements have been known for centuries (gold, silve r, iron, and copper, for example), while others have be en created in a lab only within the last
several years. Most elements do not exist as such in nature. They are so reactive that they can be found only in combination with other materials.
Some elements are very valuable, while others are quite inexpensive. Gold is currently worth almost $1700 per ounce. Aluminum, on the other hand, only
sells for about 90 cents per pound, considerably lowe r than gold. Copper is worth somewhat more, selling for approximately $3.50 per pound. Platinum is
very valuable at about $1650 an ounce, though not q uite as expensive as gold.
Video: The Chemical Elements Song
The Chemical Elements song, sung by Tom Lehrer. At t he time, there were only 102 elements discovered.

3.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332046Summary
An element is the simplest form of matter that has a u nique set of properties.
One element cannot be chemically converted to anothe r element.
Review
1. What is an element?
2. Give the names of any two elements.
3. What is the name of the table that has the names of the elements?
4. How many elements are naturally occurring?
This page titled 3.9: Elements is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the
style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
2.11: Elements by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
The Chemical elements songThe Chemical elements song

3.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320473.10: Compounds
Figure (Public Domain; User:JohnABerring27A via Wikipedia)
What do you need to start building a house?
Houses take on a variety of shapes. Some are large mansi ons while others are simpler dwellings. No matter what t he house looks
like there will be certain common components – wood, brick, plaster, nails, plumbing, wiring, etc. These com ponents go together in
numerous ways to make up the unique final product.
Compounds in chemistry are composed of different typ es and numbers of atoms. But atoms are common buildin g blocks for a wide
variety of compounds, just as brick, wood, and other mater ials are common building blocks for many types of house s.
Compounds
A compound is a substance that contains two or more elements ch emically combined in a fixed proportion. The element s carbon
and hydrogen combine to form many different compoun ds. One of the simplest is called methane, in which the re are always four
times as many hydrogen particles as carbon particle s. Methane is a pure substance because it always has the same composition.
However, it is not an element because it can be broken down in to simpler substances—carbon and hydrogen.
Recall that the components of a mixture can be sepa rated from one another by physical means. This is not true for a compound.
Table salt is a compound consisting of equal parts of the elements sodium and chlorine. Salt cannot be se parated into its two
elements by filtering, distillation, or any other ph ysical process. Salt and other compounds can only be decomposed into their
elements by a chemical process. A chemical change is a change that produces matter with a different c omposition. Many
compounds can be decomposed into their elements by h eating. When sugar is heated, it decomposes into carbon and water. Water is
still a compound, but one which cannot be broken down into hydrogen and oxygen by heating. Instead, the p assage of an electrical
current through water will produce hydrogen and oxygen gase s.
The properties of compounds are generally very differe nt than the properties of the elements from which the compound is formed.
Sodium is an extremely reactive soft metal that canno t be exposed to air or water. Chlorine is a deadly g as. The compound sodium
chloride is a white solid which is essential for all living t hings (see below).
Figure: (A) Sodium is so reactive that it must be stored under oil. (B) Chlorine is a poisonous yellow-green g as. (C) Salt
crystals, a compound of sodium and chlorine. (Credit: (A) Hi-Res Images of Chemical Elements; (B) User: Green horn1/Wikimedia
Commons; (C) User:Miansari66/Wikimedia Commons; Source: (A) http://images-of-elements.com/sodium.php; (B)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chlorine2.jpg; (C) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Salt_,_Lake_sal t.JPG
License: (A) CC by 3.0 (B) Public Domain; (C) Public Domain)
Summary
A compound is a substance that contains two or more elemen ts chemically combined in a fixed proportion.
A chemical change is a change that produces matter wit h a different composition.

3.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332047Review
1. What is a compound?
2. How is a compound different from an element?
3. What is a chemical change?
Explore More
Use the resource below to answer the following questions.
1. What lists all the elements we know about?
2. What compound is made of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen a tom?
3. What compound is made of one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms?
This page titled 3.10: Compounds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.12: Compounds by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

3.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320483.11: Chemical Change
Figure (Public Domain; Jon Sullivan via Wikipedia)
Do you like to cook?
Cooking is a valuable skill that can benefit everyo ne. Whether it is fixing a simple grilled cheese sandwi ch or preparing an
elaborate meal, cooking demonstrates some basic conc epts of chemistry. When you bake bread, you mix flour, sugar, yeast, and
water together. After baking, this mixture has been ch anged to form bread, another substance that has diff erent characteristics and
qualities from the original materials. The process of baking has produced chemical changes in the ingredie nts that result in bread
being made.
Chemical Change
Most of the elements we know about do not exist freely i n nature. Sodium cannot be found by itself (unless we p repare it in the
laboratory) because it interacts too easily with oth er materials. On the other hand, the element helium d oes not interact with other
elements to any extent. We can isolate helium from natura l gas during the process of drilling for oil.
A chemical change produces different materials than the ones we started with. One aspect of the science of c hemistry is the study
of the changes that matter undergoes. If chemistry was simply a study of elements that did nothing, life would be very boring (in
fact, life would not exist since the elements are what make up our bodies and sustain us). But the processes of change that take
place when different chemicals are combined produce all the materials that we use daily.
One type of chemical change (already mentioned) is wh en two elements combine to form a compound. Another ty pe involves the
breakdown of a compound to produce the elements that make it up. If we pass an electric current through b auxite (aluminum oxide,
the raw material for aluminum metal), we get metallic alum inum as a product.
Figure: Electrolytic production of aluminum. (Publi c Domain; Ronny Jacques via Wikipedia)
However, the vast majority of chemical changes involve one compound being transformed into another compou nd. There are
literally millions of possibilities when we take this a pproach to chemical change. New compounds can be made to produce better
fabrics that are easier to clean and maintain; they can help preserve food so it doesn’t spoil as quickly; we can make new medicines
to treat diseases; even products, such as airbags (as s een in the simulation below), use a chemical change t o improve the world
around us.
Summary
A chemical change produces different materials than t he ones we started with.
Review
1. What is a chemical change?
2. List three types of chemical changes.

3.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332048This page titled 3.11: Chemical Change is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.14: Chemical Change by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

3.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320493.12: Chemical Symbols and Formulas
Figure (Author Unknown; Source: Commons Wikimedia, Capablanca [commons.wikimedia.org]; License: Public Domain)
How do chess players monitor their moves in a game?
Suppose you were walking along and noticed a piece of p aper on the ground with markings on it. You pick it up and see the paper
in the picture above.
To most people, these notes are meaningless (maybe t hey're a secret spy code). But to a chess player, t hese symbols tell the story of
a chess game. Each abbreviation describes a chess pie ce or a move during the game. The use of special symb ols allows chess
players to "see" the game without having to read a word y and possibly incomplete description of what happened.
Chemical Symbols and Formulas
Chemical Formula
In order to illustrate chemical reactions and the el ements and compounds involved in them, chemists use symbols and formulas. A
chemical symbol is a one- or two-letter designation of an element. Som e examples of chemical symbols are for oxygen, for
zinc, and for iron. The first letter of a symbol is always capitalized. If the symbol contains two letters, t he second letter is lower
case. The majority of elements have symbols that are b ased on their English names. However, some of the elem ents that have been
known since ancient times have maintained symbols that are based on their Latin names, as shown below.
Table 1: Symbols and Latin Names for Elements
Chemical Symbol Name Latin Name
Sodium Natrium
Potassium Kalium
Iron Ferrum
Copper Cuprum
Silver Argentum
Tin Stannum
Antimony Stibium
Gold Aurum
Lead Plumbum
Watch the following video to learn more about the origin of different element's symbols.

3.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332049Chemical Formulas
Compounds are combinations of two or more elements. A chemical formula is an expression that shows the elements in a
compound and the relative proportions of those eleme nts. Water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen in a t wo to one ratio. The
chemical formula for water is. Sulfuric acid is one of the most widely produced chemicals in the United State s and is
composed of the elements hydrogen, sulfur, and oxygen. Th e chemical formula for sulfuric acid is.
Summary
A chemical symbol is a one- or two-letter designation of an element.
Compounds are combinations of two or more elements.
A chemical formula is an expression that shows the elemen ts in a compound and the relative proportions of those elements.
Some elements have symbols that derive from the Latin nam e for the element.
Review
1. What is a chemical symbol?
2. What is a chemical formula?
3. How many hydrogen atoms are in one molecule of the com pound C H O?
4. What is the Latin name for the element potassium?
This page titled 3.12: Chemical Symbols and Formulas is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.15: Chemical Symbols and Formulas by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Chemical Sy mbols of ElementsChemical Sy mbols of Elements
12 22 11

3.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320503.13: Chemical Properties and Chemical Reactions
Have you ever left your bicycle out in the rain?
It's not a good idea because the rain can cause the bicycle to rust. You start to get a reddish-orange bu ild-up of a rough deposit on
the metal. It may start with the chain, but can spre ad to other parts of the bicycle, especially if there are scratches that create a bare
metal surface. The formation of rust is a chemical p rocess that takes place when iron is exposed to water an d oxygen. It is
estimated that damage due to rust costs U.S. businesses, military, and government over 276 billion dollars a year—a very expensive
chemical process.
Chemical Properties
A chemical property describes the ability of a substance to undergo a sp ecific chemical change. A chemical property of iron is that
it is capable of combining with oxygen to form iron o xide, the chemical name of rust. The more general te rm for rusting and other
similar processes is corrosion. Other terms that are comm only used to describe chemical changes are: burn, ro t, explode,
decompose, and ferment. Chemical properties are very u seful in identifying substances. However, unlike physic al properties,
chemical properties can only be observed as the substance is in the process of being changed into a different substance.
Chemical Change
A chemical change is also called a chemical reaction. A chemical react ion is a process that occurs when one or more substan ces
are changed into one or more new substances. Zinc is a silver gray element that can be ground into a powde r. If zinc is mixed
at room temperature with powdered sulfur, a bright y ellow element, the result will simply be a mixture of zi nc and sulfur. No
chemical reaction occurs. However, if energy is provi ded to the mixture in the form of heat, the zinc will chemically react with the
sulfur to form the compound zinc sulfide. The figure below shows the substances involved in this reaction.
Figure: Zinc and sulfur are two elements that undergo a chemical reaction when heated to form the compou nd zinc sulfide.
((A; (A) Ben Mills (Benjah-bmm27); (B) User:Vineyard/ Wikimedia Commons; (C) A. Eisen/NOAA via (A)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zinc-sample.jpg; (B) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SulfurReagent. jpg; (C)
http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov/explorations/03windows/ logs/jul30/media/zincsulfideprecipitate.html) Public Domain; (B) CC BY
3.0; (C) Public Domain)
Alkaline metals are highly reactive with water. Watch th e video to see what happens when different alkaline me tals are exposed to
water.

3.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332050Summary
A chemical property describes the ability of a substanc e to undergo a specific chemical change.
A chemical reaction is a process that occurs when one or mo re substances are changed into one or more new substances.
Review
1. What is a chemical property?
2. What is a chemical reaction?
3. When can we observe a chemical property?
4. Is freezing water a chemical property?
This page titled 3.13: Chemical Properties and Chemical Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.16: Chemical Properties and Chemical Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Alkali metals in w ater - Chemical elemeAlkali metals in w ater - Chemical eleme

3.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320513.14: Reactants and Products
Figure (Public Domain; Jon Sullivan via Wikipedia)
What would you do without a computer?
Over the last few decades, computers have proven to be extremely useful tools for organizing and processin g information. Data,
such as the structural parameters of a compound, is put into the computer; the output can be a detailed diagram of how that
molecule looks in three dimensions. The computer and its programs transform input data into a useful final produ ct.
Chemical Equation
The reaction between zinc and sulfur can be shown in what i s called a chemical equation. In words, we could write the reaction as:
The more convenient way to express a chemical reaction i s to use the symbols and formulas of the substances inv olved:
The substance(s) to the left of the arrow in a chemi cal equation are called reactants. A reactant is a substance that is present at the
start of a chemical reaction. The substance(s) to th e right of the arrow are called products. A product is a substance that is present
at the end of a chemical reaction. In the equation a bove, the zinc and sulfur are the reactants that chem ically combine to form the
zinc sulfide product.
There is a standard way of writing chemical equations. The reactants are all written on the left-hand side of the equation, with the
products on the right-hand side. An arrow points from the r eactants to the products to indicate the direction of the reaction:
When appropriate, a symbol may be written above or be low the arrow to indicate some special circumstance. T he symbol " " is
often used to indicate that the reaction is to be heated.
The presence of the arrow also indicates that the re action goes in one direction under the conditions in dicated. There are reactions
which can be easily reversed, but we will not take those up righ t now.
There are a wide variety of reactions possible: eleme nts may form compounds (as seen in the reaction abo ve), compounds may
form elements (water will break down in the presence of an electric current to form hydrogen gas and oxyge n gas) or compounds
may combine, break apart, or rearrange to form new materi als.

3.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332051Summary
A chemical equation describes a chemical reaction.
Reactants are starting materials and are written on the left-hand side of the equation.
Products are the end result of the reaction and are written on the right-hand side of the equation.
Review
1. What is a reactant?
2. What is a product?
3. What does a chemical equation do?
4. In the reaction sodium + water → sodium hydroxide + hydroge n,
a. what are the reactants?
b. what are the products?
This page titled 3.14: Reactants and Products is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.17: Reactants and Products by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
C030 Reactants and productsC030 Reactants and products

3.15.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320523.15: Recognizing Chemical Reactions
Figure (Public Domain; Jon Sullivan via Wikipedia)
Have you ever cooked a pizza?
Making a pizza can be as easy as buying a "take and ba ke" from a store and putting it in the oven, or as co mplicated as mixing the
dough and loading it up with your favorite toppings b efore baking it. How do you know when it is done? The mo st obvious sign is
that the crust turns light brown. The dough is no long er flexible, but much more rigid. Maybe the cheese h as melted. You certainly
want the pizza to be cooked, not half-raw.
Recognizing Chemical Reactions
How can a scientist tell if a chemical reaction is taking place? There are four visual clues that indicate that a chemical reaction is
likely occurring:
1. A change in color occurs during the reaction.
2. A gas is produced during the reaction.
3. A solid product called a precipitate is produced in the reaction.
4. A transfer of energy occurs as a result of the reaction.
Mercury (II) oxide is a red solid. When it is heated t o a temperature above, it easily decomposes into mer cury and oxygen
gas. The red color of the mercury oxide reactant bec omes the silver color of mercury. The color change is a sign that the reaction is
occurring.
Figure: Mercuric oxide. (Public Domain; Ben Mills (Wi kimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via
Wikipedia)
Figure: Mercury metal. (Public Domain; User:A/Wikimed ia Commons via
Wikipedia)
When zinc reacts with hydrochloric acid, the reactio n bubbles vigorously as hydrogen gas is produced. Th e production of a gas is
also an indication that a chemical reaction is occurring.

3.15.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332052
Figure: Zinc reacting with hydrochloric acid produc es bubbles of hydrogen gas. (Public Domain;
User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
When a colorless solution of lead (II) nitrate is ad ded to a colorless solution of potassium iodide, a yel low solid called a precipitate
is instantly produced. A precipitate is a solid prod uct that forms from a reaction and settles out of a l iquid solution. The formation
of a precipitate is an indication of a chemical reactio n.
Figure: A yellow precipitate of solid lead (II) iodi de forms immediately when solutions of lead (II) nitra te and potassium
iodide are mixed. (CC by 2.0; Paige Powers (Flickr: paigggeyy) via Flickr)
All chemical changes involve a transfer of energy. Whe n zinc reacts with hydrochloric acid, the test tube becomes very warm as
energy is released during the reaction. Some other r eactions absorb energy. While energy changes are a potential sign of a chemical
reaction, care must be taken to ensure that a chemi cal reaction is indeed taking place. Physical changes also involve a transfer of
energy. The melting of a solid absorbs energy, while the condensation of a gas releases energy. The only way to be certain that a
chemical reaction has taken place is to test the com position of the substances after the change has taken place, to see if they are
different from the starting substances.
Indications of Chemical ChangeIndications of Chemical Change

3.15.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332052Summary
There are four visual clues that indicate that a chemical reaction is likely occurring:
A change of color occurs during the reaction.
A gas is produced during the reaction.
A solid product called a precipitate is produced in the reaction.
A transfer of energy occurs as a result of the reaction.
Review
1. What was the color change when mercury (II) oxide was heated?
2. What happened when zinc metal was mixed with hydrochlor ic acid?
3. What happens when lead nitrate and potassium iodide are m ixed?
This page titled 3.15: Recognizing Chemical Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
2.18: Recognizing Chemical Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Evidence of a Chemical ReactionEvidence of a Chemical Reaction

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: Atomic Structure
4.1: Democritus' Idea of the Atom
4.2: Conservation of Mass
4.3: Law of Definite Proportions
4.4: Law of Multiple Proportions
4.5: Mass Ratio Calculation
4.6: Dalton's Atomic Theory
4.7: Cathode Ray Tube
4.8: Electrons
4.9: Oil Drop Experiment
4.10: Protons
4.11: Neutrons
4.12: Thomson's Atomic Model
4.13: Rutherford's Atomic Model
4.14: Atomic Nucleus
4.15: Atomic Number
4.16: Mass Number
4.17: Isotopes
4.18: Atomic Mass Unit
4.19: Calculating Atomic Mass
4.20: Atomic Structure Practice
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 4: Atomic Structure is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320544.1: Democritus' Idea of the Atom
Figure (CC by 2.0; Justin Norris (Flickr:JustinMN) via Flickr)
What would the philosophers do?
People enjoy getting together to discuss things, whet her it is how your favorite sports team is doing, what the best new movie is,
the current politics, or any number of other topics. Of ten the question is raised about who is right and who i s wrong. If the football
game is to be played this coming weekend, all we can d o is offer opinions as to its outcome. The game has no t been played yet, so
we don't know who will actually win.
The ancient Greek philosophers did a lot of discussing, with part of their conversations concerning the physic al world and its
composition. There were different opinions about what m ade up matter. Some felt one thing was true while othe rs believed another
set of ideas. Since these scholars did not have laborato ries and had not developed the idea of the experime nt, they were left to
debate. Whoever could offer the best argument was consid ered right. However, often the best argument had little to d o with reality.
One of the on-going debates had to do with sand. The q uestion posed was: into how small of pieces can you div ide a grain of sand?
The prevailing thought at the time, pushed by Aristot le, was that the grain of sand could be divided indef initely, that you could
always get a smaller particle by dividing a larger one and th ere was no limit to how small the resulting particle could be.
Figure: Into how small of pieces can you divide a gra in of sand? (Public Domain; User:(WT-shared)
Shoestring/WTS.Wikivoyage via Wikipedia)
Since Aristotle was such an influential philosopher, ve ry few people disagreed with him. However, there were some philosophers
who believed that there was a limit to how small a grai n of sand could be divided. One of these philosophers was Democritus
(~460-370 B.C.E.), often referred to as the "laughing philosopher" because of his emphasis on cheerfulne ss. He taught that there
were substances called atoms and that these atoms made up all material things. The atoms were unchangeable, indestructible, and
always existed.
Figure: Democritus. (Public Domain; Antoine Coypel vi a Wikipedia)

4.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332054The word " atom " comes from the Greek and means "indivisible". The a tomists of the time (Democritus being one of the
leading atomists) believed there were two realities t hat made up the physical world: atoms and void. There we re an infinite number
of atoms, but different types of atoms had different sizes and shapes. The void was the empty space in which the atoms moved and
collided with one another. When these atoms collided wi th one another, they might repel each other or they might connect in
clusters, held together by tiny hooks and barbs on the surface s of the atoms.
Aristotle disagreed with Democritus and offered his own idea of the composition of matter. According to Aris totle, everything was
composed of four elements: earth, air, fire, and water. Deomcritus' theory better explained things, but Aristo tle was more
influential, so his ideas prevailed. It took almost t wo thousand years before scientists came around to se eing the atom as
Democritus did.
How right was Democritus?
It is very interesting that Democritus had the basic idea of atoms, even though he had no experimental e vidence to support his
thinking. We now know more about how atoms hold togethe r in "clusters" (compounds), but the basic concept existed over two
thousand years ago. We also know that atoms can be fur ther subdivided, but there is still a lower limit to h ow small we can break
up that grain of sand.
Carl Sagan - Cosmos - DemocritusCarl Sagan - Cosmos - Democritus
Democritus V s. AristotleDemocritus V s. Aristotle

4.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332054Summary
Greek philosophers debated many ideas.
Aristotle and others believed that a grain of sand could be divided indefinitely.
Democritus believed there was a lower limit to the division of a grain of sand.
Review
1. How did the ancient Greek philosophers spend their time?
2. What approach did they not have for studying nature?
3. Who was the most influential philosopher of that time?
4. What was the major contribution Democritus made to the think ing of his day?
5. List characteristics of atoms according to Democritus.
This page titled 4.1: Democritus' Idea of the Atom is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.1: Democritus' Idea of the Atom by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

4.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320554.2: Conservation of Mass
Figure (CC BY 2.0; Douglas Heriot via Flickr)
Have you ever lost a screw?
The following situation happens all too often. You have taken apart a piece of equipment to clean it up. Wh en you put the
equipment back together, somehow you have an extra sc rew or two. Or you find out that a screw is missing that was a part of the
original equipment. In either case, you know something is wrong. You expect to end up with the same amount of material that you
started with, not with more or less than what you had original ly.
Law of Conservation of Mass
By the late 1700s, chemists accepted the definition of an element as a substance that cannot be broken down into a simpler
substance by ordinary chemical means. It was also clea r that elements combine with one another to form mor e complex substances
called compounds. The chemical and physical propert ies of these compounds are different than the propert ies of the elements from
which they were formed. There were questions about the d etails of these processes.
In the 1790s, a greater emphasis began to be placed on the quantitative analysis of chemical reactions. Acc urate and reproducible
measurements of the masses of reacting elements and th e compounds they form led to the formulation of seve ral basic laws. One of
these is called the law of conservation of mass, which states that during a chemical reaction, the to tal mass of the products must
be equal to the total mass of the reactants. In other words, mass cannot be created or destroye d during a chemical reaction, but is
always conserved.
As an example, consider the reaction between silver nit rate and sodium chloride. These two compounds will dissol ve in water to
form silver chloride and sodium nitrate. The silver c hloride does not dissolve in water, so it forms a soli d that we can filter off.
When we evaporate the water, we can recover the sodium nitrate formed. If we react 58.5 grams of sodium chlor ide with 169.9
grams of silver nitrate, we start with 228.4 grams of m aterials. After the reaction is complete and the mat erials separated, we find
that we have formed 143.4 grams of silver chloride an d 85.0 grams of sodium nitrate, giving us a total ma ss of 228.4 grams for the
products. So, the total mass of reactants equals the total ma ss of products, a proof of the law of conservation of mass.

4.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332055Summary
The law of conservation of mass states that, during a chemical reaction, the total mass of the products must be equal to the total
mass of the reactants.
Review
1. The law of conservation of mass states that, during a chemic al reaction, the total ______ of the products must be eq ual to the
total ______ of the reactants.
2. Describe an example of the law of conservation of mass.
This page titled 4.2: Conservation of Mass is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
Chemistry Concepts: Conservation of MChemistry Concepts: Conservation of M

4.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320564.3: Law of Definite Proportions
Figure (Public Domain; Staff Sgt. Christopher Flurry, U.S. Marine Corps via Commons Wikimedia, File:USMC-110609-MFK922-004.jpg [commons.wikimedia.org])
We use electricity for many purposes—from cooking, to p owering our televisions, to charging our cell phones. W herever we travel
in the United States, we want electricity to be available. What we also want (although we usually don't think ab out it) is for the
electricity supply to be the same wherever we go. We wan t the same voltage (110 volts for the U.S.) to come fr om the outlet to
whatever we plug in. If the voltage is less, the system will not work. If it is more, the equipment will be d amaged. We want a
definite amount of voltage—no more and no less.
Law of Definite Proportions
The discovery that mass was always conserved in chemic al reactions was soon followed by the law of definite proportions, which
states that a given chemical compound always contains the same elements in the exact same proportions by mass. As an example,
any sample of pure water contains hydrogen and oxy gen by mass. It does not matter where the sample of wate r
came from or how it was prepared. Its composition, like that of every other compound, is fixed.
Figure: Water. (CC BY 2.0; Jenn Durfey via Flickr Photos, Water Faucet [www.flickr.com])
Another example is carbon dioxide. This gas is produ ced from a variety of reactions, often by the burning of materials. The
structure of the gas consists of one atom of carbon and two atoms of oxygen. Carbon dioxide production is of interest in many
areas, from the amount we breathe to the amount of t he gas produced by burning wood or fossil fuels. By kno wing the exact
composition of carbon dioxide, we can make predictions as t o the effects of different chemical processes.
Figure: Carbon dioxide is produced during the burnin g process. (Public Domain; Patsy Lynch, FEMA via Commons
Wikimedia, FEMA Photograph by Patsy Lynch taken on 04- 17-2006 in Missouri [commons.wikimedia.org])

4.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332056Summary
The law of definite proportions states that a given chemical compound always contains the same elements in the exact same
proportions by mass.
Review
1. State the law of definite proportions.
2. Will the composition of water molecules vary depending on its source?
3. Why is this law important?
Explore More
Use the resource below to answer the questions that follow.
1. How many hydrogen atoms are there in a molecule of water?
2. How many oxygen atoms are there in a molecule of water?
3. What is the mass ratio of hydrogen to oxygen in a molec ule of water?
4. Will the mass ratio of hydrogen to oxygen change depend ing on the size of the sample? For example if the sample s ize was 10 L
or 10,000 L.
This page titled 4.3: Law of Definite Proportions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.4: Law of Definite Proportions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Isa a csTEACH
Chemistry 5.8a Law of De  nite P roportion
Chemistry 5.8a Law of De  nite P roportion
Watch on

4.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320574.4: Law of Multiple Proportions
Figure (CC by 2.0; Flickr: Sutibu via Commons WIkimedia, Five Boro Bike Tour Unicycle [commons.wikimedia.org])
What are the similarities and differences between a unicycle and a bicycle?
Just from the words themselves, the astute Latin-speaki ng scholar can tell that, whatever it is made of, the unicycle has one of them
(uni = "one") and the bicycle has two (bi = "two"). From pictures, we get additional information that helps us tell the two apart. The
unicycle has one wheel and the bicycle has two. In pa rticular, they are made up of the same materials, and the only significant
difference is the number of wheels on the two vehicles. Now—how m any wheels are on a tricycle?
Law of Multiple Proportions
Once the idea that elements combined in definite prop ortions to form compounds was established, experiments also began to
demonstrate that the same pairs of certain elements c ould combine to form more than one compound. Conside r the elements carbon
and oxygen. Combined in one way, they form the famil iar compound carbon dioxide. In every sample of car bon dioxide, there are
of oxygen present for every of carbon. By dividing by, this simplifies to a mass ratio of oxygen to c arbon of
2.66 to 1. There is another compound that forms fro m the combination of carbon and oxygen called carbon monoxide. Every
sample of carbon monoxide contains of oxygen for e very of carbon. This is a mass ratio of oxygen to ca rbon of 1.33 to
1. In the carbon dioxide, there is exactly twice as m uch oxygen present as there is in the carbon monoxi de. This example illustrates
the law of multiple proportions: whenever the same two elements form more than one co mpound, the different masses of one
element that combine with the same mass of the other eleme nt are in the ratio of small whole numbers.
Figure: Carbon can form two different compounds with oxygen. (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12
Foundation)
In carbon monoxide, on the left, there is of oxyge n for every of carbon. In carbon dioxide, on the r ight, there is of
oxygen for every gram of carbon. So the ratio of oxygen i n the two compounds is 1:2, a small whole number ratio.
The difference between carbon monoxide and carbon di oxide is significant. Carbon monoxide is a deadly g as, formed from the
incomplete combustion of some carbon-containing mate rials (such as wood and gasoline). This compound will attach to
hemoglobin in the red blood cells and block the bin ding of oxygen to those cells. If oxygen does not bind, it cannot be carried to

4.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332057the cells of the body where it is needed, and death c an occur. Carbon dioxide, on the other hand, is not t oxic like carbon monoxide
is. However, it can displace oxygen in systems since it is heavier. Carbon dioxide fire extinguishers cut o ff the flow of oxygen in a
fire, putting out the fire.
Summary
The law of multiple proportions states that whenever th e same two elements form more than one compound, the diff erent
masses of one element that combine with the same mass of the other element are in the ratio of small whole numbers.
Review
1. State the law of multiple proportions.
2. In carbon dioxide (CO2), how many grams of oxygen (O) woul d there be if there are 24 grams of carbon (C)?
3. How many grams of carbon (C) would be present in carbon monox ide (CO) that contains 2.666 grams of oxygen (O)?
This page titled 4.4: Law of Multiple Proportions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.3: Law of Multiple Proportions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Law of Multiple ProportionsLaw of Multiple Proportions

4.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320584.5: Mass Ratio Calculation
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Laura Guerin via CK-12 Foundation)
What are the similarities and differences between these two equations?
One fundamental law of chemistry deals with the fact th at we cannot create or destroy matter (using chemical means). When a
reaction is run, the number of atoms of each specifi c type must be the same on both sides of the equati on. For some materials, it
turns out that one element can combine with a second element in more than one ratio. Carrying out mass ratio calculations helped
establish the law of multiple proportions.
Mass Ratio Calculations
Copper reacts with chlorine to form two compounds. Co mpound A consists of of copper for every of chlor ine.
Compound B consists of of copper for every of chl orine. What is the lowest whole number mass ratio of copper
that combines with a given mass of chlorine?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Compound A and
Compound B and
Apply the law of multiple proportions to the two compo unds. For each compound, find the grams of copper tha t combine with
of chlorine by dividing the mass of copper by the mass of chlorine. Then find the ratio of the masses o f copper in the two
compounds by dividing the larger value by the smaller valu e.
Step 2: Calculate
Compare the masses of copper per gram of chlorine in the two samples.
The mass ratio of copper per gram of chlorine in the two c ompounds is 2:1.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The ratio is a small whole-number ratio. For a given m ass of chlorine, compound A contains twice the mass of copper as does
compound B.Example

4.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332058
Figure:. (Public Domain; User:Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Comm ons via Commons Wikimedia, Copper Chloride
Crystals [commons.wikimedia.org])
Summary
The mass ratio gives the mass of an element that is found i n combination with another element.
Review
1. What does the mass ratio between two elements tell us?
2. If we compare the mass ratio of elements in one compound to that in an second compound what can we learn? Give an examp le
from the lesson above.
3. In compound A, there is 6.3 g of hydrogen and 18.7 g of carbon, while in compound B there is 6.9 g of hydrogen and 4 1.0 g of
carbon, what is the carbon to hydrogen mass ratio in each compound and how do these ratios compare?
4. What are lowest ratios of hydrogen and carbon in compou nds A and B? Predict their formulas
This page titled 4.5: Mass Ratio Calculation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.5: Mass Ratio Calculation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

4.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320594.6: Dalton's Atomic Theory
Figure (Public Domain; Luca della Robbia, photograph ed by Jastrow via Wikipedia)
"Pick a little, talk a little, pick a little, talk a littl e,
Cheep cheep cheep, talk a lot, pick a little more"
These lyrics from the musical "Music Man" sum up the way science was done for centuries. The lyrics refer to a group of gossiping
ladies, but the outcome was the same. The Greek and Roma n philosophers debated, discussed, and sometimes even attacked one
another. But the mode of discovery was talk. There was no experimentation—the idea had not yet been thought of. So science did
not develop very far, and there was no reliable way to est ablish what was true and what was false.
John Dalton
While it must be assumed that many more scientists, philosophers, and others studied the composition of matter after Democritus, a
major leap forward in our understanding of the compo sition of matter took place in the 1800s with the work of the British scientist
John Dalton. He started teaching school at age twelve, a nd was primarily known as a teacher. In his twenties, he moved to the
growing city of Manchester, where he was able to pursue some scientific studies. His work in several areas of sc ience brought him
a number of honors. When he died, over 40,000 people in Man chester marched at his funeral.
Dalton studied the weights of various elements and comp ounds. He noticed that matter always combined in fixed ratios based on
weight, or volume in the case of gases. Chemical com pounds always contain the same proportion of elements by mass, regardless
of amount, which provided further support for Proust's la w of definite proportions. Dalton also observed that t here could be more
than one combination of two elements.
Figure: John Dalton. (Public Domain; Henry Roscoe (aut hor), William Henry Worthington (engraver), and Josep h Allen
(painter) via Wikipedia)
Dalton's Atomic Theory (1804)
From his own experiments and observations, as well as the wo rk of his peers, Dalton proposed a new theory of the atom. This later
became known as Dalton's atomic theory. The general tenets of this theory are as follows:
All matter is composed of extremely small particles called atoms.
Atoms of a given element are identical in size, mass, and oth er properties. Atoms of different elements differ in siz e, mass, and
other properties.
Atoms cannot be subdivided, created, or destroyed.
Atoms of different elements can combine in simple whole n umber ratios to form chemical compounds.
In chemical reactions, atoms are combined, separated, o r rearranged.

4.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332059Dalton's atomic theory has been largely accepted by t he scientific community, with the exception of three changes. We now know
that (1) an atom can be further subdivided, (2) all atoms of an element are not identical in mass, and (3) using nuclear fission and
fusion techniques, we can create or destroy atoms by chang ing them into other atoms.
Figure: Dalton's symbols. (Public Domain; John Dalton v ia Wikipedia)
Summary
Dalton proposed his atomic theory in 1804.
The general tenets of this theory are:
All matter is composed of extremely small particles called atoms
Atoms cannot be subdivided, created, or destroyed.
Atoms of a given element are identical in size, mass, and oth er properties. Atoms of different elements differ in si ze, mass,
and other properties.
Atoms of different elements can combine in whole number ratios to form chemical compounds;
In chemical reaction, atoms are rearranged, combined, o r separated.
Review
1. Did Dalton believe that atoms could be created or destroyed?
2. According to Dalton's theory, all atoms of the same ___ ___ are identical in size, mass, and other properties.
3. What parts of the theory are not considered valid any m ore?
This page titled 4.6: Dalton's Atomic Theory is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
Dalton ' s Atomic TheoryDalton ' s Atomic Theory

4.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320594.6: Dalton's Atomic Theory by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

4.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320604.7: Cathode Ray Tube
Antique <span class=
TV Set" style="width: 411px; height: 330px;" width="411px" height="330px" data-cke-savedsrc="/@api/deki/files/77882/CK12_Screenshot_4-7-1.png " src="/@api/deki/files/77882/CK12_Screenshot_4-7-1.png" data-quailid="3">
Figure (Public Domain; User:Mahlum/Wikimedia Commons v ia Commons Wikimedia, Radionette TV Set
[commons.wikimedia.org])
How old do you think this TV is?
The TV set seen above is becoming harder and harder to find these days. The main reason is because they ar e older and based on
outdated technology. The new TV sets are flat screen technology that take up less space and give better picture quality, especially
with the advent of high-definition broadcasting. The t echnology used in the older TV sets used cathode ra y tubes. A beam of
electrons was sprayed to a picture tube which was treate d to react with the electrons to produce an image. Simi lar CRT devices
were used in computer monitors, now also replaced by flat screen monitors.
Discovery of the Electron
The first discovery of a subatomic particle was a res ult of experiments into the nature of the relationsh ip between electricity and
matter.
Cathode Rays
The first cathode ray tube prototype was developed by Heinrich Geissler, a German g lassblower and physicist. He used a mercury
pump to create a vacuum in a tube. Geissler explored a number of techniques to remove air from the tube and to prevent leaks, as
well as ways to get good connections of the wires in the tubes.
In 1878, Sir William Crookes, a British scientist, displayed the first cathode ra ys using a modification of the Geissler apparatus.
His major contribution to construction of the tube was to develop ways to evacuate almost all the air from the tube. Crookes also
carried out many experiments using more reliable equ ipment to confirm earlier findings about the propert ies of cathode rays. He
made two discoveries which supported the hypothesis that the cathode ray consisted of a stream of particles:
When an object was placed between the cathode and the opposi te end of the tube, it cast a shadow on the glass. The shadow
caused by the object indicates that particles were being blo cked on their way from the cathode to the anode.
Figure (Public Domain; User:Chetvornoa/Wikipedia and User:Drondent/Wikipedia via Commons Wikimedia, Crookes tube2
Diagram [commons.wikimedia.org])
A cathode ray tube was constructed with a small metal rail between the two electrodes. Attached to the rail was a padd le wheel
capable of rotating along the rail. Upon starting up the c athode ray tube, the wheel rotated from the cathode towa rds the anode.
Notice that the cathode and anode are positioned so t hat the rays will strike the top of the paddle wheel. Crooke s concluded that
the cathode ray was made of particles which must have ma ss.

4.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332060
Figure: The cathode ray tube was first invented by Sir William Crookes. (Public Domain; William Crookes via Commons
Wikimedia, Crookes Paddle Wheel tube [commons.wikimedia.org])
Further Research with the Crookes Tube
Crookes' work opened the door to a number of importa nt discoveries. Other scientists were able to demonstra te that the "cathode
ray" was actually a stream of electrons. In 1897, Karl Ferdinand Braun developed the first osc illoscope, using a cathode ray tube to
see an electrical pulse as it passed through the ins trument. The invention of television would not have been possible without the
cathode ray tube. Work with a modified system led to t he discovery of x-rays in 1895 by the German physicis t Wilhelm Roentgen.
This simple device has led to major advances in science an d technology.
Summary
The cathode ray tube was first invented by Sir William C rookes.
Experiments showed that the rays had mass.
Review
Who developed the first cathode ray tube?
What improvement did Crookes make to the cathode ray tub e?
How did Crookes show there were particles being emitted?
What did Karl Ferdinand Braun invent?
What did Wilhelm Roentgen invent?
This page titled 4.7: Cathode Ray Tube is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.11: Cathode Ray Tube by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

4.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320614.8: Electrons
Figure (Public Domain; Andrea Booher, FEMA via Wikipedia)
What causes a power outage?
In a power outage, all your electrical equipment sud denly stops working. The radio was on just a minute ago and now it is silent.
What happened? Somewhere between a power generator and your electrical device was an interruption. Power stop ped flowing
through the wires and into your radio. That “power” tu rns out to be electrons that move through the wires and cause an electrical
current to flow.
Is There Anything Inside an Atom?
As the nineteenth century began to draw to a close, the concept of atoms was well-established. We could deter mine the mass of
different atoms and had some good ideas about the a tomic composition of many compounds. Dalton’s atomic th eory held that
atoms were indivisible, so scientists did not ask quest ions about what was inside the atom – it was solid and could not be broken
down further. But then things began to change.
The Electron
In 1897, English physicist J.J. Thomson (1856-1940) experimented with a device called a cathode ray tube, in which an electric
current was passed through gases at low pressure. A catho de ray tube consists of a sealed glass tube fitted at both ends with metal
disks called electrodes. The electrodes are then co nnected to a source of electricity. One electrode, call ed the anode, becomes
positively charged while the other electrode, called the cathode, becomes negatively charged. A glowing be am (the cathode ray)
travels from the cathode to the anode.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Earlier investigations by Sir William Crookes and ot hers had been carried out to determine the nature of the cathode ray. Thomson
modified and extended these experiments in an effor t to learn about these mysterious rays. He discovere d two things, which
supported the hypothesis that the cathode ray consisted of a stream of particles.
When an object was placed between the cathode and the opposi te end of the tube, it cast a shadow on the glass.
A cathode ray tube was constructed with a small metal rail between the two electrodes. Attached to the rail was a padd le wheel
capable of rotating along the rail. Upon starting up the c athode ray tube, the wheel rotated from the cathode towa rds the anode.
This proved that the cathode ray was made of particles whic h must have mass. Crooke had first observed this phenome non and

4.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332061attributed it to pressure by these particles on the wheel. T homson correctly surmised that these particles were produci ng heat,
which caused the wheel to turn.
In order to determine if the cathode ray consisted o f charged particles, Thomson used magnets and charged plates to deflect the
cathode ray. He observed that cathode rays were deflec ted by a magnetic field in the same manner as a wire carrying an electric
current, which was known to be negatively charged. In ad dition, the cathode ray was deflected away from a nega tively charged
metal plate and towards a positively charged plate.
Figure (CC BY 2.0; Micah Sittig via Flickr)
Thomson knew that opposite charges attract one another, while like charges repel one another. Together, the results of the cathode
ray tube experiments showed that cathode rays are act ually streams of tiny negatively charged particles moving at very high speeds.
While Thomson originally called these particles corpusc les, they were later named electrons.
Thomson conducted further experiments, which allowed h im to calculate the charge-to-mass ratio of the elec tron. In units of
coulombs to grams, this value is 1.8 × 10 Coulombs/ gram. He found that this value was a constant and did not depend on the gas
used in the cathode ray tube or on the metal used as the electrodes. He concluded that electrons were negati vely charged subatomic
particles present in atoms of all elements.
Summary
Cathode rays are deflected by a magnetic field.
The rays are deflected away from a negatively charged ele ctrical field and toward a positively charge field.
The charge/mass ratio for the electron is 1.8 × 10 Cou lombs/gram.
Review
1. What subatomic particle creates electric power, and how doe s it do it?
2. Whose work did Thomson repeat and revise?
3. What experiment did Thomson perform that showed cathode r ays to be particles?
4. How did he show that these particles had a charge on them?
5. Did the cathode ray have positive or negative charge?8
What is electron? A quick answ erWhat is electron? A quick answ er

4.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332061This page titled 4.8: Electrons is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320624.9: Oil Drop Experiment
"How tall are you? How much do you weigh?" Questions like these are easy to answer because we have tools to mak e the
measurements. A yard stick or tape measure will suffi ce to measure height. You can stand on a bathroom sc ale and determine your
weight.
It is a very different matter to measure properties of objects that we cannot see with the naked eye. If we want to measure the size
of a germ, we have to use a microscope. To learn the size of a single molecule, we have to use even more sophisticated instruments.
So how would we measure something even smaller than a molecule, even smaller than an atom?
Charge and Mass of the Electron
The man who measured properties of the electron was Robert Millikan (1868-1953). He taught himself phy sics while a student at
Oberlin College' since there was nobody on the faculty to instruct him in this field. Millikan completed p ostgraduate research
training in the U.S. and in Germany. His studies on the p roperties of the electron proved to be of great valu e in many areas of
physics and chemistry.
Figure: Robert Millikan. (Public Domain; Robert Mill ikan via Wikipedia)
Oil Drop Experiment
Millikan carried out a series of experiments between 1908 and 1917 that allowed him to determine the char ge of a single electron,
famously known as the oil drop experiment.
Millikan sprayed tiny drops of oil into a chamber. In his first experiment, he simply measured how fast the drops fell under the
force of gravity. He could then calculate the mass o f the individual drops. Then, he sprayed oil drops an d applied an electrical
charge to them by shining x-rays up through the bot tom of the apparatus. The x-rays ionized the air, ca using electrons to attach to
the oil drops. The oil drops picked up static charge a nd were suspended between two charged plates. Millikan wa s able to observe
the motion of the oil drops with a microscope and fou nd that the drops lined up in a specific way between the plates, based on the
number of electric charges they had acquired.
Figure: Oil Drop experiment. (Public Domain; User:Mp fiz/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Millikan used the information to calculate the charge of an electron. He determined the charge to be, where
stands for coulomb, which is one ampere*second. Today, the accepted value of the charge of an electron is.
Millikan's experimental value proved very accurate; it is within of the currently accepted value. Millikan later used the
information from his oil drop experiment to calcula te the mass of an electron. The accepted value today is.
The incredibly small mass of the electron was found to be approximately 1/1840 the mass of a hydrogen at om. Therefore, Scientists
realized that atoms must contain another particle that carries a positive charge and is far more massive than th e electron.

4.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332062Summary
The oil drop experiment allowed Millikan to determine th e charge on the electron.
He later used this data to determine the mass of the electr on.
Review
How did Millikan learn physics in college?
What did Millikan use to pick up static charge?
Where did the oil drops go to be measured?
This page titled 4.9: Oil Drop Experiment is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.12: Oil Drop Experiment by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Millikan ' s oil drop experiment to determiMillikan ' s oil drop experiment to determi

4.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320634.10: Protons
Figure (Public Domain; Adrian Pingstone (User:Arpingsto ne/Wikimedia Commons) via Wikipedia)
Can you name this car?
Describing what we can see is a fairly easy matter. If we are asked to describe the sports car illustrated below, we could all quickly
come up with a fairly accurate description. A person knowledgeable about cars would include more details, but everyone would
have the basic information in their description.
What makes the description easy to come up with? We ca n see it, we have a common language to describe it (si ze, color,
construction), and we have a basic idea of what it is (a car, not a house or a tree). Scientists have far mo re difficulty in describing
things they cannot see. There is no way to look direc tly at an atom and see its detailed structure. When a discovery is first made,
there is often no language to use to tell others exactly what it is. This was the problem in talking about the atom and its st ructure.
Putting the Puzzle Pieces Together
Research builds upon itself – one piece connects to another. Sometimes the puzzle doesn't seem to make sen se because some of the
pieces are missing at the moment. Each finding gives a clearer picture of the whole and also raises new quest ions. The detective
work that led to the discovery of the proton was built upon fin ding pieces to the puzzle and putting them together in the r ight way.
The electron was discovered using a cathode ray tube. An electric current was passed from the cathode (the ne gative pole) to the
anode (positive pole). Several experiments showed that particles were emitted at the cathode and that these particles had a negative
charge. These experiments demonstrated the presence of e lectrons.
Figure: JJ Thomson's experiment with cathode rays. (Publ ic Domain; User:Kurzon/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
If cathode rays are electrons that are given off by the metal atoms of the cathode, then what remains of t he atoms that have lost
those electrons? We know several basic things about e lectrical charges. They are carried by particles of m atter. Millikan's
experiment showed that they exist as whole-number multi ples of a single basic unit. Atoms have no overall elec trical charge,
meaning that each and every atom contains an exactl y equal number of positively and negatively charged particles. A hydrogen
atom is the simplest kind of atom with only one elec tron. When that electron is removed, a positively char ged particle should
remain.
Discovery of the Proton
In 1886, Eugene Goldstein (1850-1930) discovered evide nce for the existence of this positively charged part icle. Using a cathode
ray tube with holes in the cathode, he noticed that t here were rays traveling in the opposite direction fr om the cathode rays. He
called these canal rays and showed that they were composed of positively charge d particles. The proton is the positively charged
subatomic particle present in all atoms. The mass of the proton is about 1840 times the mass of the electron.

4.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332063Summary
When an electron is removed from a hydrogen atom, a prot on remains.
Goldstein observed rays traveling in the opposite direct ion of the cathode rays in a cathode ray tube.
He demonstrated that these rays were positive particles and called the canal rays.
Review
1. Why is it easy to describe things we can see?
2. Why did researchers believe that the particle left af ter electrons were emitted as cathode rays had to be positi ve?
3. Atoms, which are always neutral in electric charge, contai n electrons as well as protons and neutrons. An electron h as an
electrical charge of -1. If an atom has three electrons, infer how many protons it has.
4. How many electrons does it take to weight the same as one pr oton?
This page titled 4.10: Protons is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
What' s In a Proton?What' s In a Proton?

4.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320644.11: Neutrons
Figure (Public Domain; Sidney Paget via Wikipedia)
Was Sherlock Holmes real or the product of someone's imagination?
The most famous detective in history and literature n ever existed. Sherlock Holmes was the creation of the Br itish author Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle. This mythical person had capabilities fa r beyond those of mere mortals. Holmes was capable of spotting the tiniest
clue, the smallest piece of evidence to solve the cr ime. He could link all sorts of seemingly irrelevant data into a coherent whole to
clear up whatever mystery he was dealing with.
The Quest for the Neutron
Clues are generally considered to involve the presen ce of something – a footprint, a piece of fabric, a bloodstain, something
tangible that we can measure directly. The discoveries of the electron and the proton were accomplished wit h the help of those
kinds of clues. Cathode ray tube experiments showed b oth the negatively charged electrons emitted by the cathode and the
positively charged proton (also emitted by the catho de). The neutron was initially found not by a direct observation, but by noting
what was not found.
Research had shown the properties of the electron an d the proton. Scientists learned that approximately 1,83 7 electrons weighed the
same as one proton. There was evidence to suggest that electrons went around the heavy nucleus composed of protons. Charge was
balanced with equal numbers of electrons and protons which made up an electrically neutral atom. But ther e was a problem with
this model – the atomic number (number of protons) d id not match the atomic weight. In fact, the atomic number was usually about
half the atomic weight. This indicated that something else must be present. That something must weigh about the same as a proton,
but could not have a charge – this new particle had to be elec trically neutral.
In 1920, Ernest Rutherford tried to explain this ph enomenon through the presence of another particle i n the nucleus. He proposed
that the "extra" particles were protons and electron s that had combined into a new particle in the nucle us (this did not turn out to be
the case). These new particles would have a mass very si milar to a proton, but would be electrically neutral since the positive
charge of the proton and the negative charge of the ele ctron would cancel each other out.
In 1930, German researchers bombarded the element ber yllium with alpha particles (helium nuclei containing two protons and two
neutrons with a charge of +2). The particles produced in this process had strong penetrating power, which sug gested they were
fairly large. In addition, they were not affected by a magnetic field, so they were electrically neutral. The French husband-wife
research team of Frederic and Irene Joliot-Curie use d these new "rays" to bombard paraffin, which was rich in protons. The
unknown particles produced a large emission of protons f rom the paraffin.
The English physicist James Chadwick (1891-1974) repe ated these experiments and studied the energy of the se particles. By
measuring velocities, he was able to show that the new particle has essentially the same mass as a proton. So we now have a third
subatomic particle with a mass equal to that of a pro ton, but with no charge. This particle is called the neutron. Chadwick won the
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1935 for his research.

4.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332064Neutron Applications
Neutrons can be used in a variety of ways. One importan t use is in nuclear fission to produce new isotopes. A neutron will collide
with a large atom (such as uranium) and cause it to split into smaller atoms, such as in figure below.
Figure: A neutron collides with a large atom, splitti ng it into smaller atoms. (Public Domain; User:Fastfission /Wikimedia
Commons via Wikipedia)
Nuclear reactors utilize chain reactions involving neutrons to heat water which drive turbines for the generation of electricity.
When a neutron collides with a large atom, the atom splits with the release of more neutrons and also a lar ge amount of energy. The
energy converts water to steam for the turbine, while the n eutrons serve to continue the chain reaction (see figure be low).
Figure: How nuclear fission produces new isotopes. (Publi c Domain; User: Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
What is a Neutron? - In 320 secon☢☢☢ What is a Neutron? - In 320 secon

4.11.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332064Summary
Rutherford proposed that "extra" particles in nucleus were combinations of protons and electrons.
Bombardment of beryllium with alpha particles produced lar ge, neutral particles.
Chadwick determined the mass of the neutron.
Nuclear fission produces new elements.
Nuclear reactors use chain reactions to produce heat.
Review
1. How did Rutherford try to explain the differences between t he number of protons in the nucleus and the atomic weight?
2. What did German researchers find when they bombarded ber yllium with alpha particles?
3. What did Chadwick determine about these new particle (o bserved by the German scientist and the Curies)?
This page titled 4.11: Neutrons is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

4.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320654.12: Thomson's Atomic Model
Figure (Public Domain; User:Fokker/Wikimedia Commons vi a Wikipedia)
What is this model airplane composed of?
Millions of children over the years have enjoyed buil ding models - this model airplane is one example of the types of models that
can be constructed. Perhaps sixty years ago the models were made of balsa wood, a very light material. Parts wo uld be cut by hand,
carefully glued together, and then covered with pape r or other fabric. The development of plastics made the construction of model
aircraft much simpler in many respects. And, the end-pr oduct is more durable and damage-proof.
A model serves a useful purpose – it gives us an ide a of what the real thing is like. The model plane se en above has wings, a tail,
and an engine just like the real thing. This model a lso has a propeller, as is the case with most small pla nes and some smaller
passenger planes. However, the model is not the real thi ng. We certainly cannot fly people or cargo in the model (besides maybe a
tiny mouse), but we can get some idea of what a real plane looks like and how it works.
Science uses many models to explain ideas. We model the electron as a very small particle with a negative c harge. That gives us a
picture, but a very incomplete one. This picture work s fine for most chemists, but is inadequate for a phys icist. Models give us a
start toward understanding structures and processes, but cer tainly are not a complete representation of the entity we are examining.
Atomic Models
The electron was discovered by J.J. Thomson in 1897. T he existence of protons was also known, as was the fact t hat atoms were
neutral in charge. Since the intact atom had no net charge and the electron and proton had opposite cha rges, the next step after the
discovery of subatomic particles was to figure out h ow these particles were arranged in the atom. This is a difficult task because of
the incredibly small size of the atom. Therefore, sci entists set out to design a model of what they believ ed the atom could look like.
The goal of each atomic model was to accurately represent all of the experimental evidence about atoms in the simplest way
possible.
Following the discovery of the electron, J.J. Thomson developed what became known as the " plum pudding " model in 1904. Plum
pudding is an English dessert similar to a blueberry muffin. In Thomson's plum pudding model of the atom, the electrons were
embedded in a uniform sphere of positive charge, lik e blueberries stuck into a muffin. The positive matter was thought to be jellylike, or similar to a thick soup. The electrons were c onsidered somewhat mobile. As they got closer to the out er portion of the atom,
the positive charge in the region was greater than the neighboring negative charges, and the electron woul d be pulled back toward
the center region of the atom.
Figure: The "plum pudding" model (Public Domain; User: Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
However, this model of the atom soon gave way to a new mo del developed by New Zealander Ernest Rutherford (1871 -1937)
about five years later. Thomson did still receive man y honors during his lifetime, including being awarded the Nobel Prize in
Physics in 1906 and a knighthood in 1908.

4.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332065Summary
A model gives an idea of what something looks like, but i s not the real thing.
The "plum pudding" model of the atom consisted of a unifo rm sphere of positive charge with negative electrons embe dded in
the sphere.
Review
What is a model?
Why are models useful in science?
In Thomson's model of the atom, where were the electrons?
What was the positive charge in this model?
What kept the electrons in the atom?
Whose model replaced Thomson's?
What awards did Thomson receive?
This page titled 4.12: Thomson's Atomic Model is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.13: Plum Pudding Atomic Model by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Thomson ' s Plum Pudding Model of the Thomson ' s Plum Pudding Model of the

4.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320664.13: Rutherford's Atomic Model
Figure (Public Domain; Man vyi via https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/F...k_wall_old.jpg)
How much space do bricks occupy?
As we look at the world around us, it looks pretty solid. We hit a wall with our hand and the hand stops – it does not (normally) go
through the wall. We think of matter as occupying sp ace. But there is a lot of empty space in matter. In fact, most of the matter is
empty space.
The Gold Foil Experiment
In 1911, Rutherford and coworkers Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden initiated a series of groundbreaking experi ments that would
completely change the accepted model of the atom. Th ey bombarded very thin sheets of gold foil with fast moving alpha particles.
Alpha particles, a type of natural radioactive partic le, are positively charged particles with a mass abou t four times that of a
hydrogen atom.
Figure: (A) The experimental setup for Rutherford's gold foil experiment: A radioactive element that emitted alp ha particles
was directed toward a thin sheet of gold foil that wa s surrounded by a screen which would allow detection o f the deflected
particles. (B) According to the plum pudding model (top), all of the alpha particles should have passed thr ough the gold foil with
little or no deflection. Rutherford found that a sma ll percentage of alpha particles were deflected at l arge angles, which could be
explained by an atom with a very small, dense, positiv ely-charged nucleus at its center (bottom). ((A; (A) Christopher Auyeung;
(B) User:Fastfission/Wikimedia Commons via (A) CK-12 Foun dation; (B)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rutherford_gol d_foil_experiment_results.svg) CC BY-NC 3.0; (B) Public Domain)
According to the accepted atomic model—in which an at om's mass and charge are uniformly distributed throu ghout the atom—the
scientists hypothesized that all of the alpha parti cles would pass through the gold foil with only a slig ht deflection, or none at all.
Surprisingly, while most of the alpha particles were in deed not deflected, a very small percentage (about 1 in 8000 particles)
bounced off the gold foil at very large angles. Some we re even redirected back toward the source. No prior k nowledge had
prepared them for this discovery. In a famous quote, Rutherford exclaimed that it was "as if you had fired a 15-inch [artillery] shell
at a piece of tissue and it came back and hit you."
Rutherford needed to come up with an entirely new mod el of the atom in order to explain his results. Bec ause the vast majority of
the alpha particles had passed through the gold, he r easoned that most of the atom was empty space. In con trast, the particles that
were highly deflected must have experienced a tremen dously powerful force within the atom. He concluded tha t all of the positive
charge and the majority of the mass of the atom must be concentrated in a very small space in the atom's interior, which he called
the nucleus. The nucleus is the tiny, dense, central core of the atom and is comp osed of protons and neutrons.

4.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332066Rutherford's atomic model became known as the nuclear model. In the nuclear atom, the protons and neutrons, which comprise
nearly all of the mass of the atom, are located in t he nucleus at the center of the atom. The electrons are distributed around the
nucleus and occupy most of the volume of the atom. It is worth emphasizing just how small the nucleus is com pared to the rest of
the atom. If we could blow up an atom to be the size of a large professional football stadium, the nucle us would be about the size of
a marble.
Rutherford's model proved to be an important step to wards a full understanding of the atom. However, it did not completely
address the nature of the electrons and the way in whi ch they occupied the vast space around the nucleus. It was not until some
years later that a full understanding of the electron was achieved. This proved to be the key to understan ding the chemical
properties of elements.
Summary
Bombardment of gold foil with alpha particles showed that a very small percentage of alpha particles were deflected.
The nuclear model of the atom consists of a small and d ense positively charged interior surrounded by a cloud of electrons.
Review
1. What is an alpha particle?
2. What did Rutherford observe from shooting thousands and thousands of alpha particles at a thin piece of gold foi l?
3. How did Rutherford explain the observation that most alpha particles went straight through the gold foil?
4. What did he say about the particles that were deflecte d?
5. Describe Rutherford’s nuclear model.
This page titled 4.13: Rutherford's Atomic Model is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.14: Gold Foil Experiment by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Rutherford Gold Foil Experiment - BacksRutherford Gold Foil Experiment - Backs

4.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320674.14: Atomic Nucleus
Figure (CC by 3.0; Charles Hamm via Wikipedia)
How is science like a jigsaw puzzle?
Many people enjoy putting jigsaw puzzles together. As t he different pieces go together, the picture begins to become clearer. When
the puzzle is completed, you see that what had been a confused collection of individual components that ma de little or no sense by
themselves fit together to give a clear picture.
Science works the same way as a jigsaw puzzle. Different r esearchers make individual discoveries that answer a spec ific question
or questions. When enough data are gathered, we get a better understanding of a process or a structure. The experiments of Crooke,
Millikan, Rutherford, and many others gave us pieces of th e puzzle that is the atomic nucleus.
Different Models of the Nucleus
After the electron and proton were discovered, people began to try to build a picture of the atom. The Th omson model had
electrons mixed in with a positive core of some sort th at provided electrical neutrality. Rutherford showed that this model was
incomplete. His picture of the atom involved a small solid core that alpha particles could zoom past with very few collisions. So the
picture of the atom became a little clearer – elect rons surrounded a very small core nucleus. The disco very of the neutron helped
fill out the picture even more. We now have protons and neutrons in a concentrated center of the atom wit h electrons surrounding
the nucleus.
One problem still existed. We have a number of positi vely charged protons in the nucleus. Why don't they pu sh each other apart?
Physicists postulate a strong nuclear force that acts at very short distances. At these distances the attracti on between protons is
greater than the force causing the positive charges t o push each other away. Neutrons are also involved in this process somehow. So
the strong force holds protons together, it holds neutron s together, and it causes protons and neutrons to be attra cted to one another.
Summary
Rutherford proposed a model of the atomic nucleus which had a solid core.
Physicists postulate a strong nuclear force holds the proton s and neutrons together in the nucleus of the atom.
Just How Small is an Atom?Just How Small is an Atom?

4.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332067Review
1. How did Rutherford change our thinking about atomic struct ure?
2. What is our current picture of the atom?
3. Why is the presence of positively charged protons a prob lem with current models of the atom?
4. How do we explain why the nucleus does not fall apart?
This page titled 4.14: Atomic Nucleus is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.15: Atomic Nucleus by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

4.15.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320684.15: Atomic Number
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
What is unique about each one of us?
For the vast majority of people, it is not their name, b ecause it is quite possible for others in the world t o have the same name
(check it out by doing an internet search for your n ame and see how many other of "you" there are). It is not your physical
description. Eye-witnesses to crime scenes often pick the wro ng person when trying to identify the criminal.
There may be some unique identifiers for us. If you have a cell phone in your name, nobody else in the world has that number.
Email addresses are different for each of us, which is a good thing since we can email almost anywhere in th e world. Our DNA is
unique, but getting a DNA analysis is expensive and time- consuming, so we really don't want to have to explore that.
Organizing the Elements
One of the goals of science is to discover the order in the universe and to organize information that r eflects that order. As
information about the different elements was made kn own, efforts were made to see if there were patterns i n all of the data. An
early attempt to organize data was made by Mendeleev, who developed the first periodic table. His data set wa s based on atomic
weights and was instrumental in providing clues as to the possib le identity of new elements. Once we learned the detail s of the
atomic nucleus, the table was based on the number of prot ons in the nucleus, called the atomic number of the element.
Atomic Number
Figure: How can you determine the atomic number of an element. (Public Domain; User:Materialscientist/Wiki media
Commons via Wikipedia)
The atomic number (Z) of an element is the number o f protons in the nucleus of each atom of that elemen t. This means that the
number of protons is the characteristic which makes ea ch element unique compared to all other elements. E lements are different
because of their atomic number. The periodic table displays all of the known elements and is arranged in order of increasing
atomic number. In this table, an element's atomic numb er is indicated above the elemental symbol. Hydrogen, at the upper left of
the table, has an atomic number of 1. Every hydrogen atom has one proton in its nucleus. Following on the table is helium, whose
atoms have two protons in the nucleus. Lithium atoms have t hree protons, and so forth.
Since atoms are neutral, the number of electrons is eq ual to the number of protons. Hydrogen atoms all hav e one electron
occupying the space outside of the nucleus. Manganes e (atomic number 25) would have twenty-five protons a nd twenty-five
electrons.

4.15.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332068
Figure: The periodic table classifies elements by atomi c number. (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commo ns via
Wikipedia)
The classification of elements by atomic number allo ws us to understand many properties of the atom and m akes it possible to
predict behaviors instead of just having to memorize ev erything.
Summary
The atomic number (Z) of an element is the number of prot ons in the nucleus of each atom of that element
The number of electrons is equal to the number of protons in an atom of an element.
Review
1. What is the atomic number of an atom? Why is this num ber important?
2. Using a periodic table, what is the atomic number of heliu m have
3. How many protons are in the following elements:?
a. Ne
b. Ca
c. Pt
4. Write the symbol for the element with the following ato mic number:
a. 18
b. 41
c. 82
d. 12
This page titled 4.15: Atomic Number is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.16: Atomic Number by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
S1.2.1 De ne mass number (A), atomic S1.2.1 De ne mass number (A), atomic

4.16.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320694.16: Mass Number
Figure (Public Domain; User:Ebultoof/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
How can you determine the mass of a chemical?
Often a student will need to weigh out a chemical for an experiment. If he or she uses a watch glass (a sma ll, round piece that will
hold the solid chemical), the weight of the watch gla ss must be determined first. Then the solid is added t o the glass and the weight
of the glass plus the solid is measured. The balance readin g will be the total of the glass plus the chemical.
History of Atomic Weight Determinations
As a part of his research on atoms, John Dalton determi ned a number of atomic weights of elements in the earl y 1800s. Atomic
weights were the basis for the periodic table that Mend eleev developed. Originally all atomic weights were base d on a comparison
to hydrogen, which has an atomic weight of one. After t he discovery of the proton, scientists assumed that the weight of an atom
was essentially that of the protons—electrons were known to con tribute almost nothing to the atomic weight of the elemen t.
This approach worked until we learned how to determine the number of protons in an element. We then saw that the atomic weight
for an element was often twice the number of protons (or more). The discovery of the neutron provided the missing part of the
picture. The atomic mass is now known to be the sum of the pr otons and neutrons in the nucleus.
Mass Number
Rutherford showed that the vast majority of the mass of an atom is concentrated in its nucleus, which is composed of protons and
neutrons. The mass number is defined as the total number of protons and neutron s in an atom. It can be calculated by adding the
number of neutrons and the number of protons (atomic numb er) together.
Mass number = atomic number + number of neutrons
Consider Table below that shows data from the first six elements of the periodic table.
Table: Atoms of the First Six Elements
Name Symbol Protons Neutrons Electrons Atomic Number Mass Number
Hydrogen 1 0 1 1 1
Helium 2 2 2 2 4
Lithium 3 4 3 3 7
Beryllium 4 5 4 4 9
Boron 5 6 5 5 11
Carbon 6 6 6 6 12

4.16.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332069Consider the element helium. Its atomic number is 2, so it has two protons in its nucleus. Its nucleus also co ntains two neutrons.
Since, we know that the mass number of the helium atom is 4. Finally, the helium atom also contains two electr ons since
the number of electrons must equal the number of pro tons. This example may lead you to believe that atom s have the same number
of protons and neutrons, but further examination of the table above will show that this is not the case. Li thium, for example, has
three protons and four neutrons, leaving it with a mass num ber of 7.
Knowing the mass number and the atomic number of an at om allows you to determine the number of neutrons pre sent in that atom
by subtraction.
Atoms of the element chromium have an atomic number of 24 and a mass number of 52. How many neutrons are i n the
nucleus of a chromium atom?
Solution
To determine this, you subtract the atomic number from the mass number, as shown above:
The composition of any atom can be illustrated with a shorthand notation using the atomic number and the mass number. Both are
written before the chemical symbol, with the mass numbe r written as a superscript and the atomic number writt en as a subscript.
The chromium atom discussed above would be written as:
Another way to refer to a specific atom is to write th e mass number of the atom after the name, separated b y a hyphen. The above
atom would be written as chromium-52.
Summary
The mass number is defined as the total number of protons an d neutrons in an atom.
The mass number = number of neutrons + atomic number.
Review
1. Who first determined atomic weights for elements?
2. What were the original atomic weights based on?Example
How to Determine the A TOMIC NUMBEHow to Determine the A TOMIC NUMBE

4.16.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320693. Why were calculations based on numbers of protons not vali d for determining atomic weights?
4. A tin atom has an atomic number of 50 and a mass numbe r of 118. How many neutrons are present in this atom?
5. What is the mass number of a cobalt atom that has 27 pro tons and 30 neutrons?
This page titled 4.16: Mass Number is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.17: Mass Number by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

4.17.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320704.17: Isotopes
Figure (Public Domain; Chief Photographer's Mate Johnny Bivera, U.S. Navy via Wikipedia)
Are all the members of the football team shown above identical?
They are on the same team and are all known by the sa me team name, but there are individual differences among the players. We
do not expect the kicker to be as big as the quarte rback. The tight end is very likely to weigh less tha n the defensive tackle on the
other side of the ball. They play as a unit, but they hav e different weights and heights.
What are Isotopes?
The history of the atom is full of some of these dif ferences. Although John Dalton stated in his atomic t heory of 1804 that all atoms
of an element are identical, the discovery of the ne utron began to show that this assumption was not corr ect. The study of
radioactive materials (elements that spontaneously g ive off particles to form new elements) by Frederick So ddy (1877-1956) gave
important clues about the internal structure of ato ms. His work showed that some substances with different ra dioactive properties
and different atomic masses were in fact the same elem ent. He coined the term isotope from the Greek roots isos (íσος “equal”) and
topos (τóπος “place”). He described isotopes as, “Put colloquially, their atoms have identical outsides but different insides.” Soddy
won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1921 for his work.
As stated earlier, not all atoms of a given element a re identical. Specifically, the number of neutrons ca n be variable for many
elements. As an example, naturally occurring carbon exists in three forms. Each carbon atom has the same number of protons (6),
which is its atomic number. Each carbon atom also cont ains six electrons in order to maintain electrical n eutrality. However the
number of neutrons varies as six, seven, or eight. Isoto pes are atoms that have the same number atomic numb er, but different mass
numbers due to a change in the number of neutrons.
The three isotopes of carbon can be referred to as ca rbon-12 (), carbon-13 (), and carbon-14 () refers to the nucleus of a
given isotope of an element. A carbon atom is one of three different nuclides. Most elements naturally cons ist of mixtures of
isotopes. Carbon has three natural isotopes, while some heavier elements can have many more. Tin has ten st able isotopes, the most
of any element.
While the presence of isotopes affects the mass of an atom, it does not affect its chemical reactivity. Ch emical behavior is governed
by the number of electrons and the number of protons. Carb on-13 behaves chemically in exactly the same way as the m ore plentiful
carbon-12.

4.17.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332070Summary
Isotopes are atoms that have the same atomic number, but dif ferent mass numbers due to a change in the number of ne utrons.
The term nuclide refers to the nucleus of a given isotope o f an element.
The atomic mass of an atom equals the sum of the protons and the neutrons.
Review
1. What are isotopes?
2. Why do different isotopes of an element generally hav e the same physical and chemical properties?
3. How would the nucleus of the hydrogen-1 and hydrogen-2 di ffer?
4. Relate the concepts of isotope and mass number.
5. All oxygen atoms have eight protons, and most have eight n eutrons as well. What is the mass number of an oxygen isoto pe that
has nine neutrons? What is the name of this isotope?
6. An isotope of yttrium has 39 protons and 59 neutrons. Wh at is the mass number of that isotope?
7. An isotope with a mass number of 193 has 116 neutrons. What is the atomic number of this isotope?
8. An isotope of barium (atomic number 56) has an mass of 138. How many neutrons are in the nucleus of this isotope?
9. Relate the concepts of isotope and mass number.
This page titled 4.17: Isotopes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.18: Isotopes by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
What Are Isotopes?What Are Isotopes?

4.18.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320714.18: Atomic Mass Unit
Figure (Public Domain; Derek Jensen (User:Tysto/Wikimedi a Commons) via Wikipedia)
The current system of measurement in the United States is a hodge-podge of different units, many of which are hard to
interconvert. We at least have standardized units the se days, unlike centuries past. At one time, measuremen ts of length were
defined as the distance from the end of one appenda ge to another. For example, the yard was defined as the distance from the king's
nose to the tip of his thumb, when his arm was stretched out.
Standardized measurements make it possible for people everywhere to get the same amount of something. Note t he red and white
labels on the gas pump pictured below. These labels c ertify that the gas pump has been checked, and is pu mping an accurate gallon
of gas. Standard measurements in science are very imp ortant so that we can compare experimental data from one lab to another,
and make sure that we are all talking about the same thin g.
Atomic Mass
Masses of individual atoms are very, very small. Using a modern device called a mass spectrometer, it is possi ble to measure such
miniscule masses. An atom of oxygen-16, for example, has a mass of. While comparisons of masses measured in
grams would have some usefulness, it is far more pract ical to have a system that will allow us to more easi ly compare relative
atomic masses. Scientists decided on using the carbon -12 nuclide as the reference standard by which all o ther masses would be
compared. By definition, one atom of carbon-12 is assi gned a mass of 12 atomic mass units. An atomic mass unit is defined
as a mass equal to one twelfth the mass of an atom of carbon-12. The mass of any isotope of any element is expressed in relation to
the carbon-12 standard. For example, one atom of heliu m-4 has a mass of. An atom of sulfur-32 has a mass of
Figure: Mass spectrometer schematic. (Public Domain; Dev on Fyson, based on image created by the U.S. Geological Survey
via Wikipedia)
The carbon-12 atom has six protons and six neutrons in its nucleus for a mass number of 12. Since the nucleu s accounts for nearly
all of the mass of the atom, a single proton or single neutron has a mass of approximately. However, as see n by the helium
and sulfur examples, the masses of individual atoms are not whole numbers. This is because an atom's mass i s affected very
slightly by the interactions of the various particles with in the nucleus, and the small mass of the electron is taken into account.

4.18.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332071Summary
Carbon-12 is the reference for all atomic mass calculatio ns.
An atomic mass unit is defined as a mass equal to one twelfth t he mass of an atom of carbon-12.
The mass of an atom is affected by the interactions of pa rticles within the nucleus.
Review
1. What instrument is used to measure the mass of atoms?
2. How much does a single oxygen-16 atom weigh in grams?
3. What is the reference standard for atomic mass units?
4. How is an atomic mass unit defined?
5. Why are the numbers for atomic mass of individual atom s not whole numbers?
This page titled 4.18: Atomic Mass Unit is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.19: Atomic Mass Unit by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
atomic mass unitsatomic mass units

4.19.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320724.19: Calculating Atomic Mass
Figure (CC BY 2.0; George M. Groutas via Flickr Boulders beach, Cape Peninsula [www.flickr.com])
Have you ever tried to move a boulder?
You have a pile of rocks to move and need to decide what equipment you want to rent to move them. If the rocks are fairly small,
you can get a shovel to pick them up. Larger rocks cou ld be moved by hand, but big boulders will need some sort of mechanical
scoop. The amount of each kind of rock will also dete rmine how much time you will need to get the job done. Knowing the relative
amounts of large, medium, and small rocks can be very u seful in deciding how to approach the job.
Percent Natural Abundance
Most elements occur naturally as a mixture of two or m ore isotopes. The table below shows the natural isotopes of several
elements, along with the percent natural abundance of each.
Table: Atomic Masses and Percents of Abundance of Some Natural Isotopes
Element Isotope (Symbol)Percent Natural
AbundanceAtomic Mass Average Atomic Mass
Hydrogen99.985 1.0078
1.0080 0.015 2.0141
negligible 3.0160
Carbon98.89 12.000
12.011 1.11 13.003
trace 14.003
Oxygen99.759 15.995
15.999 0.037 16.995
0.204 17.999
Chlorine75.77 34.969
35.453
24.23 36.966
Copper69.17 62.930
63.546
30.83 64.928
For some elements, one particular isotope predominates greatly over the other isotopes. Naturally occurrin g hydrogen is nearly all
hydrogen-1 and naturally occurring oxygen is nearly all oxygen-16. For many other elements, however, mor e than one isotope may
exist in more substantial quantities. Chlorine (atom ic number 17) is a yellowish-green toxic gas. About th ree quarters of all chlorine
atoms have 18 neutrons, giving those atoms a mass nu mber of 35. About one quarter of all chlorine atoms have 20 neutrons, giving

4.19.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332072those atoms a mass number of 37. Were you to simply c alculate the arithmetic average of the precise atomic masses, you would
get 36.
Clearly the actual average atomic mass from the last column of the table is significantly lower. Why? We n eed to take into account
the percent natural abundance of each isotope, in o rder to calculate the weighted average. The atomic m ass of an element is the
weighted average of the atomic masses of the natural ly occurring isotopes of that element. The sample pr oblem below
demonstrates how to calculate the atomic mass of chlorine.
Use the atomic masses of each of the two isotopes of c hlorine along with their respective percent abundance s to calculate the
average atomic mass of chlorine.
Solution
Step 1: List the known and unknown quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Chlorine-35: atomic mass and percent abundance
Chlorine-37: atomic mass and percent abundance
Unknown
Average atomic mass of chlorine
Change each percent abundance into decimal form by dividing by 100. Multiply this value by the atomic m ass of that isotope.
Add together for each isotope to get the average atomi c mass.
Step 2: Calculate.
Note: Applying significant figure rules results in the result without excessive rounding error. In one step:
Step 3: Think about your result.
The calculated average atomic mass is closer to 35 than to 37 because a greater percentage of naturall y occurring chlorine
atoms have the mass number of 35. It agrees with the value f rom the table above.Example

4.19.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332072Summary
The atomic mass of an element is the weighted average of the atomic masses of the naturally occurring isotopes of t hat element.
Calculations of atomic mass use the percent abundance of each isotope.
Review
1. Define atomic mass.
2. What information do you need to calculate atomic mass fo r an element?
3. Calculate the atomic mass for carbon using the data pro vided in the table below.
Isotope Atomic Mass Percent Abundance
carbon-12 12.000000 98.90
carbon-13 13.003355 1.100
This page titled 4.19: Calculating Atomic Mass is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
4.20: Calculating Average Atomic Mass by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Calculating Average Atomic MassCalculating Average Atomic Mass

4.20.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3323084.20: Atomic Structure Practice
Sacramento City College
CHEM 309: General, Organic and Biochemistry
Prof. Dianne Bennett
Agenda (Fall) • Agenda (Spring) • Homework Problems • Homework Solutions
Chapters • Video Tutorials • Basic Knowledge Practice Quizzes
Template:HideTOC
There are select answers to these problems here.
ALL questions listed must be answered to earn credit for completing the text
homework. Yes, even the Additional Exercises.
Elements and Atomic Structure
(1) Of the three subatomic particles, which is the le ast massive? Which of the subatomic particles are l ocated inside the nucleus of
the atom?
(2) Neon has 10 electrons, and Argon has 18 electrons. Of the two Noble gases, which would you expect to have th e greater atomic
radius? Justify your answer.
(3) Using the periodic table, identify the atomic symb ols and names of the elements that correspond to the following atomic
numbers:
a. 8
b. 27
c. 33
d. 59
e. 90
(4) How many electrons do each of the following elements con tain? Hint: These are not ions, but neutral elements.
a. Fluorine
b. Magnesium
c. Iodine
d. Copper
e. Silicon
(5) Which elements contain the following numbers of pr otons and electrons?
a. 15 protons and 15 electrons
b. 77 protons and 77 electrons
c. 42 protons and 42 electrons
d. 4 protons and 4 electrons
e. 99 protons and 99 electrons
(6) Between elements in the same column, would you expec t elements that are higher up in the column to have a larger atomic
radius, or ones that are lower in the column? Justify your a nswer.
(7) Of the three subatomic particles that make up an element, which one can always be used to identify the element? Why can the
others not be used in this way? Explain.

4.20.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332308(8) Define the mass number of an element. Is this differen t from the atomic number? Explain.
(9) What is an isotope? How does one isotope differ from an other within the same element?
(10) In a sample of different isotopes of Carbon-11, Carbon-12, Carbon-13 and Carbon-14, fill in the blank s for the atomic number,
how many protons, neutrons, electrons and the mass number of each isotope.
(11) What do all isotopes of nitrogen have in common? Is this true for isotopes of all elements?
(12) How would you determine which isotope in a group is the s mallest? The largest?
(13) Two of the most well-known isotopes of carbon are carb on-12 and carbon-14. Answer the following:
a. What is the atomic mass of each isotope?
b. What is the atomic number of each isotope?
c. What is the difference between the two isotopes?
d. Based on the atomic mass listed on your periodic table, wh ich of the two is more abundant in nature, carbon-12 or car bon-14?
The mass of carbon on the periodic table is 12.01.
(14) Starting with polonium, atomic number 84, there a re no stable, non-radioactive isotopes of any subseque nt elements on the
periodic table. Using the atomic symbol and the mass and atom ic numbers, express the isotope of polonium-84.
Periodic Table of Elements
(15) One of the main groups on the periodic tables is the Metals. How many different subgroups of metals ar e there on the periodic
table? Name each of them. Where in the periodic table c an each subgroup be located? Be specific.
(16) Apart from Metals, there are Metalloids and Non-Met als as groups on the periodic table. Name at least two subgroups within
the Non-Metals. Where on the periodic table are these subgr oups located? Be specific.
(17) How do the transition metals differ from the alkali an d alkaline earth metals?
(18) Determine if the following descriptions are examples of a physical or chemical property.
a. Iron nails rust when left out in the rain
b. Glass is transparent and rigid
c. Table salt creates an electrical current when dissolved in water
d. Diamond is virtually unbreakable
e. Metallic sodium explodes when exposed to water
(19) Of the following elements, which of the three categor ies, metal, non-metal and metalloid, do they each belong to?
a. Manganese
b. Bromine
c. Silicon
d. Uranium
e. Phosphorus
(20) Using the given clues, determine the identity of the following elements:
a. A transition metal in period 4 with 3 valence electro ns
b. A noble gas with atomic number less than 10
c. A metalloid from period 2
d. Group 7A element that does NOT exist as a diatomic mol ecule
e. Group 5A element directly adjacent to a metalloid
(21) For periods 1-6, how many electrons are in each en ergy level? How many valence electrons do the following elements from
levels 2 and 3 have?
a. Fluorine
b. Aluminum
c. Nitrogen

4.20.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332308d. Magnesium
e. Silicon
(22) Which family of elements has the least number of va lence electrons? Which has the most?
Additional Exercises
(23) If the atomic radius of sodium atoms is 1.86 × 10 m, how many sodium atoms are needed to make a lin e that is 1.00 cm in
length?
(24) If the atomic radius of osmium atoms is 1.34 × 1 0 m, how many osmium atoms are needed to make a line that is 5.85 m in
length?
(25) The compound that sodium makes with chlorine has sodium and chlorine atoms in a 1:1 ratio. Name two othe r elements that
should make a compound having a 1:1 ratio of atoms with sodium.
(26) The compound that magnesium makes with oxygen ha s magnesium to oxygen atoms in a 1:1 ratio. Name two ot her elements
that should make a compound having a 1:1 ratio of atoms with ma gnesium.
4.20: Atomic Structure Practice is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.−10
−10

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Electrons in Atoms
5.1: Properties of Light
5.2: Atomic Emission Spectra
5.3: Bohr's Atomic Model
5.4: Spectral Lines of Atomic Hydrogen
5.5: Quantum Mechanical Atomic Model
5.6: Quantum Numbers
5.7: Orbitals
5.8: Aufbau Principle
5.9: Pauli Exclusion Principle
5.10: Electron Configurations
5.11: Valence Electrons
5.12: Noble Gas Configuration
5.13: Hund's Rule and Orbital Filling Diagrams
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 5: Electrons in Atoms is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

5.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320745.1: Properties of Light
Figure (Public Domain; Jon Sullivan / pdphoto.org via Wikipedia)
What are waves?
Waves can come in many sizes. Here we see a large wave c rashing on the beach. Other waves can be very small an d regular. We
normally think of waves as being made of water, but t here are forms of energy that take on the characteri stics of waves. The idea of
a wave has played a major role in our understanding of how the atom is put together and why it behaves the way it doe s.
Properties of Light
The nuclear atomic model proposed by Rutherford was a great improvement over previous models, but was stil l not complete. It
did not fully explain the location and behavior of the electrons in the vast space outside of the nucl eus. In fact, it was well known
that oppositely charged particles attract one anothe r. Rutherford's model did not explain why the electr ons don't simply move
toward, and eventually collide with, the nucleus. Exper iments in the early twentieth century began to focus on the absorption and
emission of light by matter. These studies showed how cer tain phenomena associated with light reveal insight i nto the nature of
matter, energy, and atomic structure.
Wave Nature of Light
In order to begin to understand the nature of the e lectron, we first need to look at the properties of li ght. Prior to 1900, scientists
thought light behaved solely as a wave. As we will see l ater, this began to change as new experiments demonstr ated that light also
has some of the characteristics of a particle. First, we will ex amine the wavelike properties of light.
Visible light is one type of electromagnetic radiation, which is a form of energy that exhibits wavelike be havior as it moves
through space. Other types of electromagnetic radiat ion include gamma rays, x-rays, ultraviolet light, infra red light, microwaves,
and radio waves. The figure below shows the electromagnetic spectrum, which is all forms of electromagnetic radiation. Not ice
that visible light makes up only a very, very small portion of the entire electromagnetic spectrum. All e lectromagnetic radiation
moves through a vacuum at a constant speed of. Whil e the presence of air molecules slows the speed of lig ht by a
very small amount, we will use the value of as the speed of light in air.
Figure: The electromagnetic spectrum encompasses a very wide range of wavelengths and frequencies. Visible li ght is only a
very small portion of the spectrum with wavelengths fr om -. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Zachary Wilson via CK-12 Foundation)
The figure above shows how the electromagnetic spectru m displays a wide variation in wavelength and frequenc y. Radio waves
have wavelengths of as long as hundreds of meters, whil e the wavelength of gamma rays are on the order of. T he

5.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332074corresponding frequencies range from to. Visible lig ht can be split into colors with the use of a prism (see below),
yielding the visible spectrum of light. Red light ha s the longest wavelength and lowest frequency, while vio let light has the shortest
wavelength and highest frequency. Visible light wavele ngth ranges from about to with frequencies in the r ange of
Figure: A small beam of white light is refracted (ben t) as it passes through a glass prism. The shorter the wave length of light,
the greater is the refraction, so the light is separate d into all of its colors. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12
Foundation)
Summary
Electromagnetic radiation is a form of energy.
Visible light has wavelengths from -.
The speed of light in air is.
Review
1. What did Rutherford’s nuclear atomic model not expla in?
2. Prior to 1900, what did scientists believe about the natu re of light?
3. What is visible light?
4. What is the range of wavelengths for visible light?
This page titled 5.1: Properties of Light is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.1: Electromagnetic Spectrum by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
What Is Light?What Is Light?

5.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320785.2: Atomic Emission Spectra
Figure (Public Domain; Department of Defense Warrior Games via Commons Wikimedia, Archery at the 2017 Warrior Games
[commons.wikimedia.org])
How much energy does it take to shoot an arrow?
Archery as a sport or a means of defense has existed f or centuries. At rest, there is no tension on the bowst ring and no force on the
arrow. When the string and arrow are pulled back, we n ow have a situation where kinetic energy (pulling of the string) has been
converted to potential energy (the tension on the st ring). The archer releases the arrow and the potential e nergy is translated into
kinetic energy as the arrow moves. It turns out that electrons behave the same way when energy is put into the system or released
from the system.
Atomic Emission Spectra
The electrons in an atom tend to be arranged in such a way that the energy of the atom is as low as possibl e. The ground state of
an atom is the lowest energy state of the atom. When t hose atoms are given energy, the electrons absorb the energy and move to a
higher energy level. These energy levels of the ele ctrons in atoms are quantized, meaning again that th e electron must move from
one energy level to another in discrete steps, rather than continuously. An excited state of an atom is a state where its potential
energy is higher than the ground state. An atom in the excited state is not stable. When it returns back t o the ground state, it releases
the energy that it had previously gained in the form of el ectromagnetic radiation.
So how do atoms gain energy in the first place? One way is to pass an electric current through an enclosed sa mple of a gas at low
pressure. Since the electron energy levels are unique for each element, every gas discharge tube will glow wit h a distinctive color,
depending on the identity of the gas (see below).
Figure: Gas discharge tubes are enclosed glass tubes fille d with a gas at low pressure, through which an electri c current is
passed. Electrons in the gaseous atoms first become excite d, and then fall back to lower energy levels, emitti ng light of a distinctive
color in the process. Shown are gas discharge tubes of h elium, neon, argon, krypton, and xenon. (CC by 3.0; User:Jurii/Wikimedia
Commons, Heinrich Pniok (Wikimedia: Alchemist-hp) via Commons Wikimedia, Glowing noble gases [commons.wikimedia.org])
"Neon" signs are familiar examples of gas discharge tu bes. However, only signs that glow with the red-orange co lor seen in the
figure are actually filled with neon. Signs of other color s contain different gases or mixtures of gases.
Scientists studied the distinctive pink color of the gas discharge created by hydrogen gas. When a narrow b eam of this light was
viewed through a prism, the light was separated into fo ur lines of very specific wavelengths (and frequencies since and are
inversely related). An atomic emission spectrum is the pattern of lines formed when light passes thro ugh a prism to separate it
into the different frequencies of light it contains. The figure below shows the atomic emission spectrum of hydro gen.

5.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332078
Figure: When light from a hydrogen gas discharge tube is passed through a prism, the light is split into four visible lines. Each
of these spectral lines corresponds to a different elect ron transition from a higher energy state to a lower energy state. Every
element has a unique atomic emission spectrum, as shown b y the examples of helium and iron. (CC BY-NC 3.0;
Christopher Auyeung, using emission spectra available in the public domain via CK-12 Foundation; H spectrum: Commons
Wikimedia, Emission Spectrum- H [commons.wikimedia.org]; visible spectrum: Commons Wikimedia, Linear Visible Spectrum
[commons.wikimedia.org]; He spectrum: Commons Wikimedia, Helium Emission Spectrum [commons.wikimedia.org]; Fe
spectrum: Commons Wikimedia, Emission Spectrum-Fe [commons.wikimedia.org])
Classical theory was unable to explain the existence o f atomic emission spectra, also known as line-emission spectra. According to
classical physics, a ground state atom would be able to absorb any amount of energy rather than only discr ete amounts. Likewise,
when the atoms relaxed back to a lower energy state, a ny amount of energy could be released. This would res ult in what is known
as a continuous spectrum, where all wavelengths and frequencies are represent ed. White light viewed through a prism and a
rainbow are examples of continuous spectra. Atomic emis sion spectra were more proof of the quantized nature of light and led to a
new model of the atom based on quantum theory.
Summary
Atomic emission spectra are produced when excited electrons return to the ground state.
The emitted light of electrons corresponds to energies of the specific electrons.
Review
1. What is the ground state of an atom?
2. What is an excited state?
Emission and Absorption SpectraEmission and Absorption Spectra

5.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320783. Why do we see emission lines when electrons return to the gr ound state?
This page titled 5.2: Atomic Emission Spectra is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.5: Atomic Emission Spectra by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

5.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320795.3: Bohr's Atomic Model
Figure (Public Domain; the US Department of Agriculture via Wikipedia)
How does this worker's energy change as he climbs up and down the ladder?
Climbing a ladder takes energy. At every step, you pu sh yourself up against gravity, and accumulate potent ial energy. Coming back
down releases that potential energy as you descend st ep by step. If you are not careful, you can release th at potential energy all at
once by falling off the ladder (never a good thing). In addition, you take the climb or descent in step s. There is no "in-between"
position on the ladder—your foot either hits a rung, or it hits empty space, and you are in trouble until you fin d a rung to stand on.
Bohr's Atomic Model
Following the discoveries of hydrogen emission spectra and the photoelectric effect, the Danish physicist Nie ls Bohr (1885-1962)
proposed a new model of the atom in 1915. Bohr propo sed that electrons do not radiate energy as they or bit the nucleus, but exist in
states of constant energy that he called stationary states. This means that the electrons orbit at fixed dist ances from the nucleus
(see below). Bohr's work was primarily based on the emis sion spectra of hydrogen. This is also referred to a s the planetary model
of the atom. It explained the inner workings of the hydrogen atom. Bohr was awarded the Nobel Prize in physi cs in 1922 for his
work.
Figure: Bohr's atomic model hydrogen emission spectra. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Zachary Wilson via CK-12 Foundation)
Bohr explained that electrons can be moved into dif ferent orbits with the addition of energy. When the energy is removed, the
electrons return back to their ground state, emitting a corresponding amount of energy—a quantum of ligh t, or photon. This was the
basis for what later became known as quantum theory. This is a theory based on the principle that matter and energy have the
properties of both particles and waves. It accounts f or a wide range of physical phenomena, including the existence of discrete
packets of energy and matter, the uncertainty principl e, and the exclusion principle.
According to the Bohr model, often referred to as a planetary model, the electrons encircle the nucleus of the atom in sp ecific
allowable paths called orbits. When the electron is in one of these orbits, its energy is fixed. The ground st ate of the hydrogen atom,
where its energy is lowest, is when the electron is in the orbit that is closest to the nucleus. The orbits t hat are further from the
nucleus are all of successively greater energy. The electron is not allowed to occupy any of the spaces i n between the orbits. An
everyday analogy to the Bohr model is the rungs of a ladder. As you move up or down a ladder, you can only occupy specific rungs
and cannot be in the spaces in between rungs. Moving u p the ladder increases your potential energy, while m oving down the ladder
decreases your energy.
Bohr's work had a strong influence on our modern und erstanding of the inner workings of the atom. However, his model worked
well as an explanation for the emissions of the hydro gen atom, but was seriously limited when applied to oth er atoms. Shortly after

5.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332079Bohr published his planetary model of the atom, seve ral new discoveries were made, which resulted in, yet ag ain, a revised view of
the atom.
Summary
The Bohr model postulates that electrons orbit the nucl eus at fixed energy levels.
Orbits further from the nucleus exist at higher energy leve ls.
When electrons return to a lower energy level, they emi t energy in the form of light.
Review
1. When did Bohr propose his model of the atom?
2. What is a stationary state?
3. What is the ground state?
4. Can the electron occupy any space between the orbits?
This page titled 5.3: Bohr's Atomic Model is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.6: Bohr's Atomic Model by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Structure of the Atom 4: The Bohr ModelStructure of the Atom 4: The Bohr Model

5.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320805.4: Spectral Lines of Atomic Hydrogen
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
Can you fix a car engine?
While less common in this day and age, there was a tim e when many people could work on their own cars if the re was a problem.
Today, engines are computerized and require specializ ed training and tools in order to be fixed. When peo ple did their own repairs,
it was sometimes a trial and error process. Maybe the spark plugs needed to be replaced. No, that didn’t fix the problem completely,
but it was a start in the right direction. Science ope rates the same way. A theory that is developed may work for a while, but then
there are data that the theory cannot explain. This mean s that it's time for a newer and more inclusive theory.
Spectral Lines of Hydrogen
Bohr's model explains the spectral lines of the hyd rogen atomic emission spectrum. While the electron o f the atom remains in the
ground state, its energy is unchanged. When the atom absorbs one or more quanta of energy, the electron m oves from the ground
state orbit to an excited state orbit that is furth er away. Energy levels are designated with the variabl e. The ground state is,
the first excited state is, and so on. The energy t hat is gained by the atom is equal to the difference in energy between the two
energy levels. When the atom relaxes back to a lower energy state, it releases energy that is again equal t o the difference in energy
of the two orbits (see below).
Figure: Bohr model of the atom: electron is shown tra nsitioning from the energy level to the energy lev el. The
photon of light that is emitted has a frequency that corresponds to the difference in energy between the t wo levels. (CC BY-NC 3.0;
Zachary Wilson via CK-12 Foundation)
The change in energy,, then translates to light of a particular frequency being emitted according to t he equation. Recall
that the atomic emission spectrum of hydrogen had spe ctral lines consisting of four different frequencies. Th is is explained in the
Bohr model by the realization that the electron orb its are not equally spaced. As the energy increases furth er and further from the
nucleus, the spacing between the levels gets smaller and smaller.
Based on the wavelengths of the spectral lines, Bohr was able to calculate the energies that the hydrogen e lectron would have in
each of its allowed energy levels. He then mathematic ally showed which energy level transitions correspond t o the spectral lines in
the atomic emission spectrum (see below).

5.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332080
Figure: The electron energy level diagram for the h ydrogen atom. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12
Foundation)
He found that the four visible spectral lines correspo nded to transitions from higher energy levels down to the second energy level
. This is called the Balmer series. Transitions endi ng in the ground state are called the Lyman series, but the energies
released are so large that the spectral lines are all in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum. The tran sitions called the Paschen series
and the Brackett series both result in spectral line s in the infrared region, because the energies are too sm all.
Bohr's model was a tremendous success in explaining th e spectrum of the hydrogen atom. Unfortunately, when the mathematics of
the model were applied to atoms with more than one ele ctron, it was not able to correctly predict the freq uencies of the spectral
lines. While Bohr's model represented a great advan cement in the atomic model and the concept of electron transitions between
energy levels is valid, improvements were needed in order t o fully understand all atoms and their chemical behavior.
Summary
Emission lines for hydrogen correspond to energy changes rel ated to electron transitions.
The Bohr model works only for the hydrogen atom.
Review
1. What happens when a hydrogen atom absorbs one or more qua nta of energy?
2. How do we detect the change in energy?
3. What electron transitions are presented by the lines o f the Paschen series?
4. Does the Bohr model work for atoms other than hydrogen?
This page titled 5.4: Spectral Lines of Atomic Hydrogen is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.7: Spectral Lines of Atomic Hydrogen by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

5.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320845.5: Quantum Mechanical Atomic Model
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
Imagine that a news flash interrupts your favorite TV program... "There has been a hold-up at the First Na tional Bank. The suspect
fled in a car and is believed to be somewhere in the downtown district. Everyone is asked to be on the ale rt." The robber can be
located only within a certain area - the police do not h ave an exact location, just a general idea as to the wher eabouts of the thief.
Quantum Mechanical Atomic Model
In 1926, Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger (1887-19 61) used the wave-particle duality of the electron to develop and solve a
complex mathematical equation that accurately descr ibed the behavior of the electron in a hydrogen ato m. The quantum
mechanical model of the atom comes from the solution to Schrödinger's equation. Quantization of electron energies is a
requirement in order to solve the equation. This is unlike the Bohr model, in which quantization was simp ly assumed with no
mathematical basis.
Recall that in the Bohr model, the exact path of th e electron was restricted to very well-defined circula r orbits around the nucleus.
The quantum mechanical model is a radical departure from that. Solutions to the Schrödinger wave equation, c alled wave
functions, give only the probability of finding an electron at a given point around the nucleus. Electrons do not travel around the
nucleus in simple circular orbits.
The location of the electrons in the quantum mechani cal model of the atom is often referred to as an electron cloud. The electron
cloud can be thought of in the following way: Imagine placing a square piece of paper on the floor with a dot in the circle
representing the nucleus. Now take a marker and drop i t onto the paper repeatedly, making small marks at e ach point the marker
hits. If you drop the marker many, many times, the ov erall pattern of dots will be roughly circular. If y ou aim toward the center
reasonably well, there will be more dots near the nucl eus and progressively fewer dots as you move away from it. Each dot
represents a location where the electron could be at any given moment. Because of the uncertainty princi ple, there is no way to
know exactly where the electron is. An electron cloud has variable densities: a high density where the elect ron is most likely to be
and a low density where the electron is least likely to be (s ee below).
Figure: An electron cloud: the darker region nearer the nucleus indicates a high probability of finding the electron, while the
lighter region further from the nucleus indicates a l ower probability of finding the electron. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung
via CK-12 Foundation)

5.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332084In order to specifically define the shape of the clo ud, it is customary to refer to the area within which there is a chance of finding
the electron. This is called an orbital, the three-dimensional region of space that indicat es where there is a high probability of
finding an electron.
Summary
The Schrödinger wave equation replaced Bohr's ideas about electron location with an uncertainty factor.
The location of the electron can only be given as a pro bability that the electron is somewhere in a certain area.
Review
1. What does the quantum mechanical view of the atom requ ire?
2. What is a wave function?
3. What does a high density electron cloud suggest?
This page titled 5.5: Quantum Mechanical Atomic Model is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.11: Quantum Mechanical Atomic Model by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Structure of the Atom 6: The Wave MecStructure of the Atom 6: The Wave Mec

5.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320855.6: Quantum Numbers
Figure (Public Domain; Enoch Lai via Wikipedia)
Can you guess how many people are in this stadium?
If you attend a college or professional football ga me, you need a ticket to get in. It is very likely that your ticket may specify a gate
number, section number, row, and seat number. No other ticket can have the same four parts to it. It may eve n have the same gate,
section, and row, but it would still have to include a different seat number. Each seat is unique and allo ws only one occupant to fill
it.
Quantum Numbers
We use a series of specific numbers, called quantum numbers, to describe the location of an electron in an asso ciated atom.
Quantum numbers specify the properties of the atomic orbitals and the electrons in those orbitals. An elec tron in an atom or ion has
four quantum numbers to describe its state. Think of them as important variables in an equation that des cribe the three-dimensional
position of electrons in a given atom.
Principal Quantum Number
The principal quantum number, signified by, is the main energy level occupied b y the electron. Energy levels are fixed
distances from the nucleus of a given atom. They are described in whole number increments (e.g., 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,...). At location
, an electron would be closest to the nucleus, while at the electron would be farther, and at farther yet. As we will
see, the principal quantum number corresponds to the row number for an atom on the periodic table.
Angular Momentum Quantum Number
The angular momentum quantum number, signified by, describes the general shape or region an electron occupies—its orbital
shape. The value of depends on the value of the pri ncipal quantum number,. The angular momentum quant um number can have
positive values of zero to. If, could be either or.
Magnetic Quantum Number
The magnetic quantum number, signified as, describes the orbital orientation in space. Electrons can be situated in one of
three planes in three dimensional space around a give n nucleus (,, and). For a given value of the angula r momentum quantum
number,, there can be values for. As an example:
or
for,
for,
Table: Principal Energy Levels and Sublevels

5.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332085Principal Energy Level Number of Possible SublevelsPossible Angular Momentum
Quantum NumbersOrbital Designation by
Principal Energy Level and
Sublevel
The table above shows the possible angular momentum quantum number values for the corresponding princi pal quantum
numbers and.
Spin Quantum Number
The spin quantum number describes the spin for a given electron. An electron can have one of two associated spins, spin,
or spin. An electron cannot have zero spin. We also represent spin with arrows or. A single orbital can hold a maximum of
two electrons, and each must have opposite spin.
Summary
Quantum numbers specify the arrangements of electrons i n orbitals.
There are four quantum numbers that provide information about various aspects of electron behavior.
Review
1. What do quantum numbers do?
2. What is the principal quantum number?
3. What does the spin quantum number represent?
P rofe ssor Da ve Expla in s
Quantum Numbers, Atomic Orbitals, and E
Quantum Numbers, Atomic Orbitals, and E
Watch on

5.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332085This page titled 5.6: Quantum Numbers is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.14: Quantum Numbers by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

5.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320865.7: Orbitals
Figure (Public Domain; User:Baseball Bugs/Wikimedia Com mons via Commons Wikimedia, Plane over Lake Harriet
[commons.wikimedia.org])
How is it that so many planes are able to fly without running into each other?
The flight path of a commercial airliner is carefull y regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration. Ea ch airplane must maintain
a distance of five miles from another plane flying a t the same altitude, and be 2,000 feet above and belo w another aircraft (1,000
feet if the altitude is less than 29,000 feet). So, eac h aircraft only has certain positions it is allowed to maintain while it flies.
Quantum mechanics demonstrates that electrons have simil ar restrictions on their locations.
Orbitals
We can apply our knowledge of quantum numbers to des cribe the arrangement of electrons for a given atom. We do this with
something called electron configurations. They are effectively a map of the electrons for a given atom. We look at the four
quantum numbers for a given electron and then assign that electron to a specific orbital.
Orbitals
For any value of, a value of places that electron in an orbital. This orbital is spherical in shape:
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Orbitals
From the table below, it is evident that there are th ree possible orbitals when. These are designated as orbitals and have
dumbbell shapes. Each of the orbitals has a different orientation in three-dimensional space.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Orbitals
When, values can be for a total of five orbitals. Note that all five of the orbitals have specific t hreedimensional orientations.

5.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332086
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Orbitals
The most complex set of orbitals are the orbitals. When, values can be for a total of seven
different orbital shapes. Again, note the specific orientat ions of the different orbitals.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Table: Electron Arrangement Within Energy Levels
Principal Quantum
Number Allowable
SublevelsNumber of Orbitals
per SublevelNumber of Orbitals
per Principal
Energy LevelNumber of
Electrons per
SublevelNumber of
Electrons per
Principal Energy
Level
1 1 1 2 2
3 6
18 3 6
5 10
323 6
5 10
7 14

5.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332086Summary
There are four different classes of electron orbitals.
Electron orbitals are determined by the value of the ang ular momentum quantum number.
Review
1. What is an electron configuration?
2. How many electrons are in the orbital?
3. What is the total number of electrons in a orbital?
4. How many electrons does it take to completely fill a orbi tal?
This page titled 5.7: Orbitals is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
5.13: Orbitals by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Electron Orbitals - s, p & dElectron Orbitals - s, p & d

5.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320875.8: Aufbau Principle
Figure (Public Domain; Gary Minnaert via Commons Wikimedia, File: LACMA BCAM02.jpg [commons.wikimedia.org])
How are buildings constructed?
Construction of a building begins at the bottom. Th e foundation is laid, and the building goes up step by step. You obviously cannot
start with the roof, since there is no place to hang it. The building goes from the lowest level to the h ighest level in a systematic
way.
Aufbau Principle
In order to create ground state electron configurati ons for any element, it is necessary to know the way in which the atomic
sublevels are organized in order of increasing energy. Figure shows the order of increasing energy of the suble vels.
Figure: Electrons are added to atomic orbitals in ord er from low energy (bottom of the graph) to high (t op of the graph),
according to the Aufbau principle. Principle energy levels are color coded, while sublevels are grouped to gether, and each circle
represents an orbital capable of holding two electron s. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
The lowest energy sublevel is always the sublevel, which consists of one orbital. The single electron of th e hydrogen atom will
occupy the orbital when the atom is in its ground st ate. As we proceed to atoms with multiple electrons, thos e electrons are
added to the next lowest sublevel:,,, and so on. Th e Aufbau principle states that an electron occupies orbitals in order
from lowest energy to highest. The Aufbau (German for building up, construction) principle is sometimes referred to as the
"building up" principle. It is worth noting that in r eality, atoms are not built by adding protons and el ectrons one at a time, and that
this method is merely an aid to understand the end result.
As seen in the figure above, the energies of the sublev els in different principal energy levels eventually begin to overlap. After the
sublevel, it would seem logical that the sublevel s hould be the next lowest in energy. However, the sublev el is slightly
lower in energy than the sublevel and thus fills first. Following the filling of the sublevel is the, then the and the.

5.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332087Note that the sublevel does not fill until just aft er the sublevel. Figure is a useful and simple aid fo r keeping track of the
order of fill of the atomic sublevels.
Figure: The Aufbau principle is illustrated in the di agram by following each red arrow in order from top to bottom:,,,
, etc. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Summary
The Aufbau principle gives the order of electron filling in an atom.
It can be used to describe the locations and energy levels of every electron in a given atom.
Review
1. What is the Aufbau principle?
2. Which orbital is filled after the?
3. Which orbital is filled after?
4. Which orbital is filled after?
This page titled 5.8: Aufbau Principle is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.15: Aufbau Principle by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Aufbau Principle (Periodic T able Labels)Aufbau Principle (Periodic T able Labels)

5.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320885.9: Pauli Exclusion Principle
Figure (Pixelbay License; Pixabay:Nemo via http://pixabay.com/en/mail-internet-...ectronic-356 36)
Can you name one thing that easily distinguishes you from the rest of the world?
And we're not talking about DNA—that's a little expensiv e to sequence. For many people, it is their email addr ess. My email
address allows people all over the world to contact me. It does not belong to anyone else, but serves to ide ntify me. Electrons also
have a unique set of identifiers in the quantum numbers that describe their location and spin.
Pauli Exclusion Principle
When we look at the orbital possibilities for a given atom, we see that there are different arrangements of electrons for each
different type of atom. Since each electron must main tain its unique identity, we intuitively sense that the four quantum numbers
for any given electron must not match up exactly with the four quantum numbers for any other electron in that atom.
For the hydrogen atom, there is no problem since ther e is only one electron in the atom. However, for heli um, we see that the
first three quantum numbers for the two electrons ar e the same: same energy level, same spherical shape. What differentiates the
two helium electrons is their spin. One of the electro ns has a spin while the other electron has a spin. So, the two electrons
in the orbital are each unique and distinct from on e another because their spins are different. This obse rvation leads to the Pauli
exclusion principle, which states that no two electrons in an atom can hav e the same set of four quantum numbers. The energy o f
the electron is specified by the principal, angular m omentum, and magnetic quantum numbers. If those thre e numbers are identical
for two electrons, the spin numbers must be different in order for the two electrons to be differentiated f rom one another. The two
values of the spin quantum number allow each orbital to hold two electrons. Figure shows how the electrons are indicated in a
diagram.
Figure: In an orbital filling diagram, a square repr esents an orbital, while arrows represent electrons. An arrow pointing
upward represents one spin direction, while an arrow p ointing downward represents the other spin direction. (CC BY-NC 3.0; CK12 Foundation via CK-12 Foundation)
Pauli exclusion principle: How spin w orkPauli exclusion principle: How spin w ork

5.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332088Summary
The Pauli exclusion principle specifies limits on how iden tical quantum numbers can be for two electrons in the same at om.
Review
1. What is the difference between the two helium electrons?
2. What does the Pauli exclusion principle state?
3. What does the two values for the spin quantum number allo w?
This page titled 5.9: Pauli Exclusion Principle is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.16: Pauli Exclusion Principle by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

5.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320895.10: Electron Configurations
Figure (Public Domain; David R. Tribble (User:Loadmast er/Wikimedia Commons) via Commons wikimedia, Dir Command
in Windows Command Prompt [commons.wikimedia.org])
How big is a file?
If you keep your papers in manila folders, you can p ick up a folder and see how much it weighs. If you wan t to know how many
different papers (articles, bank records, or whatever else you keep in a folder), you have to take everyth ing out and count. A
computer directory, on the other hand, tells you exac tly how much you have in each file. We can get the sa me information on
atoms. If we use an orbital filling diagram, we have t o count arrows. When we look at electron configuratio n data, we simply add
up the numbers.
Electron Configurations
Electron configuration notation eliminates the boxes and arrows of orbital filling diagrams. Each occupied sublevel designation
is written followed by a superscript that is the numb er of electrons in that sublevel. For example, the hyd rogen configuration is,
while the helium configuration is. Multiple occupied sublevels are written one after another. The electron configuration of
lithium is. The sum of the superscripts in an elec tron configuration is equal to the number of electr ons in that atom, which is
in turn equal to its atomic number.
Draw the orbital filling diagram for carbon and write its el ectron configuration.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
atomic number of carbon, Z=6
Use the order of fill diagram to draw an orbital filli ng diagram with a total of six electrons. Follow Hund's rul e. Write the
electron configuration.
Step 2: Construct diagram.
Figure: Orbital filling diagram for carbon. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Electron configuration
Step 3: Think about your result.
Following the sublevel is the, and sublevels always c onsist of three orbitals. All three orbitals need to be drawn even if
one or more is unoccupied. According to Hund's rule, t he sixth electron enters the second of those orbita ls, with the same spin
as the fifth electron.Example

5.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332089Second Period Elements
Periods refer to the horizontal rows of the periodic table. The first period of the periodic table contain s only the elements hydrogen
and helium. This is because the first principal ener gy level consists of only the sublevel, and so only two electrons are required in
order to fill the entire principal energy level. Eac h time a new principal energy level begins, as with t he third element lithium, a
new period is started on the periodic table. As one mov es across the second period, electrons are successive ly added. With
beryllium, the sublevel is complete and the subl evel begins with boron. Since there are three orbita ls and
each orbital holds two electrons, the sublevel is fi lled after six elements. Table shows the electron con figurations of the
elements in the second period.
Table: Electron Configurations of Second-Period Eleme nts
Element Name Symbol Atomic Number Electron Configuration
Lithium 3
Beryllium 4
Boron 5
Carbon 6
Nitrogen 7
Oxygen 8
Fluorine 9
Neon 10
How to Write Electron Con guration 6 eHow to Write Electron Con guration 6 e

5.10.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332089Summary
Electron configuration notation simplifies the indic ation of where electrons are located in a specific atom.
Superscripts are used to indicate the number of electrons i n a given sublevel.
Review
1. What does electron configuration notation eliminate?
2. How do we know how many electrons are in each sublevel?
3. An atom has the electron configuration of. How many elec trons are in that atom?
4. Which element has the electron configuration of?
This page titled 5.10: Electron Configurations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.18: Electron Configurations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Electron Con gurationsElectron Con gurations

5.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320905.11: Valence Electrons
Figure (Public Domain; User:Chemicalinterest/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
What makes a particular element very reactive and another element non-reactive?
A chemical reaction involves either electron remova l, electron addition, or electron sharing. The path t hat a specific element will
take in a reaction depends on where the electrons are in th e atom and how many there are.
Valence Electrons
In the study of chemical reactivity, electrons in th e outermost principal energy level are very importan t and so are given a special
name. Valence electrons are the electrons in the highest occupied principal energy level of an atom. In the second period elemen ts,
the two electrons in the sublevel are called inner-shell electrons and are not involved directly in the element's rea ctivity, or in
the formation of compounds. Lithium has a single el ectron in the second principal energy level, and so we say that lithium has one
valence electron. Beryllium has two valence electrons. How many valence electrons does boron have? Recogniz e that the second
principal energy level consists of both the and th e sublevels, and so the answer is three. In fact, the number of valence
electrons goes up by one for each step across a perio d, until the last element is reached. Neon, with its conf iguration ending in
, has eight valence electrons.
Chemistry _Class 9th_Chapter 4_StructuChemistry _Class 9th_Chapter 4_Structu

5.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332090Summary
Valence electrons are the outer-shell electrons of an at om.
Valence electrons determine the reactivity of an atom.
Review
1. Define valence electron.
2. Define inner shell electron.
3. How many valence electrons are there in fluorine?
4. What are the 2s electrons in nitrogen?
5. How many inner shell electrons are there in beryllium?
This page titled 5.11: Valence Electrons is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.19: Valence Electrons by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Finding the Number of V alence ElectronFinding the Number of V alence Electron

5.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320915.12: Noble Gas Configuration
Figure (Public Domain; User:Danbold/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
How does it feel to be full after a meal?
Envision that you have nearly finished a great meal, but cannot put another bite in your mouth because th ere is no place for it to go.
The noble gases have the same problem—there is no r oom for any more electrons in their outer shells. T hey are completely full and
cannot handle any more.
Noble Gas Configuration
Sodium, element number 11, is the first element in the third period of the periodic table. Its electron c onfiguration is.
The first ten electrons of the sodium atom are the i nner-shell electrons and the configuration of just t hose ten electrons is exactly
the same as the configuration of the element neon. This provides the basis for a shorthand notation for electron
configurations called the noble gas configuration. T he elements that are found in the last column of th e periodic table are an
important group of elements called the noble gases. Th ey are helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon. A noble gas
configuration of an atom consists of the elemental symbol of the last noble gas prior to that atom, followed by the configuration of
the remaining electrons. So for sodium, we make the sub stitution of for the part of the configuration. Sod ium's noble
gas configuration becomes. Table shows the noble gas c onfigurations of the third period elements.
Table: Electron Configurations of Third-Period Elem ents
Element Name Symbol Atomic NumberNoble Gas Electron
Configuration
Sodium 11
Magnesium 12
Aluminum 13
Silicon 14
Phosphorus 15
Sulfur 16
Chlorine 17
Argon 18
Again, the number of valence electrons increases from one to eight across the third period.
The fourth and subsequent periods follow the same patt ern, except for the use of a different noble gas. Pota ssium has nineteen
electrons, one more than the noble gas argon, so its co nfiguration could be written as. In a similar fashi on, strontium has
two more electrons than the noble gas krypton, which wo uld allow us to write its electron configuration as. All elements
can be represented in this fashion.

5.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332091Summary
The noble gas configuration system allows some shortening of the total electron configuration by using the symbol for the noble
gas of the previous period as part of the pattern of elec trons.
Review
1. What is the element represented by?
2. What element has this electron configuration?
3. What noble gas would be part of the electron configuratio n notation for Mn?
4. How would you write the electron configuration for Ba?
This page titled 5.12: Noble Gas Configuration is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.20: Noble Gas Configuration by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Noble Gas NotationNoble Gas Notation

5.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320925.13: Hund's Rule and Orbital Filling Diagrams
Figure (CC BY 3.0; Laura Guerin via CK-12 Foundation)
Have you ever wondered what those load limit signs mean on a bridge?
The sign above signifies that nothing over five ton s is allowed because it will do damage to the structur e. There are limits to the
amount of weight that a bridge can support, there are limits to the number of people that can safely occ upy a room, and there are
limits to what can go into an electron orbital.
Hund's Rule
The last of the three rules for constructing electr on arrangements requires electrons to be placed one at a time in a set of orbitals
within the same sublevel. This minimizes the natural repulsive forces that one electron has for another. Hund's rule states that
orbitals of equal energy are each occupied by one e lectron before any orbital is occupied by a second el ectron, and that each of the
single electrons must have the same spin. The figure below shows how a set of three orbitals is filled wit h one, two, three, and
four electrons.
Figure: The sublevel, for the elements boron, carbo n, nitrogen, and oxygen. According to
Hund's rule, as electrons are added to a set of orbital s of equal energy, one electron enters each orbital b efore any orbital receives a
second electron. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Orbital Filling Diagrams
An orbital filling diagram is the more visual way to represent the arrangement o f all the electrons in a particular atom. In an
orbital filling diagram, the individual orbitals are shown as circles (or squares) and orbitals within a sub level are drawn next to each
other horizontally. Each sublevel is labeled by its p rincipal energy level and sublevel. Electrons are in dicated by arrows inside the
circles. An arrow pointing upwards indicates one spin di rection, while a downward pointing arrow indicates the o ther direction.
The orbital filling diagrams for hydrogen, helium, and l ithium are shown in the figure below.

5.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332092
Figure: Orbital filling diagrams for hydrogen, heliu m, and lithium. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
According to the Aufbau process, sublevels and orbital s are filled with electrons in order of increasing e nergy. Since the sublevel
consists of just one orbital, the second electron s imply pairs up with the first electron as in helium. The next element is lithium and
necessitates the use of the next available sublevel, the.
The filling diagram for carbon is shown in the figure below. There are two electrons for carbon and each o ccupies its own
orbital.
Figure: Orbital filling diagram for carbon. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Oxygen has four electrons. After each orbital has on e electron in it, the fourth electron can be placed in the first orbital
with a spin opposite that of the other electron in that orb ital.
Figure: Orbital filling diagram for oxygen. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Summary
Hund's rule specifies the order of electron filling within a set of orbitals.
Orbital filling diagrams are a way of indicating electro n locales in orbitals.
Review
1. State Hund’s rule.
2. What is an orbital filling diagram?
Hund' s RuleHund' s Rule

5.13.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320923. Is the diagram in figure below correct? Explain yo ur answer.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
4. Is the diagram in figure below correct? Explain yo ur answer.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
This page titled 5.13: Hund's Rule and Orbital Filling Diagrams is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
5.17: Hund's Rule and Orbital Filling Diagrams by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: The Periodic Table
The modern periodic table emphasizes the electronic structure of atoms. The original periodic table emph asized the reactivity of the
elements. In this chapter we will learn about the con nection between the two, and how the electronic structu re is related to the
macroscopic properties of the elements.
6.1: Early History of the Periodic Table
6.2: Mendeleev's Periodic Table
6.3: Periodic Law
6.4: Modern Periodic Table- Periods and Groups
6.5: Metals
6.6: Nonmetals
6.7: Metalloids
6.8: Blocks of the Periodic Table
6.9: Hydrogen and Alkali Metals
6.10: Alkaline Earth Metals
6.11: Noble Gases
6.12: Halogens
6.13: Transition Elements
6.14: Periodic Trends- Atomic Radius
6.15: Periodic Trends- Ionization Energy
6.16: Ionic Radii
6.17: Metallic and Nonmetallic Character
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 6: The Periodic Table is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320946.1: Early History of the Periodic Table
Figure (Public Domain; User:Raysonho/Wikimedia Commons via Commons Wikimedia, File:SteacieLibrary.jpg
[commons.wikimedia.org])
When you go to the library to find a book, how do you locate it?
If it is a fiction book, you look by author since th e fiction materials are filed by the author’s last na me. If you are looking for a nonfiction publication, you look in a catalog (most lik ely on a computer these days). The book you are looki ng for will have a number
by the title. This number refers to the Dewey Decimal system, developed by Melvil Dewey in 1876 and used in ov er 200,000
libraries throughout the world. Another system in wide use is the Library of Congress approach, developed in the late 1800s-early
1900s to organize the materials in the federal Libr ary of Congress. This method is one of the most widely u sed ways to organize
libraries in the world. Both approaches organize inform ation so that people can easily find what they are lo oking for. Chemistry
information also needs to be organized so we can see patter ns of properties in elements.
Early Attempts to Organize Elements
By the year 1700, only a handful of elements had been identified and isolated. Several of these, such as co pper and lead, had been
known since ancient times. As scientific methods improve d, the rate of discovery dramatically increased. With the ever-increasing
number of elements, chemists recognized that there may be some kind of systematic way to organize the el ements. The question
was: how?
A logical way to begin grouping elements together was by their chemical properties. (In other words, puttin g elements in separate
groups based on how they reacted with other elements.) In 1829, a German chemist, Johann Dobereiner (1780-18 49), placed
various groups of three elements into groups called triads. One such triad was lithium, sodium, and potassium. Tr iads were based
on both physical, as well as chemical, properties. Dobere iner found that the atomic masses of these three elem ents, as well as other
triads, formed a pattern. When the atomic masses of lithium and potassium were averaged together, it was
approximately equal to the atomic mass of sodium (2 2.99). These three elements also displayed similar ch emical reactions, such as
vigorously reacting with the members of another triad: chlorine, bromine, and iodine. While Dobereiner's sy stem would pave the
way for future ideas, a limitation of the triad system was that not all of the known elements could be classified in this way.
English chemist John Newlands (1838-1898) ordered the elements in increasing order of atomic mass and noti ced that every eighth
element exhibited similar properties. He called this r elationship the "Law of Octaves ". Unfortunately, there were some elements
that were missing and the law did not seem to hold fo r elements that were heavier than calcium. Newlands' wo rk was largely
ignored and even ridiculed by the scientific commun ity in his day. It was not until years later that anot her more extensive periodic
table effort would gain much greater acceptance, and that the pioneering work of John Newlands would be appreciated.
Figure (Public Domain; John Alexander Reina Newlands via Commons Wikimedia, Newlands Periodiska System 1866
[commons.wikimedia.org])

6.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332094Summary
Johann Dobereiner organized elements into groups called triads.
John Newlands proposed the "Law of Octaves" for organizing the elements.
Review
1. List some elements known since ancient times?
2. What properties were the basis of the triad system?
3. Why did Dobereiner believe that lithium, sodium, and pot assium belonged in a triad?
4. What was a shortcoming of the triad system?
5. How did Newlands arrange the element?
6. What was a problem with the “Law of Octaves"?
This page titled 6.1: Early History of the Periodic Table is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.1: Early History of the Periodic Table by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Solving the puzzle of the periodic table -Solving the puzzle of the periodic table ……

6.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320956.2: Mendeleev's Periodic Table
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Laura Guerin via CK-12 Foundation)
When you study for a test, how do you approach the task?
One useful way to study for a test is to use flashcards. To make them, write down vocabulary words, foreign lang uage terms, math
formulas, chemistry reactions—anything you want to lea rn. Then sort these cards into categories and topic s that go together. This
organization of information helps you see patterns i n the material so that you can tie different ideas together and make better sense
of them.
The periodic table was first built using a set of card s. With this strategy, Dmitri Mendeleev, the creator of th e periodic table, could
organize and rearrange material until patterns emerged.
Mendeleev's Periodic Table
In 1869, Russian chemist and teacher Dmitri Mendeleev (1836-1907) published a periodic table of the eleme nts. The following
year, German chemist Lothar Meyer independently publ ished a very similar table. Mendeleev is generally giv en more credit than
Meyer because his table was published first, and because of seve ral key insights that he made regarding the table.
Figure: Dmitri Mendeleev. (Public Domain; Unknown vi a Wikipedia)
Mendeleev was writing a chemistry textbook for his stude nts and wanted to organize all of the known elements at that time
according to their chemical properties. He famously o rganized the information for each element onto separ ate note cards that were
then easy to rearrange as needed. He discovered that when he placed them in order of increasing atomic m ass, certain similarities in
chemical behavior repeated at regular intervals. Thi s type of a repeating pattern is called "periodic". A pendulum that swings back
and forth in a given time interval is periodic, as is the mo vement of the moon around the Earth.

6.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332095
Figure: Mendeleev's 1869 periodic table. (Public Doma in; Dmitri Mendeleev via Wikipedia)
In the figure above, atomic mass increases from top t o bottom of vertical columns, with successive columns going left to right. As a
result, elements that are in the same horizontal row a re groups of elements that were known to exhibit simil ar chemical properties.
One of Mendeleev's insights is illustrated by the elemen ts tellurium and iodine. Notice that tellurium is l isted before iodine
even though its atomic mass is higher. Mendeleev revers ed the order because he knew that the properties of io dine were much more
similar to those of fluorine, chlorine, and bromin e than they were to oxygen, sulfur, and selenium. He
simply assumed that there was an error in the determi nation of one or both of the atomic masses. This turne d out not to be the case,
but Mendeleev was indeed correct to group these two elements as he did.
Notice that there are several places in the table th at have no chemical symbol, but are instead labeled with a question mark.
Between zinc and arsenic are two such missing element s. Mendeleev believed that elements with atomic masses of 68
and 70 would eventually be discovered and that they wo uld fit chemically into each of those spaces. Listed in the table below are
other properties that Mendeleev predicted for the fi rst of these two missing elements, which he called "eka -aluminum", compared
with the element gallium.
Mendeleev's predicted properties for Eka-aluminum and gallium.
Eka-Aluminum Gallium
Atomic Mass
Melting Point Low
Density
Formula of Oxide
The element gallium was discovered four years after t he publication of Mendeleev's table, and its properti es matched up
remarkably well with eka-aluminum, fitting into the ta ble exactly where he had predicted. This was also the case with the element
that followed gallium, which was eventually named germanium.
Mendeleev's periodic table gained wide acceptance with the scientific community and earned him credit as the discoverer of the
periodic law. Element number 101, synthesized in 195 5, is named mendelevium after the founder of the periodic table. It was,
however, several years after Mendeleev died before the several discrepancies with the atomic masses could be explained, and
before the reasons behind the repetition of chemical p roperties could be fully explained.

6.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332095Summary
Mendeleev published his periodic table in 1869.
His organization of elements was based on atomic mass.
Mendeleev's periodic table made it possible to predict pro perties of elements that had not yet been discovered.
Review
1. When did Mendeleev publish his periodic table?
2. Who else came out with a periodic table at about the same t ime?
3. Why was Mendeleev’s table considered to be superior?
4. What element did Mendeleev predict to exist?
5. What element was named after Mendeleev?
This page titled 6.2: Mendeleev's Periodic Table is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.2: Mendeleev's Periodic Table by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Mendeleev and The Periodic T ableMendeleev and The Periodic T able

6.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320966.3: Periodic Law
Figure: Copy and Paste Caption here. (CC-BY 2.0; Chri stopher Fynn via Flickr, Mysore - Fruit vendor [www.flickr.com])
How are these items related to one another?
We have all enjoyed looking around a market for del icious foods to eat later at home. When you get to the market you know you
need to get fruits, vegetables and grains to ensure y ou eat a balanced diet. In the market, these items are all grouped together to
make it easier to find the type of fruit, vegetable or grain you are looking for; it would be inconveni ent if the different fruits were
all scattered in different places. The periodic tabl e is organized in a similar way, ensuring similar el ements are found in the same
group or period.
The Periodic Law
When Mendeleev put his periodic table together, nob ody knew about the existence of the nucleus. It was n ot until 1911 that
Rutherford conducted his gold foil experiment that demonstrated the presence of the nucleus in the atom. Just two years later, in
1913, English physicist Henry Moseley (1887-1915) exam ined x-ray spectra of a number of chemical elements. He would shoot xrays through crystals of the element and study the wa velengths of the radiation that he detected. Moseley found that there was a
relationship between wavelength and atomic number. His r esults led to the definition of atomic number as the number of protons
contained in the nucleus of each atom. He then realize d that the elements of the periodic table should be arranged in order of
increasing atomic number, rather than increasing atomic mass.
Figure (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons v ia Commons Wikimedia, Periodic Table
[commons.wikimedia.org])
When ordered by atomic number, the discrepancies with in Mendeleev's table disappeared. Tellurium has an at omic number of 52,
while iodine has an atomic number of 53. So even thou gh tellurium does indeed have a greater atomic mass than iodine, it is
properly placed before iodine in the periodic table. Mendeleev and Moseley are credited with being most r esponsible for the
modern periodic law: When elements are arranged in order of increasing a tomic number, there is a periodic repetition of the ir
chemical and physical properties. The result is the periodic table as we know it today. Each new horizonta l row of the periodic table
corresponds to the beginning of a new period because a new principal energy level is being filled with electrons. Elements with
similar chemical properties appear at regular intervals, within the vertical columns called groups.

6.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332096Summary
Elements of the periodic table are arranged in order of in creasing atomic number.
The periodic law states: "When elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic number, there is a periodic r epetition of
their chemical and physical properties."
Review
1. Did Mendeleev know about the nucleus of an atom?
2. Who discovered the relationship between wavelength of X- rays and atomic number?
3. What did Moseley conclude from his research?
4. What is the “periodic law”?
5. What do the vertical columns (groups) in the period ic table represent?
This page titled 6.3: Periodic Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.3: Periodic Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
Periodic Law: The Origin of the Periodic Periodic Law: The Origin of the Periodic

6.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320976.4: Modern Periodic Table- Periods and Groups
Figure (Copyright; author via source)
How has the English dictionary evolved over time?
Language changes with time. New words enter the language and old words often disappear from lack of use. Dicti onaries are
published so that people can keep up with changes in language and know how to use words properly. These publi cations may be in
print, as is the law dictionary below, or they may be electronic. Dictionaries can be found on the interne t and apps are available for
smartphones. Dictionaries are invaluable for good, reli able communication.
The Modern Periodic Table
The periodic table has undergone extensive changes in the time since it was originally developed by Mendel eev and Moseley.
Many new elements have been discovered, while others hav e been artificially synthesized. Each fits properly i nto a group of
elements with similar properties. The periodic table is an arrangement of the elements in order of their atomic numbers, so that
elements with similar properties appear in the same ve rtical column or group.
The figure below shows the most commonly used form of the periodic table. Each square shows the chemical sym bol of the
element along with its name. Notice that several of th e symbols seem to be unrelated to the name of the e lement: for iron, for
lead, etc. Most of these are the elements that have be en known since ancient times and have symbols based o n their Latin names.
The atomic number of each element is written above the sym bol.
Figure (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons v ia Wikipedia)
A period is a horizontal row of the periodic table. There are seven periods in the periodic table, with each one be ginning at the far
left. A new period begins when a new principal energy le vel begins filling with electrons. Period 1 has only two elements
(hydrogen and helium), while periods 2 and 3 have 8 e lements. Periods 4 and 5 have 18 elements. Periods 6 and 7 have 32
elements, because the two bottom rows that are separat e from the rest of the table belong to those periods. These two rows are
pulled out in order to make the table itself fit more ea sily onto a single page.
A group is a vertical column of the periodic table, based on the organization of the outer shell electr ons. There are a total of 18
groups. There are two different numbering systems tha t are commonly used to designate groups, and you sho uld be familiar with
both. The traditional system used in the United States involves the use of the letters A and B. The first two groups are 1A and 2A,
while the last six groups are 3A through 8A. The midd le groups use B in their titles. Unfortunately, there was a slightly different
system in place in Europe. To eliminate confusion, th e International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) decided that

6.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332097the official system for numbering groups would be a s imple 1 through 18 from left to right. Many periodi c tables show both
systems simultaneously.
Most recent depictions of the periodic table show an inc omplete seventh period. In fact, many of those seven th period elements
were not known before the early twentieth century. Many elements have been synthesized by bombarding known e lements with
sub-atomic particles such as neutrons or alpha parti cles. Uranium has been used in this manner to produce e lements 93-100. Larger
elements (atomic numbers 101 and above) are formed by fu sing nuclei of smaller elements together.
These synthetic elements tend to be very unstable, oft en existing for less than a second, so little is kno wn about them. Elements up
to atomic number 112 are known (not in any detail, h owever), and some evidence for elements 113 and abov e had been put forth,
with elements 114 and 116 being added to the table in 2011. In December 2015, the IUPAC verified the existence of four new
elements 113, 115, 117, and 118 and approved their addit ion to the periodic table.
The following are the new element names and their origins:
Element 113 was named Nihonium, symbol Nh, proposed by Japan ese researchers after the Japanese word Nihon, which means
Japan.
A team of scientists from Russia and the United States name d element 115, Moscovium, symbol Mc, after Moscow and elemen t
117, Tennessine, symbol Ts, after Tennessee.
The Russian team that discovered element 118 named it Ogan esson, symbol Og, after Yuri Oganessian, a prolific eleme nt
hunter.
These elements complete the seventh period or row of the periodic table.
The video below reviews groups and trends in the period ic table:
Watch the additional videos below to learn more about th e newly identified and named chemical elements:
Element Name and Symbol: Nihonium (Nh)
Atomic Number: 113
The Periodic T able: Groups and T rendsThe Periodic T able: Groups and T rends

6.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332097Element Name and Symbol: Moscovium (Mc)
Atomic Number: 115
Element Name and Symbol: Tennessine (Ts)
Atomic Number: 117
Element Name and Symbol: Oganesson (Og)
Atomic Number: 118
Nihonium - Periodic T able of V ideosNihonium - Periodic T able of V ideos
Moscovium - Periodic T able of V ideosMoscovium - Periodic T able of V ideos
T ennessine - Periodic T able of V ideosT ennessine - Periodic T able of V ideos

6.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332097Summary
The periodic table is arranged in order of atomic numbe r.
A period is a horizontal row of the periodic table.
A group is a vertical row of the periodic table.
Review
1. How is today’s periodic table different from the one tha t Mendeleev published?
2. Are all the elements in today’s periodic table natur ally occurring? Explain your answer.
3. What is a “period"? What does it represent?
4. What is a “group"? What does it represent?
5. Why are there two different numbering systems for group s?
This page titled 6.4: Modern Periodic Table- Periods and Groups is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.4: Modern Periodic Table- Periods and Groups by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Oganesson - Periodic T able of V ideosOganesson - Periodic T able of V ideos

6.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320986.5: Metals
Figure (Public Domain; User:Brianiac/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
Can you guess what types of metals these screws are made of?
Screws come in all sizes and shapes. They are all (well, almost all) made of some kind of metal. But they have differences in size,
shape, and type of metal. Physical characteristics al so differ. Some screws are long, and others are short. On e screw may have a
flat-head slot while another screw may have a Phillips-h ead. Some of the screws in the picture below are used t o fasten things
together, and others are used to hang heavy objects on a wa ll.
Chemists classify materials in many ways. We can sor t elements on the basis of their electron arrangemen ts. The way the electrons
are distributed determines the chemical properties o f the element. Another way is to classify elements based on physical properties.
Some common physical properties are color, volume, and density. Other properties that allow us to sort on the b asis of behavior are
conduction of heat and electricity, malleability (t he ability to be hammered into very thin sheets), du ctility (the ability to be pulled
into thin wires), melting point, and boiling point. Th ree broad classes of elements based on physical proper ties are metals,
nonmetals, and metalloids.
Metals
A metal is an element that is a good conductor of he at and electricity. Metals are also malleable, which means that they can be
hammered into very thin sheets without breaking. The y are ductile, which means that they can be drawn into wires. When a fresh
surface of any metal is exposed, it will be very shiny because it reflects light well. This is called luster. All metals are solid at room
temperature with the exception of mercury (Hg), which is a liquid. Melting points of metals display a very wid e variance. The
melting point of mercury is -39°C, while the highest melting metal is tungsten (W), with a melting point o f 3422°C. The elements
in blue in the periodic table below are metals. About 80 perce nt of the elements are metals.
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Gold has been used by many civilizations for making j ewelry (see figure below). This metal is soft and easily shaped into a variety
of items. Since gold is very valuable and often used as currency, gold jewelry has also often represented wealth.
Figure: Gold jewelry. (Public Domain; User:Dorieo21/W ikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)

6.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332098Copper is a good conductor of electricity and is ver y flexible and ductile. This metal is widely used to conduct electric current in a
variety of appliances, from lamps to stereo systems to c omplex electronic devices (see figure below).
Figure: Copper wire exposed. (Public Domain; Scott Eha rdt via Wikipedia)
Mercury is the only metal to exist as a liquid at room temperature (see figure below). This metal was extensiv ely used in
thermometers for decades until information about it s toxicity became known. Mercury switches were once commo n, but are no
longer used. However, new federally-mandated energy-ef ficient light bulbs that are now used contain trace a mounts of mercury and
represent a hazardous waste.
Figure: Pouring Mercury. (CC BY 3.0; User:Bionerd/Wikimedia Commons and User:Materialscien tist/Wikimedia Commons
via Wikipedia)
Summary
Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity.
Metals are malleable and ductile
All metals are solids at room temperature with the exception o f mercury
Gold, silver, iron, and mercury are typical metals.
Review
1. What properties of an element are affected by electr on distribution?
2. Define malleability.
3. Define ductility.
4. State one reason gold is used in jewelry.
5. Why is mercury no longer used in many devices?
Chemistry: What is a metal? / Metallic BChemistry: What is a metal? / Metallic B

6.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332098This page titled 6.5: Metals is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
6.5: Metals by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

6.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3320996.6: Nonmetals
Figure (Public Domain; Neville Street via Wikipedia)
When we sort parts in our shop or garage, we often cla ssify them in terms of common properties. One contain er might hold all the
screws (possibly sub-divided by size and type). Anothe r container would be for nails. Maybe there is a set of drawers for plumbing
parts.
When you get finished, you could also have a collect ion of things that don’t nicely fit a category. You d efine them in terms of what
they are not. They are not electrical components, or sprinkler heads for the yard, or parts for the car. T hese parts may have some
common properties, but are a variety of items.
Nonmetals
In the chemical world, these “spare parts” would be con sidered nonmetals, loosely defined as not having the properties of metals. A
nonmetal is an element that is generally a poor conductor of heat and electricity. Most properties of nonmetals are the opposite of
metals. There is a wider variation in properties among the nonmetals than among the metals. Nonmetals exist in all three states of
matter. The majority are gases, such as nitrogen and ox ygen. Bromine is a liquid. A few are solids, such as carbo n and sulfur. In the
solid state, nonmetals are brittle, meaning that they will shatter if struck with a ham mer. The solids are not lustrous. Melting points
are generally much lower than those of metals. The green elements in the table below are nonmetals.
Figure: Copy and Paste Caption here. (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Nonmetals have a wide variety of uses. Sulfur can be e mployed in gunpowder, fireworks, and matches to facilit ate ignition (see
Figure below). This element is also widely used as an i nsecticide, a fumigant, or a means of eliminating cert ain types of fungus. An
important role for sulfur is the manufacture of rubb er for tires and other materials. First discovered in 1839 by Charles Goodyear,
the process of vulcanization makes the rubber more f lexible and elastic as well as being more resistant to changes in temperature. A
major use of sulfur is for the preparation of sulfur-cont aining compounds such as sulfuric acid.

6.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332099
Figure: Sulfur. (Public Domain; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Wikipedia)
Bromine is a versatile compound, used mainly in man ufacture of flame-retardant materials, especially im portant for children’s
clothing (see Figure below). For treatment of water in swimming pools and hot tubs, bromine is beginning to replace chlorine as a
disinfectant because of its higher effectiveness. Wh en incorporated into compounds, bromine atoms play important roles in
pharmaceuticals for treatment of pain, cancer, and Alzhe imer’s disease.
Figure: Bromine. (CC BY 3.0; User:Jurii/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Helium is one of the many nonmetals that is a gas. Oth er nonmetal gases include hydrogen, fluorine, chlorine, and all the group
eighteen noble (or inert) gases. Helium is chemically non-reactive, so it is useful for applications such as balloons (see figure
below) and lasers, where non-flammability is extremely i mportant. Liquid helium exists at an extremely low t emperature and can
be used to cool superconducting magnets for imaging studies (MRI, magnetic resonance imaging). Leaks in ve ssels and many types
of high-vacuum apparatus can be detected using heli um. Inhaling helium changes the speed of sound, produ cing a higher pitch in
your voice. This is definitely an unsafe practice and ca n lead to physical harm and death.
Figure: Blimp. (Public Domain; Derek Jensen (Wikimedia: Tysto) via Wikipedia)

6.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332099Summary
Nonmetals are generally poor conductors of heat and electri city.
Properties of nonmetals are usually the opposite of prop erties of metals
Nonmetals can be solid, liquid, or gas at room temperature depending upon the element.
Sulfur, bromine, and helium are typical nonmetals.
Review
1. What are the properties of nonmetals?
2. List the states of matter in which nonmetals can exi st and give one example of each state.
3. What are the physical properties and uses of sulfur?
4. What are the physical properties and uses of bromine?
5. What are the physical properties and uses of helium?
This page titled 6.6: Nonmetals is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.6: Nonmetals by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Metals, Nonmetals, and MetalloidsMetals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
Metals Metalloids Non MetalsMetals Metalloids Non Metals

6.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321006.7: Metalloids
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Laura Guerin via CK-12 Foundation)
Have you ever taken a multiple-choice test?
Most of the time the answers are specific choices – is the answer possibility a or possibility b? Quite often you can “think through”
the choices to come up with the correct answer. More fru strating is the choice “none of the above.” You feel very uncertain
checking that possibility.
Metalloids
Some elements are “none of the above.” They don’t fi t neatly into the categories of metal or non-metal because of their
characteristics. A metalloid is an element that has properties that are intermedi ate between those of metals and nonmetals.
Metalloids can also be called semimetals. On the perio dic table, the elements colored yellow, which generall y border the stair-step
line, are considered to be metalloids. Notice that al uminum borders the line, but it is considered to be a metal since all of its
properties are like those of metals.
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Examples of Metalloids
Silicon is a typical metalloid (see figure below). It has luster like a metal, but is brittle like a nonme tal. Silicon is used extensively
in computer chips and other electronics because its electri cal conductivity is in between that of a metal and a nonmet al.
Me talloidsMe talloids

6.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332100
Figure: Silicon. (Public Domain; User:Enricoros/Wikipe dia via Wikipedia)
Boron is a versatile element that can be incorporat ed into a number of compounds (see figure below). Bor osilicate glass is
extremely resistance to thermal shock. Extreme chang es in the temperature of objects containing borosil icates will not create any
damage to the material, unlike other glass compositio ns, which would crack or shatter. Because of their stren gth, boron filaments
are used as light, high-strength materials for airplane s, golf clubs, and fishing rods. Sodium tetraborate is wid ely used in fiberglass
as insulation and also is employed in many detergents and cleaners.
Figure: Boron. (CCSA;CC-BY 3.0; User:Jurii/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Arsenic has long played a role in murder mysteries, be ing used to commit the foul deed (see figure below). T his use of the material
is not very smart since arsenic can be easily detect ed on autopsy. We find arsenic in pesticides, herbic ides, and insecticides, but the
use of arsenic for these applications is decreasing d ue to the toxicity of the metal. Its effectiveness as an insecticide has led arsenic
to be used as a wood preservative.
Figure: Arsenic. (Public Domain; Aram Dulyan (Wikime dia: Aramgutang) via Wikipedia)
Antimony is a brittle, bluish-white metallic material t hat is a poor conductor of electricity (see figure below). Used with lead,
antimony increases the hardness and strength of the mixture. This material plays an important role in the fabrication of electronic
and semiconductor devices. About half of the antimon y used industrially is employed in the production o f batteries, bullets, and
alloys.
Figure: Antimony. (Public Domain; Aram Dulyan (User:A ramgutang/Wikimedia Commons) via Wikipedia)
Summary
Metalloids are elements with properties intermediate betwe en those of metals and non-metals
Silicon is a metalloid because it has luster, but is brittl e.
Boron, arsenic, and antimony are metalloids with a variety of uses.

6.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332100Review
1. Define “metalloid.”
2. Why would it be difficult to decide whether or not an elem ent was a metalloid based on its properties?
3. Why is silicon used extensively in electronics?
4. What are borosilicates used for?
5. Why is the use of arsenic as an insecticide decreasing?
6. What is a main application of antimony?
This page titled 6.7: Metalloids is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321016.8: Blocks of the Periodic Table
Figure (Public Domain; User:Szalax/Wikimedia Commons vi a Wikipedia)
What makes these music notes unique?
We all enjoy music of some sort. Some people like classi cal music, others like jazz or country. Music styles change from one period
of time to the next, and from one region to another. Each type of music has its language that describes it. Classical music has a
certain structure, style, and content. There are diff erent expressions of classical music – the symphony, con certo, sonata. We have
ballet and opera as well as choral music. Jazz has a d ifferent set of characteristics from classical and d ifferent styles of
performance. Each type of music can be described and compared to other types on the basis of certain comm on qualities like notes,
chords, and melodic styles.
The elements in the periodic table could be consider ed to be similar to types of music. Each set of elem ents has its unique set of
properties, with different sets of elements having som e common characteristics in terms of electron arrang ements. We can see
patterns of electronic structure and reactivity in t he periodic table that allow us to understand better the behavior of individual
elements.
Periods and Blocks
There are seven horizontal rows of the periodic tabl e, called periods. The length of each period is determined by the num ber of
electrons that are capable of occupying the sublevels that fill during that period, as seen in the table belo w.
Table: Period Length and Sublevels in the Periodic Tab le
Period Number of Elements in Period Sublevels in Order of Fill
1 2
2 8
3 8
4 18
5 18
6 32
7 32
Recall that the four different sublevels each consist of a different number of orbitals. The sublevel h as one orbital, the sublevel
has three orbitals, the sublevel has five orbitals, and the sublevel has seven orbitals. In the firs t period, only the sublevel is
being filled. Since all orbitals can hold two electro ns, the entire first period consists of just two eleme nts. In the second period, the
sublevel, with two electrons, and the sublevel, with si x electrons, are being filled. Consequently, the seco nd period contains
eight elements. The third period is similar to the seco nd, filling the and sublevels. Notice that the sublev el does not actually
fill until after the sublevel. This results in the fourth period containing 18 elements due to the add itional 10 electrons that are
contributed by the sublevel. The fifth period is simi lar to the fourth. After the sublevel fills, the su blevel with its 14
electrons fills. This is followed by the and the. Th e total number of elements in the sixth period is 32. The later elements in
the seventh period are still being created. So while th ere is a possible number of 32 elements in the period, the current number is
slightly less.

6.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332101The period to which a given element belongs can be ea sily determined by its electron configuration. For e xample, consider the
element nickel. Its electron configuration is. The highest occupied principal energy level is the fou rth, indicated by
the 4 in the portion of the configuration. Therefore, n ickel can be found in the fourth period of the periodic t able.
Based on electron configurations, the periodic tabl e can be divided into blocks denoting which sublevel is in the process of being
filled. The,,, and blocks are illustrated below.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung and Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundat ion)
The figure also illustrates how the sublevel is alway s one principal level behind the period in which tha t sublevel occurs. In other
words, the sublevel fills during the fourth period. T he sublevel is always two levels behind. The sublevel belongs to the
sixth period.
S3.1.1/2 Periodic T able:spdf, groups, peS3.1.1/2 Periodic T able:spdf, groups, pe

6.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332101Summary
The horizontal rows of the periodic table are called pe riods.
The length of a period depends on how many electrons are needed to occupy the sublevels that fill the period.
Blocks indicate which sublevel is being filled.
Review
1. What are the horizontal rows of the periodic table called?
2. Which sublevel is being filled in period 1?
3. Which sublevel is being filled in period 7?
4. How does the electron configuration of an element give information about the period it is in?
5. What block of elements has the sublevels being filled?
This page titled 6.8: Blocks of the Periodic Table is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.8: Blocks of the Periodic Table by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Writing Electron Con gurations using peWriting Electron Con gurations using pe

6.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321026.9: Hydrogen and Alkali Metals
Figure (Public Domain; User:Ajhalls/Wikimedia Commons v ia Commons Wikimedia, Large Sodium Explosion
[commons.wikimedia.org])
Can you guess what kind of reaction is taking place in this picture?
Some chemistry students just enjoy learning about the science, while others are intrigued by the violent rea ctions that sometimes
can occur. Many chemistry classes have been enlivene d by the demonstration of how reactive sodium is with water. In some
instances, the demonstration has gone off safely. Unfort unately, in other situations students and instructor s have incurred serious
injury due to their failure to observe proper safety precautions.
One value of the periodic table is the ability to ma ke predictions about the behavior of individual ele ments. By knowing which
group an element is in, we can determine the number of r eactive electrons and say something about how that element will behave.
Hydrogen and Alkali Metals
The periodic table is arranged on the basis of atom ic numbers (number of protons in the nucleus). One o f the valuable
consequences of this arrangement is that we can learn a lot about the electron distribution in these atom s. The colors in the table
below indicate the different groupings of atoms based on th e location and number of electrons in the atom.
Figure (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons, modified by CK-12 Foundation via Commons Wikimedia,
Periodic Table [commons.wikimedia.org])
If we look at Group I (red column), we see that it is la beled alkali metals. Also note the green H above the alkali metals. All of
these elements have a similar configuration of outer- shell electrons (see table below). In each case, there is one electron in the outer
orbital and that is an s-orbital electron. Hydrogen is not an alkali metal itself, but has some similar p roperties due to its simple one
proton (located in the nucleus), one electron arran gement. The lone electron exists in a s-orbital around the nucleus. For lithium,
there are two 1s electrons in an inner orbit and one 2 s electron in the outer orbit. The same pattern holds for s odium and potassium.
Element, Symbol, Electron Configuration

6.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332102Element Symbol Electron Configuration
hydrogen H
lithium Li
sodium Na
potassium K
rubidium Rb
cesium Cs
francium Fr
Even an atom with a very complex electron compositio n such as cesium still has the single electron in it s outer orbital (see figure
below).
Figure: Celsium Orbitals. (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
This one electron is very easily removed during chemic al reactions. The group I elements react rapidly wit h oxygen to produce
metal oxides. They are very soft metals, which become liq uid just above room temperature.
Li reacts with water to produce hydrogen gas. Sodium als o reacts the same way, just more rapidly. Potassium rea cts rapidly with
water producing hydrogen gas and heat which ignites th e hydrogen gas. Rubidium and cesium react yet more v igorously and
explode on contact with water.
Group 1 - The Alkali MetalsGroup 1 - The Alkali Metals

6.9.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332102Summary
Group I (alkali metals and hydrogen) elements all have one el ectron in their outer shell. This electron is in a orbit al.
The Group I metals are all very reactive with water.
Review
1. What group are the alkali metals and hydrogen in?
2. What is the outer shell electron configuration in th is group?
3. How reactive are the alkali metals with oxygen?
4. How reactive are these metals with water?
This page titled 6.9: Hydrogen and Alkali Metals is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321036.10: Alkaline Earth Metals
Figure (Public Domain; U.S. Marine Corps via Wikipedia)
How are oyster shells and chemistry related?
We take a lot of chemistry for granted. Very few of u s think about the chemistry of bone or oyster shells. Both of these materials
have large amounts of calcium compounds in them and p lay important roles in maintaining the structure of the organism. The shell
provides a solid surrounding for the oyster. Bones giv e support to the body so the person can move around and not just be a soft
mass of tissue.
Figure (Public Domain; Jossifresco via Wikipedia)
Alkaline Earth Metals
Group 2 elements are referred to as “ alkaline earth ” metals (tan column below). The name “ alkaline ” comes from the fact that
compounds of these elements form basic (pH greater than 7) or alkaline solutions when dissolve d in water. If the Group 1 elements
all have one electron in their outer orbital, we can pre dict that the Group 2 elements will have two electrons in t hat outer shell.
Figure (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons, modified by CK-12 Foundation via Wikipedia)
The beryllium atom, the first element of Group 2, ha s an atomic number of four. The atom has the 1s shell filled as well as the 2s
shell, giving a total of four electrons (). Note tha t there are two electrons in the outer shell, a stru cture that is characteristic

6.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332103of the Group 2 elements. Barium (atomic number 56) h as the same outer shell structure of two electrons in the orbital, even
though the internal electron structure for barium is quit e complicated.
Figure (Public Domain; Ingmar Runge via Wikipedia)
Radium (atomic number 88) has similar properties to barium and is also in the Group 2 category. However, rad ium is a radioactive
element and is generally under the category of radi oisotopes in addition to being an alkaline earth met al, because it is not a stable
element.
The Group 2 elements tend to be less reactive than t heir Group 1 counterparts. The need to remove two ele ctrons in order for the
material to react means more energy is needed for ele ctron removal. However, these elements are reactive en ough that they do not
exist in their elemental forms in nature, but are presen t as compounds.
Uses of Alkaline Earth Compounds
Since magnesium burns brightly, it is used in flares and fireworks. Magnesium alloys with aluminum provide light weight and
sturdy materials for airplanes, missiles, and rockets. Sever al antacids use magnesium hydroxide to neutralize excess stomach acid.
Calcium compounds are widely found in limestone, marb le, and chalk. Calcium is an important constituent o f cement. Other uses
include calcium chloride as a deicer and limestone as a whi te pigment in paints and toothpaste.
Strontium is widely used in fireworks and magnets. Bariu m compounds can be used in paints, filler for rubber, plastic, and resins,
and as a contrast medium for X-rays. Many beryllium com pounds are toxic, but these materials have been empl oyed in metal
alloys.
Summary
The alkaline earth elements are in Group 2 of the periodic table.
These elements each have two s electrons in their outer shel l.
The alkaline earth elements are less reactive than the a lkali metals.
clip - Alkaline earth metals (5)clip - Alkaline earth metals (5)

6.10.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332103Review
1. Why are these elements known as “alkaline earth” eleme nts?
2. How many electrons are in the outer shell of the alkali ne earth elements?
3. Are the alkaline earth elements more or less reactive t han the alkali metals? Explain your answer.
4. Is radium usually considered as part of the alkaline ear th category in terms of chemistry? Explain your answer.
This page titled 6.10: Alkaline Earth Metals is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321046.11: Noble Gases
Figure (Public Domain; User:Ingolfson/Wikimedia Common s via Wikipedia)
What gives these lights their color?
Cities at night would be rather boring without all th e bright lights. They provide colorful Illuminations and help make things much
more visible. We call these lights “neon lights,” but the y use several gases to make the different colors.
Noble Gases
The reactivity of an element can give us important c lues as to the electron configuration of that materia l. If an element is extremely
unreactive, this suggests that the electron configur ation is such that adding or removing electrons is ve ry unlikely. There must be a
stable electron configuration that resists further rea ction.
Figure (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons, modified by CK-12 Foundation via Wikipedia)
The Group 18 (once known as group VIII) elements are es sentially chemically inert (light blue column on the right). All these
elements exist as monatomic gases at room temperature. If we look at the electro n configurations, we see that helium (atomic
number 2) has a full shell of two electrons. Since ther e are no electrons shielding this shell from the nuc leus, these two electrons
will be very difficult to remove, making helium unreacti ve.
The remaining elements in the group have full outer shells consisting of two electrons and six electr ons for an outer shell
content of eight electrons. This particular arrangem ent renders the atoms fairly unreactive. This group has been referred to as the
“inert” gases, indicating that they are chemically inert, or unreactive. Another popular term is “ noble gases,” suggesting that these
gases do not like to have much to do with the other, more common materials (or that they don’t do a lot of work).
Noble Gas Compounds
In more recent years, a number of reactions using th e noble gas elements have been discovered. Although t he conventional wisdom
was that the complete outer shells of these elements would not allow them to react, some scientists believe d that the outer electrons
of the larger elements (such as Rn, Xe, and Kr) were far enough away from the nucleus that they should be abl e to be displaced
under the right set of conditions. The first compound (XePtF) was made with xenon in 1962. Since then, several compounds have
been made with radon, xenon, krypton, and argon. Only helium and neon have not formed compounds at this time.6

6.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332104Colors of Noble Gases
The different gases glow when an electric current is passed through them. Many of these gases are used in displays because of their
chemical inertness. They are stable and will not rea ct with other materials in the system. Radon also wil l give a reddish glow, but is
not used because it is radioactive and will not retain its structure as radon for any significant length of time.
Figure (CC BY 3.0; User:Jurii/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Royal Society of Chemistry - Colors of the Noble Gases
Summary
The noble gases are in Group VIII of the periodic table.
Helium has a full outer shell of two electrons.
The other gases have full outer shells of two and six el ectrons.
Compounds have been formed with Rn, Xe, Kr, and Ar.
Review
1. What elements comprise the noble elements?
2. What state are they in at room temperature?
3. Why is helium non-reactive?
4. Why were the other noble gases believed to be non-reactive?
5. When was the first compound formed from xenon?
6. What happens when an electric current is passed through these gases?
This page titled 6.11: Noble Gases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.11: Noble Gases by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
R oy a l Socie ty of Ch e m istry
The Chemistry of Light 18 - Colours of the
The Chemistry of Light 18 - Colours of the
Watch on

6.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321056.12: Halogens
How do you study a gas that does not exist as such in nature?
It’s not as easy as you think. Fluorine is so reactiv e that we cannot find it free in nature. None of the h alogens exist free in nature
(unlike some of the metals such as gold and silver) because they are very reactive. The video below shows how violently elemental
fluorine reacts with other materials.
Halogens
Some elements are much more reactive than others. Th e Group I (red) and Group II (tan) elements can easil y lose electrons during
a reaction. Elements of other groups are much more likely t o accept electrons as they react.
Figure (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons, modified by CK-12 Foundation via Wikipedia)
The elements of Group VIIA (new Group 17 - fluorine, chl orine, bromine, iodine, and astatine) are called the halogens (yellow
column). The term “halogen” means “salt-former” beca use these elements will readily react with alkali meta l and alkaline earth
metals to form halide salts. The halogens all have the general electron configuration, giving them seven valence electrons.
They are one electron short of having the full outer an d sublevel, which makes them very reactive.
Physical Properties of Halogens
As elements, chlorine and fluorine are gases at room temperature, bromine is a dark orange liquid, and i odine is a dark purple-gray
solid. Astatine is so rare that its properties are mos tly unknown. In the picture below we see chlorine gas o n the left (green),
bromine solid and vapor in the middle (orange), and solid iodine (grey) on the right. Fluorine is not shown in the picture below
because it is too corrosive and will destroy the glass co ntainer.
Fluorine - Periodic T able of V ideosFluorine - Periodic T able of V ideos

6.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332105
Figure (Chlorine and iodine: Public Domain; Bromine: The copyright holder of this work allows anyone to use it for any
purpose including unrestricted redistribution, commerc ial use, and modification; Chlorine: User:Greenhorn1/ Wikimedia Commons
Bromine: User:Tomihahndorf/De.Wikipedia; Iodine: Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Chlorine:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chlorinegas.jpg; Bromine: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Brom_amp.jpg;
Iodine: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Iodine-sample. jpg)
None of these elements are found free in nature beca use of their reactivity. Fluorine is found in combinat ion with cations in several
minerals. Chlorine is found in table salt, in the ocean s (which are about 2% chloride ion by weight) and in lakes such as the Great
Salt Lake in Utah. Small amounts of bromide and iodide salts c an be found in the oceans and in brine wells in several states.
Figure (Public Domain; NASA via Wikipedia)
Watch the following two video experiments of block elem ents:
This first video is of bromine reacting with aluminum.
This second video discusses the properties of halogens and shows a few more reactions they can participate in.
Reaction of Bromine and AluminumReaction of Bromine and Aluminum

6.12.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332105Summary
The halogens all have seven electrons in their outer shel ls.
The electron configuration in the outer shell is.
As the atomic number increases, the reactivity of the hal ogens decreases.
Fluorine and chlorine exist as gases at room temperature, while bromine is a liquid, and iodine is a solid.
Review
1. Pick two elements that are halogens. For each, write the na me, chemical symbol, and atomic weight.
2. What does the term “halogen” mean?
3. What is the outer shell electron configuration for th e halogens?
4. What is the physical state of each halogen at room t emperature?
5. Where are the halogens found?
This page titled 6.12: Halogens is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
Group 7 - The Halogens | Properties of Group 7 - The Halogens | Properties of

6.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321066.13: Transition Elements
Figure (Public Domain; Stock model: Bull-Doser; Race model: Dana60Cummins via Stock model: Commons Wikimedia,
Ford Focus ZX5 [commons.wikimedia.org]; Race model: Commons Wikimedia, Ford Focus Ecoboost Race Car
[commons.wikimedia.org])
What are the similarities and differences between these two cars?
From the outside, the two cars below look the same (exc ept for the flashy paint job on the racing model). T hey are the same model
of the car, but one is a stock edition for regular d riving, while the other one is built for high-speed racing. We really can't tell much
from the external view. To see the differences, we nee d to go under the hood, take the engines apart, and look at the braking and
suspension systems in order to see how the two cars differ.
Many electron configurations of elements are simple and straightforward. We can look at the outer shell a nd easily understand how
that set of elements will react in terms of electron gain or loss. However, there are sets of elements that are more complex in their
behavior. One such group is the transition elements.
Figure (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons, modified by CK-12 Foundation via Commons Wikimedia,
Periodic Table [commons.wikimedia.org])
The Transition Elements
Transition elements are the elements that are found i n Groups 3-12 (old groups IIA-IIB) on the periodic tab le (salmon-colored
block in the middle of the table). The term refers t o the fact that the sublevel, which is in the process of being filled, is in a lo wer
principal energy level than the sublevel filled bef ore it. For example, the electron configuration of sc andium, the first transition
element, is. Remember that the configuration is rev ersed from the fill order—the fills before the beg ins. Because
they are all metals, the transition elements are ofte n called the transition metals. As a group, they displa y typical metallic properties
and are less reactive than the metals in Groups 1 and 2. Some of the more familiar ones are so unreactive that they can be found in
nature in their free, or uncombined, state. These incl ude platinum, gold, and silver. Because of this unique filling order, the
transition elements are often referred to as " -block" ele ments.

6.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332106
Figure: Piece of silver. (Public Domain; US Geological Survey via Commons Wikimedia, Silver [commons.wikimedia.org])
Compounds of many transition elements are distincti ve for being widely and vividly colored. As visible li ght passes through a
transition metal compound dissolved in water, the -or bitals absorb light of various energies. The visible light of a given energy
level that is not absorbed produces a distinctly colored so lution.
Figure: Transition metal compounds dissolved in water e xhibit a wide variety of bright colors. From left to right are shown
solutions of cobalt (II) nitrate, potassium dichromate, potassium chromate, nickel (II) chloride, copper (II) sulfate, and potassium
permanganate. (Public Domain; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: B enjah-bmm27) via Commons Wikimedia, Coloured Transition Metal
Solutions [commons.wikimedia.org])
Summary
The transition elements are found in groups IIA-IIB (n ew groups 3-12).
These elements are characterized by having unfilled su blevels.
In general, the next higher sublevel is already fille d or has one electron missing.
Many transition element compounds are brightly colored d ue to the inner-level electron transitions.
Review
1. List five different transition elements, giving the ir name, chemical symbol, and atomic number.
2. What is unique about the transition elements in terms of e lectron configurations?
3. Why are these elements often referred to as “ -block” ele ments?
4. Why do many transition element compounds have bright colors?
This page titled 6.13: Transition Elements is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
C3: T ransition Metals (Revision)C3: T ransition Metals (Revision)

6.13.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321066.13: Transition Elements by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

6.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321086.14: Periodic Trends- Atomic Radius
Figure (CC by 2.0; James Cridland via Flickr)
How can all of these people fit in such a small space?
Events draw large numbers of people to them. Even an outdoor event can fill up so that there is no room f or more people. The crowd capacity
depends on the amount of space in the venue, and the amount of space depends on the size of the objects filli ng it. We can get more people into a
given space than can elephants, because elephants ar e larger than people. We can get more squirrels into t hat same space than we can people for the
same reason. Knowing the sizes of objects to be dealt with ca n be important in deciding how much space is needed.
Atomic Radius
The size of atoms is important to explanations of the behavior of atoms or compounds. One way to express the siz e of atoms is by use of atomic
radius. This data helps us understand why some molecules fi t together and why other molecules have parts that get too crowded under certain
conditions.
The size of an atom is defined by the edge of its or bital. However, orbital boundaries are fuzzy, and varia ble under different conditions. In order to
standardize the measurement of atomic radii, the distan ce between the nuclei of two identical atoms bonded to gether is measured. The atomic radius
is defined as one-half the distance between the nuclei of identical atoms that are bonded together.
Figure: The atomic radius of an atom can be define d as one half the distance between two nuclei in a d iatomic molecule. (CC BY-NC
3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Atomic radii have been measured for elements. The uni ts for atomic radii are picometers, equal to meters. As an example, the internuclear
distance between the two hydrogen atoms in an molecul e is measured to be. Therefore, the atomic radius of a hydrogen atom is

6.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332108
Figure: Atomic radii of the representative elements m easured in picometers. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Periodic Trend
The atomic radius of atoms generally decreases from le ft to right across a period. There are some small excep tions, such as the oxygen radius being
slightly greater than the nitrogen radius. Within a p eriod, protons are added to the nucleus as electrons are being added to the same principal energy
level. These electrons are gradually pulled closer to the nucleus because of its increased positive charge. Since the force of attraction between nuclei
and electrons increases, the size of the atoms decrease s. The effect lessens as one moves further to the righ t in a period, because of electron-electron
repulsions that would otherwise cause the atom's size to increase.
Group Trend
The atomic radius of atoms generally increases from top to bottom within a group. As the atomic number increase s down a group, there is again an
increase in the positive nuclear charge. However, there is also an increase in the number of occupied princip al energy levels. Higher principal energy
levels consist of orbitals which are larger in size th an the orbitals from lower energy levels. The effect of th e greater number of principal energy
levels outweighs the increase in nuclear charge, and s o atomic radius increases down a group.
Figure: A graph of atomic radius plotted versus atomi c number. Each successive period is shown in a different color. As the atomic number
increases within a period, the atomic radius decreases. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)

6.14.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321080:00
Summary
Atomic radius is determined as half the distance between the nuclei of two identical atoms bonded together.
The atomic radius of atoms generally decreases from le ft to right across a period.
The atomic radius of atoms generally increases from to p to bottom within a group.
Review
1. Define “atomic radius.”
2. What are the units of measurement for atomic radi us?
3. How does the atomic radius of different elements change across a period?
4. How does atomic radius change from top to bottom within a group?
5. Explain why the atomic radius of hydrogen is so m uch smaller than the atomic radius of potassium.
This page titled 6.14: Periodic Trends- Atomic Radius is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.15: Periodic Trends- Atomic Radius by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

6.15.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321096.15: Periodic Trends- Ionization Energy
Figure (CC by 2.0; Nick Russill via Flickr, Northern Lights, Greenland [www.flickr.com])
The incredible green lights in this cold northern s ky consist of charged particles known as ions. Their swi rling pattern is caused by
the pull of Earth’s magnetic field. Called the nort hern lights, this phenomenon of nature shows that ion s respond to a magnetic
field. Do you know what ions are? Read on to find out.
Atoms Are Neutral
The northern lights aren’t caused by atoms, because atoms are not charged particles. An atom always has th e same number of
electrons as protons. Electrons have an electric char ge of -1 and protons have an electric charge of +1. Therefore, the charges of an
atom’s electrons and protons “cancel out.” This explains why atoms are neutral in electric charge.
Q: What would happen to an atom’s charge if it were to gain extra electrons?
A: If an atom were to gain extra electrons, it would have more electrons than protons. This would give it a n egative charge, so it
would no longer be neutral.
Atoms to Ions
Atoms cannot only gain extra electrons. They can also lose electrons. In either case, they become ions. Ions are atoms that have a
positive or negative charge because they have unequ al numbers of protons and electrons. If atoms lose ele ctrons, they become
positive ions, or cations. If atoms gain electrons, t hey become negative ions, or anions. Consider the examp le of fluorine (see figure
below). A fluorine atom has nine protons and nine ele ctrons, so it is electrically neutral. If a fluorine atom gains an electron, it
becomes a fluoride ion with an electric charge of -1.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher AuYeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Names and Symbols
Like fluoride, other negative ions usually have name s ending in –ide. Positive ions, on the other hand, are just given the element
name followed by the word ion. For example, when a sodium atom loses an electron, it becomes a positive sodium ion. The charge
of an ion is indicated by a plus (+) or minus sign (-), which is written to the right of and just above the ion’s chemical symbol. For
example, the fluoride ion is represented by the symb ol F, and the sodium ion is represented by the symbol Na. If the charge is
greater than one, a number is used to indicate it. For example, iron (Fe) may lose two electrons to form an ion with a charge of plus- +

6.15.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332109two. This ion would be represented by the symbol Fe. Thi s and some other common ions are listed with their symb ols in the table
below.
Table: Some Common Ions
Cations Anions
Name of Ion Chemical Symbol Name of Ion Chemical Symbol
Calcium ion Ca Chloride Cl
Hydrogen ion H Fluoride F
Iron(II) ion Fe Bromide Br
Iron(III) ion Fe Oxide O
Q: How does the iron(III) ion differ from the iron(II) ion?
A: The iron(III) ion has a charge of +3, so it has one less elec tron than the iron(II) ion, which has a charge of +2.
Q: What is the charge of an oxide ion? How does its number of electrons compare to its number of protons?
A: An oxide ion has a charge of -2. It has two more electrons than protons.
How Ions Form
The process in which an atom becomes an ion is called ionization. It may occur when atoms are exposed to hi gh levels of radiation.
The radiation may give their outer electrons enough energy to escape from the attraction of the positiv e nucleus. However, most
ions form when atoms transfer electrons to or from ot her atoms or molecules. For example, sodium atoms may tr ansfer electrons to
chlorine atoms. This forms positive sodium ions (Na) and negative chloride ions (Cl).
Q: Why do you think atoms lose electrons to, or gain electron s from, other atoms?
A: Atoms form ions by losing or gaining electrons becaus e it makes them more stable and this state takes less e nergy to maintain.
The most stable state for an atom is to have its out ermost energy level filled with the maximum possible number of electrons. In the
case of metals such as lithium, with just one electron i n the outermost energy level, a more stable state can be achieved by losing
that one outer electron. In the case of nonmetals such as fluorine, which has seven electrons in the outer most energy level, a more
stable state can be achieved by gaining one electron an d filling up the outer energy level.2+
2+ + 2+ 3+ 2+ Ionic BondIonic Bond

6.15.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332109Properties of Ions
Ions are highly reactive, especially as gases. They u sually react with ions of opposite charge to form ne utral compounds. For
example, positive sodium ions and negative chloride ions react to form the neutral compound sodium chlor ide, commonly known
as table salt. This occurs because oppositely charged ions attract each other. Ions with the same charge, o n the other hand, repel
each other. Ions are also deflected by a magnetic field, as you saw in the opening image of the northern lights.
Summary
Atoms have equal numbers of positive protons and negative el ectrons, so they are neutral in electric charge.
Atoms can gain or lose electrons and become ions, which are atoms that have a positive or negative charge because they have
unequal numbers of protons and electrons.
The process in which an atom becomes an ion is called ioniz ation. It may occur when atoms are exposed to high level s of
radiation or when atoms transfer electrons to or from oth er atoms.
Ions are reactive, attracted or repulsed by other charge d particles, and deflected by a magnetic field.
Review
1. Why are atoms neutral in electric charge?
2. Define ion.
3. Compare and contrast cations and anions, and give an exa mple of each.
4. Describe how ions form.
5. List properties of ions.
6. The model in the illustration below represents an atom of lithium (Li). If the lithium atom becomes an ion, whic h type of ion
will it be, a cation or an anion? What will be the electri c charge of this ion? What will the ion be named? What symbol will be
used to represent it?
Atoms vs. IonsAtoms vs. Ions

6.15.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332109
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; CK-12 Foundation Employee via CK-12 Foundation)
This page titled 6.15: Periodic Trends- Ionization Energy is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

6.16.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321126.16: Ionic Radii
Figure (Public Domain; the US Department of Agriculture via Commons Wikimedia, Peanuts [commons.wikimedia.org])
How are peanuts sold?
Peanuts can be sold two ways. The bare peanut without the shell (brown inner portion of peanut) can be purchas ed in jars and packages for casual
munching or for cooking. The size of the peanut in th is situation is smaller than the peanut plus shell sinc e the outer portion is missing. If we add the
shell to the peanut, we have a larger size for the c ombination.
Electrons and protons are strongly attracted to one an other. The strength of that attraction and the relati ve numbers of the two particles in a given
atom or ion have a significant influence on the size of that species. When an atom loses one or more elect rons, the resulting ion becomes smaller. If
electrons are added to the atom, the ion becomes larger.
Ionic Radius
The ionic radius for an atom is measured in a crystal lattice, requiring a solid form for the compound. These radii wil l differ somewhat depending
upon the technique used. Usually, x-ray crystallography is employed to determine the radius for an ion.
Figure: Comparison of ion sizes for Groups 1, 2, 13, 1 6, and 17. The atoms are shown in gray. Groups 1, 2, a nd 13 are metals and form
cations, shown in green. Groups 16 and 17 are nonmetal s and form anions, shown in purple. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Zachary Wilson via CK-12
Foundation)
The removal of electrons always results in a cation that is considerably smaller than the parent atom. W hen the valence electron(s) are removed, the
resulting ion has one fewer occupied principal energy level, so the electron cloud that remains is smaller. Ano ther reason is that the remaining
electrons are drawn closer to the nucleus because the pro tons now outnumber the electrons. One other factor is th e number of electrons removed.
The potassium atom has one electron removed to form the co rresponding ion, while calcium loses two electrons.
The addition of electrons always results in an anion th at is larger than the parent atom. When the electrons outnumber the protons, the overall
attractive force that the protons have for the elect rons is decreased. The electron cloud also spreads out because more electrons results in greater
electron-electron repulsion. Notice that the group 16 ions are larger than the group 17 ions. The group 16 elements each add two electrons, while the
group 17 elements add one electron per atom, to form th e anions.

6.16.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321120:00
Summary
Ionic radius is determined by measuring the atom in a cry stal lattice.
Removal of electrons results in an ion that is smaller t han the parent element.
Addition of electrons results in an ion that is larger t han the parent atom.
Review
1. How are ionic radii measured?
2. Explain why the radius of the rubidium ion is smaller than the radius of the rubidium atom.
3. Explain why the radius of the tellurium ion is larger than the radius of the tellurium atom.
4. Why is the oxygen anion larger than the fluoride an ion?
5. Why is the sodium cation larger than the magnesium c ation?
This page titled 6.16: Ionic Radii is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited
to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
6.20: Periodic Trends - Ionic Radii by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

6.17.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321146.17: Metallic and Nonmetallic Character
Figure: Graph indicating eating habits of American m en from 1971 to 2000. (Public Domain; Recreated by C K-12
Foundation based on data from the CDC via CDC GOV Preview [www.cdc.gov]; Flickr, Venn Diagram [www.flickr.com])
What are we eating as a nation?
The graph above indicates some trends in the U.S. diet o ver a thirty-year period. By observing the direction our eating habits are
going, steps can be taken to help prevent bad eating habits and decrease problems such as high blood pressure and h eart attacks.
Development of the periodic table has helped organiz e chemical information in many ways. We can now see t rends among
properties of different atoms and make predictions abou t the behavior of specific materials.
Metallic and Nonmetallic Character
Metallic character refers to the level of reactivity of a me tal. Metals tend to lose electrons in chemical reacti ons, as indicated by
their low ionization energies. Within a compound, me tal atoms have relatively low attraction for electro ns, as indicated by their low
electronegativities. By following the trend summary in the figure below, you can see that the most reactive metals would reside in
the lower left portion of the periodic table. The mos t reactive metal is cesium, which is not found in na ture as a free element. It
reacts explosively with water and will ignite spontaneo usly in air. Francium is below cesium in the alkali me tal group, but is so rare
that most of its properties have never been observed.
Figure: Trends in behaviors of elements. (Public Domain; User:Mirek2/Wikimedia Commons via Commons Wikimedia,
Periodic Trends [commons.wikimedia.org])
Reactivity of metals is based on processes such as the formation of halide compounds with halogens, and how easily the element
displaces hydrogen from dilute acids.
The metallic character increases as you go down a gr oup. Since the ionization energy decreases going down a group (or increases
going up a group), the increased ability for metals lower in a group to lose electrons makes them more reactive. In addition, the
atomic radius increases going down a group, placing the outer electrons further away from the nucleus and making that electron
less attracted by the nucleus.

6.17.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332114Nonmetals tend to gain electrons in chemical reactio ns, and have a high attraction for electrons within a c ompound. The most
reactive nonmetals reside in the upper right portion of the periodic table. Since the noble gases are a special group because of their
lack of reactivity, the element fluorine is the most reactive nonmetal. It is not found in nature as a fr ee element. Fluorine gas reacts
explosively with many other elements and compounds, and is considered to be one of the most dangerous known substances.
Note that there is no clear division between metallic and non-metallic character. As we move across the periodic table, there is an
increasing tendency to accept electrons (nonmetallic) and a decrease in the possibility that an atom will give up one or more
electrons.
Summary
Metallic character refers to the level of reactivity of a metal.
Non-metallic character relates to the tendency to accept electrons during chemical reactions.
Metallic tendency increases going down a group.
Non-metallic tendency increases going from left to right across the periodic table.
Review
1. Define “metallic character.”
2. Define “non-metallic character.”
3. Describe the trend in metallic character going down a group.
4. Describe the trend in non-metallic character going ac ross the periodic table.
5. Why does the metallic character increase as you go down a group?
This page titled 6.17: Metallic and Nonmetallic Character is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.22: Periodic Trends - Metallic and Nonmetallic Charact er by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Chemistry T utorial 2.02c Metallic and NChemistry T utorial 2.02c Metallic and N

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Chemical Nomenclature
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) is an international federation of organizations that represents
chemists in individual countries. IUPAC is best known for its works standardizing nomenclature in chemistry and other fields of
science.
7.1: Molecular Formula
7.2: Empirical Formula
7.3: Cations
7.4: Anions
7.5: Transition Metal Ions
7.6: Naming Binary Ionic Compounds
7.7: Stock System Naming
7.8: Formulas for Binary Ionic Compounds
7.9: Polyatomic Ions
7.10: Names and Formulas of Ternary Ionic Compounds
7.11: Naming Binary Molecular Compounds
7.12: Naming Acids
7.13: Names and Formulas of Bases
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 7: Chemical Nomenclature is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321167.1: Molecular Formula
Figure (Public Domain; J. S. Bach via Commons Wikimedia, Bach cello harmony [commons.wikimedia.org])
Why are music notes a unique "language"?
There are many "universal languages" in the world. Music ians of every culture recognize music embodied in a series of notes on a
staff.
This passage from a Bach cello suite could be played b y any trained musician from any country, because the re is an agreement as to
what the symbols on the page mean. In the same way, molecul es are represented using symbols that all chemists agree upo n.
Molecular Formula
A molecule is comprised of two or more atoms that have been ch emically combined. A molecular formula is a chemical formula
of a molecular compound that shows the kinds and numbe rs of atoms present in a molecule of the compound. Am monia is a
compound of nitrogen and hydrogen as shown below:
Figure: The molecular formula for ammonia. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Note from the example that there are some standard r ules to follow in writing molecular formulas. The arran gements of the
elements depend on the particular structure, so we wil l not concern ourselves with that point right now. The number of atoms of
each kind is indicated by a subscript following the atom. If there is only one atom, no number is written. If there is more than one
atom of a specific kind, the number is written as a s ubscript following the atom. We would not write for ammo nia, because
that would mean that there are three nitrogen atoms and one hydrogen atom in the molecule, which is incorrect.
The molecular formula does not tell us anything abo ut the shape of the molecule or where the different atoms are. The molecular
formula for sucrose (table sugar) is. This simply te lls us the number of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atom s in the
molecule. There is nothing said about where the indiv idual atoms are located. We need a much more complica ted formula (shown
below) to communicate that information.
Figure: The molecular structure of sucrose,. (Public D omain; User:Calvero/Wikimedia Commons via Commons
Wikimedia, Sucrose [commons.wikimedia.org])

7.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332116Summary
A molecular formula tells us which atoms and how many of e ach type of atom are present in a molecule.
If only one atom of a specific type is present, no subsc ript is used.
For atoms that have two or more of a specific type of atom pr esent, a subscript is written after the symbol for that at om.
Molecular formulas do not indicate how the atoms are arran ged in a molecule.
Review
1. What does a molecular formula tell us?
2. What does a molecular formula not tell us?
3. What do the subscripts mean in a molecular formula?
4. If you wrote C H O C H O as the molecular formula for sucro se, would that be correct? Explain your answer.
5. Sometimes the formula for acetic acid is written CH COOH. Is t his a true molecular formula?
This page titled 7.1: Molecular Formula is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.1: Molecular Formula by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Covalent Bonds: How to draw the structCovalent Bonds: How to draw the struct
6 11 5 6 11 6

7.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321177.2: Empirical Formula
Figure (Public Domain; Madame Lavoisier via Wikipedia)
What might the scientists in the picture be discussing?
When the French scientist Antoine Lavoisier conducted h is experiments, he did not know what the products of e ach reaction would
be. He had to isolate the material (whether he was heat ing mercury or measuring gases from breathing) and t hen study its elemental
composition before he could understand the processes tha t were occurring.
Discovering that a new compound exists is the start of a long research project. In order to make this new compound in the lab, we
need to know a lot about its structure. Often, the plac e to start is to determine the elements in the mater ial. Then, we can find out
the relative amounts of each element to continue our eva luation of this new material.
Empirical Formula
An empirical formula is a formula that shows the elements in a compound i n their lowest whole-number ratio. Glucose is an
important simple sugar that cells use as their prima ry source of energy. Its molecular formula is. Since each of the
subscripts is divisible by 6, the empirical formula fo r glucose is. When chemists analyze an unknown comp ound, often the
first step is to determine its empirical formula. T here are a great many compounds whose molecular and e mpirical formulas are the
same. If the molecular formula cannot be simplified into a smaller whole-number ratio, as in the case of or, then the
empirical formula is also the molecular formula.
How do we determine an empirical formula for a compoun d? Consider a compound composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
We can analyze the relative amounts of each element in the compound. When we get a percent figure for ea ch element, we now
know how many grams of each are in 100 grams of the or iginal material. This allows us to determine the numb er of moles for each
element. The ratios can then be reduced to small whole numbers to give the empirical formula. If we wanted a molecular formula,
we would need to determine the molecular weight of the comp ound.
Empirical and Molecular FormulasEmpirical and Molecular Formulas

7.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332117Summary
The empirical formula gives the lowest whole-number ratio of elements in a compound.
The empirical formula does not show the actual number o f atoms.
Review
1. Define “empirical formula.”
2. Why is C H O not considered to be an empirical formula f or glucose?
3. Can the empirical formula for a compound be the same a s the molecular formula?
4. What do we need to know in order to determine a molecular fo rmula from an empirical formula?
5. Give three examples of compounds whose empirical formulas are the same as their molecular formulas.
This page titled 7.2: Empirical Formula is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.2: Empirical Formula by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Writing Empirical Formula Practice ProblWriting Empirical Formula Practice Probl
6 12 6

7.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321187.3: Cations
Figure (Public Domain; User:Gold Guru/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
Have you ever gone digging for gold?
When the prospectors during the California Gold Rush (1848-1855) searched for gold nuggets in the earth, they were able to find
the nuggets because gold is an unreactive material that exists in its elemental state in many places. Not ev eryone was fortunate
enough to find significantly large gold nuggets, but a number of miners did become very wealthy (of course, a large number of
others went back home broke).
Many of the elements we know about do not exist in the ir native form. They are so reactive that they are f ound only in compounds.
These non-elemental forms are known as ions. Their prop erties are very different from those of the element s they come from. The
term comes from a Greek word meaning "move" and was firs t coined by Michael Faraday, who studied the movement o f materials
in an electrical field.
Cations
Figure: Sodium loses an electron to become a cation. (CK-12 Curriculum Materials License; CK-12 Foundation via CK-12
Foundation)
Some elements lose one or more electrons in forming ions. These ions are known as " cations " because they are positively charged
and migrate toward the negative electrode (cathode) in an electrical field. Looking at the periodic t able below, we know that the
group 1 elements are all characterized by having on e electron in the outer orbit; group 2 elements ha ve two electrons in the
outer orbit. These electrons are loosely attached to the atom and can easily be removed, leaving more pro tons in the atom than there
are electrons, so that the resulting ion has a positi ve charge. Cations can also be formed from electron loss to many of the transition
elements.

7.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332118
Figure: Periodic Table of Elements, notated with grou p numbers. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12)
The cations are designated by the symbol for the pa rent element and a plus charge as a superscript afte r the element symbol—the
potassium cation would be indicated as. Note that the charge is placed after the symbol and not before it. The potassium ion is
monovalent, meaning that it has lost one electron and has a charge. The symbol for the magnesium cation would be o r
to indicate that it has lost two electrons and has a charge, so the magnesium cation would be referred to as a divalent
cation.
The cations are simply named as the parent element. T he sodium cation is still called "sodium". Often, the charge would be
attached for clarity, so the sodium cation might be ref erred to as "sodium one plus".
IONS - CA TION & ANION [Aboody TV] CIONS - CA TION & ANION [Aboody TV] C
Chemistry Revision - Ions (Cation, AnionChemistry Revision - Ions (Cation, Anion

7.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332118Applications of Cations
Cations play important roles in our daily lives. Sodiu m, potassium, and magnesium ions are essential for such processes as blood
pressure regulation and muscle contraction. Calcium i ons are an important part of bone structure. Sodium i ons can be used in water
softeners to remove other harmful elements. We put sodiu m chloride (table salt) on our food and use it as a preservat ive.
Summary
Cations are formed by the loss of one or two electrons from an element.
Groups 1 and 2 elements form cations.
Cations are named according to the parent element.
Cation charges are indicated with a superscript following th e chemical symbol.
Review
1. What is a cation?
2. Write the symbol for the barium cation.
3. Write the symbol for the cesium cation.
4. List three ways cations are useful.
This page titled 7.3: Cations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
7.3: Cations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

7.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321197.4: Anions
Figure (Public Domain; Shane Anderson/NOAA via Commons Wikimedia, Kelp 300 [commons.wikimedia.org])
What does the amount of salt in seaweed tell us?
Before iodized salt was developed, some people exper ienced a number of developmental difficulties, inclu ding problems with
thyroid gland function and intellectual disabilitie s. In the 1920s, we learned that these conditions coul d usually be treated easily
with the addition of iodide anion to the diet. One easy way to increase iodide intake was to add the anion t o table salt. This simple
step greatly enhanced health and development. Large amounts of iodide ion are also found in seaweed such as kelp (see picture
above) and saltwater fish.
When a metal loses an electron, energy is needed to remove that electron. The other part of this proces s involves the addition of the
electron to another element. The electron adds to th e outer shell of the new element. Just as the loss of the electron from the metal
produces a full shell, when the electron or electrons are added to the new element, it also results in a full shel l.
Anions
Anions are negative ions that are formed when a nonmetal atom gains one or more electrons. Anions are so name d because they
are attracted to the anode (positive field) in an electrical field. Atoms typica lly gain electrons so that they will have the electro n
configuration of a noble gas. All the elements in Gro up 17 have seven valence electrons due to the outer configuration.
Therefore, each of these elements would gain one elect ron and become an anion with a charge. Likewise, Group 16 elements
form ions with a charge, and the Group 15 nonmetals form ions with a charge.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Naming anions is slightly different than naming cati ons. The ending of the element's name is dropped and replaced with the -ide
suffix. For example, is the fluoride ion, while is the oxide ion. As is the case with cations, the charge on t he anion is
indicated by a superscript following the symbol. Common a nions are listed in the table below:
Table

7.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332119Anion Name Symbol and Charge
fluoride
chloride
bromide
iodide
oxide
sulfide
nitride
Uses for Anions
Fluoride ion is widely used in water supplies to help p revent tooth decay. Chloride is an important compone nt in ion balance in
blood. Iodide ion is needed by the thyroid gland to make t he hormone thyroxine.
Summary
Anions are formed by the addition of one or more electr ons to the outer shell of an atom.
Group 17 elements add one electron to the outer shell, group 16 elements add two electrons, and group 15 elements add t hree
electrons.
Anions are named by dropping the ending of the element 's name and adding -ide.
IONS - CA TION & ANION [Aboody TV] CIONS - CA TION & ANION [Aboody TV] C
Chemistry Revision - Ions (Cation, AnionChemistry Revision - Ions (Cation, Anion

7.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332119Review
1. What is an anion?
2. How are anions formed?
3. Why do anions form?
4. How are anions named?
5. List three examples of anions with names, charges, and che mical symbols.
6. List three ways anions are used.
This page titled 7.4: Anions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
7.4: Anions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

7.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321207.5: Transition Metal Ions
Figure (Public Domain; the US Mint via Commons Wikimedia, Platinium eagle 101 [commons.wikimedia.org])
What kind of coin is this?
Most of us are familiar with the common coins: penny, n ickel, dime, quarter. In some areas (such as Las Vega s), you might see
large amounts of silver dollars (these get a little heavy in your pocket). But most of us have probabl y never seen a platinum eagle—
an eagle-depicting coin that is held primarily by c ollectors. If you were to take a one-ounce platinum e agle into a store to buy one
hundred dollars worth of items, the store owner will mo st likely not believe you when you claim that the coi n is worth one hundred
dollars. It would also be awkward and annoying if you l ost one of these coins out of your pocket. Platinum is just one of several
transition metals that is worth a lot of money (gold is anot her one).
The group 1 and 2 elements form cations through a si mple process that involves the loss of one or more ou ter shell electrons. These
electrons come from the orbital and are removed very r eadily.
Transition Metal Ions
Most transition metals differ from the metals of Groups 1, 2, and 13 in that they are capable of forming more than one cation wi th
different ionic charges. As an example, iron commonly f orms two different ions. It can sometimes lose two ele ctrons to form the
ion, while at other times it loses three electrons to form the ion. Tin and lead, though members of the bl ock rather than
the block, also are capable of forming multiple ions.
Figure: (Public Domain; Cepheus, modified by CK-12 Fo undation via Commons Wikimedia, Periodic Table
[commons.wikimedia.org])
Ionic formation for transition metals is complicated by the fact that these elements have unfilled inne r shells. Although the next
higher orbitals are actually at a lower energy leve l than the level, these electrons are the ones tha t are removed during
ionization.
The table below lists the names and formulas of some of th e common transition metal ions:

7.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332120Common Transition Metal Ions
Table: Common Transition Metal Ions
copper (I), cadmium, chromium (III), lead (IV),
gold (I), chromium (II), cobalt (III), tin (IV),
mercury (I), cobalt (II), gold (III),
silver, copper (II), iron (III),
iron (II),
lead (II),
manganese (II),
mercury (II),
nickel (II),
platinum (II),
tin (II),
zinc,
Uses for Transition Metals
Because there are so many metals in this group, there are a wide variety of uses. Many of the metals are use d in electronics, while
others (such as gold and silver) are used in monetary systems. Iron is a versatile structural material. Cobalt, nickel, platinum, and
other metals are employed as catalysts in a number of che mical reactions. Zinc is a significant component of bat teries.
Summary
Transition metals have unfilled inner electron shells.
Ions form primarily through loss of electrons.
Many transition metals can form more than one ion.
Transition metals have a wide variety of applications.
naming ionic compounds w ith transitionnaming ionic compounds w ith transition

7.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332120Review
1. What is unique about the electron configurations of tr ansition metals?
2. Which electrons of transition metal elements are most l ikely to be lost during ion formation?
3. How many ions can iron form?
4. Which transition metal forms only one ion?
5. List several uses for transition metals.
This page titled 7.5: Transition Metal Ions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.5: Transition Metal Ions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

7.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321217.6: Naming Binary Ionic Compounds
Figure (Public Domain; Carl Gustav Calwer, Gustav Jäger, Emil Hochdanz via Wikipedia)
Do you know the proper name for this insect?
Proper naming (or nomenclature) is important for identification purposes. Medicine n ames must be precise so that the correct drug
is given—one that will help the patient and not harm them. Biological classification of species requires accurate naming for proper
categorization. Insects are categorized by genus and species, so they are uniquely identified. Names must be correct for the tracing
of family trees in genealogical studies. Compounds used in chemical reactions must be correctly specified i n order for the reaction
to occur.
Binary Ionic Compounds
A binary ionic compound is a compound composed of a monatomic metal cation and a monatomic nonmetal anion.
Naming Binary Ionic Compounds
When examining the formula of a compound in order t o name it, you must first decide what kind of compoun d it is. For a binary
ionic compound, a metal will always be the first eleme nt in the formula, while a nonmetal will always be the second. The metal
cation is named first, followed by the nonmetal anion. Subscripts in the formula do not affect the name. T he table below shows
three examples.
Table: Naming Binary Ionic Compounds
Formula Name
potassium fluoride
sodium nitride
calcium phosphide
Notice that in each of the formulas above, the overal l charge of the compound is zero. Potassium ion is, wh ile fluoride ion is
. Since the magnitude of the charges is equal, the fo rmula contains one of each ion. This would also be t he case for a compound
such as, in which the ions are and. For sodium nit ride, the sodium ion is, while the nitride ion is. In order to
make a neutral compound, three of the sodium ions ar e required in order to balance out the single nitri de ion. So the is
given a subscript of 3. For calcium phosphide, the calc ium ion is, while the phosphide ion is. The least com mon multiple
of 2 and 3 is 6. To make the compound neutral, three calcium ions have a total charge of, while two phosp hide ions have a total
charge of. The is given a subscript of 3, while the is given a subscript of 2.

7.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332121Summary
A binary ionic compound is a compound composed of a mon atomic metal cation and a monatomic nonmetal anion.
The metal part of the compound is named as the element.
The nonmetallic part of the compound is named by dropp ing the end of the element and adding -ide.
For binary compounds, it is not necessary to indicate t he number of ions in the compound.
Review
1. What is a binary compound?
2. Which of the following is not a binary compound?
a. NaCl
b. KH2PO4
c. KBr
3. Name the following compounds:
a. NaBr
b. MgCl2
c. LiI
d. CaO
e. CuBr2
f. FeO
This page titled 7.6: Naming Binary Ionic Compounds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.7: Naming Binary Ionic Compounds by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Chemistry 5.2 Naming Ionic CompoundsChemistry 5.2 Naming Ionic Compounds

7.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321227.7: Stock System Naming
Figure (Public Domain; XA VeRY via Wikipedia)
How is an mp3 player designed?
In describing many technological items, it's not eno ugh to simply say what brand or model we have. We talk about details such as
how much horsepower is “under the hood” for a car or h ow fast the chip is for our computer. Even a simple de vice like an mp3
player has more than one size. We can get an 8 MB player, or a 16 MB player. Designation of the item often is incomplete without
other information as to its capabilities. Descriptive nomenclature such as we use in chemistry provides suc h information for
compounds.
Transition metals have more than one possibility for ion formation. In order to name these compounds corre ctly, we need to be able
to indicate which ion is involved in any given compound.
Naming Compounds Using the Stock System
Naming compounds that involve transition metal catio ns necessitates use of the Stock system. Consider the binary ionic compound
. To simply name this compound "iron chloride" would be incomplete, because iron is capable of forming two i ons with
different charges. The name of any iron-containing compound must reflect which iron ion is in the compo und. In this case, the
subscript in the formula indicates that there are thr ee chloride ions, each with a charge. Therefore, the ch arge of the single iron
ion must be. The correct name of is iron (III) chl oride, with the cation charge written as the Roman nu meral. Here are
several other examples:
Table
Formula Name
copper (I) oxide
copper (II) oxide
tin (IV) oxide
The first two examples are both oxides of copper (shown in the figure below). The ratio of copper ions to oxid e ions determines the
name. Since the oxide ion is, the charges of the copp er ion must be in the first formula and in the sec ond formula. In the
third formula, there is one tin ion for every two oxi de ions. This means that the tin must carry a charg e, making the name tin
(IV) oxide.
Figure: Copper (I) oxide, a red solid, and copper (I I) oxide, a black solid, are different compounds beca use of the charge of the
copper ion. (Public Domain; Ondřej Mangl via Copper (I) oxide: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cu2O.png; Copper(II)
oxide: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Oxid_m%25C4%2 59B%25C4%258Fnat%25C3%25BD.PNG)

7.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332122Summary
The Stock system allows for the specification of transition me tal ionic charge when naming ionic compounds.
Roman numerals are used to indicate the amount of positiv e charge on the cation.
Review
1. What is the Stock system?
2. For which group of metal ions would we use the Stock system?
3. What does the Roman numeral stand for?
4. Assign a Roman numeral to each of the following cations:
a. Sn
b. Fe
c. Co
d. Pb
This page titled 7.7: Stock System Naming is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.6: The Stock System of Nomenclature by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Stock Naming Sy stem for transition meStock Naming Sy stem for transition me
4+
3+
2+
4+

7.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321237.8: Formulas for Binary Ionic Compounds
Figure (Public Domain; Winifred Kenna via Commons Wikimedia, Gregg shorthand A Christmas Carol
[commons.wikimedia.org])
How does shorthand work?
Shorthand was a very popular way of recording speech, esp ecially in dictating letters and in court testimony. Instead of trying to
write out all the words, the person taking the dictatio n would use a set of symbols that represented syllables or words. The pages
above show a shorthand version of “A Christmas Carol” written by Charles Dickens. Unless you know shorthand, the passage is
meaningless. But knowing shorthand allows you to read t his classic story. Different professions also use a type of shorthand in
communication to save time. Chemists use chemical sy mbols in combination to indicate specific compounds. T here are two
advantages to this approach:
1. The compound under discussion is clearly described so that there can be no confusion about its identity.
2. Chemical symbols represent a universal language that a ll chemists can understand, no matter what their native la nguage is.
Writing Formulas for Binary Ionic Compounds
If you know the name of a binary ionic compound, you can write its chemical formula. Start by writing the metal ion with its
charge, followed by the nonmetal ion with its charge. Because the overall compound must be electrically ne utral, decide how many
of each ion is needed in order for the positive and negative charge to cancel each other out. Consider the compound aluminum
nitride. The ions are:
Since the ions have charges that are equal in magnitud e, one of each will be the lowest ratio of ions in the formula. The formula for
aluminum nitride is.
The ions for the compound lithium oxide are:
In this case, two lithium ions are required to balance o ut the charge of one oxide ion. The formula of lithium oxide is.
An alternative way to write a correct formula for an i onic compound is to use the crisscross method. In this method, the numerical
value of each of the ion charges is crossed over to become the subscript of the other ion. Signs of the ch arges are dropped. Shown
below is the crisscross method for aluminum oxide.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The red arrows indicate that the 3 from the charge wi ll cross over to become the subscript of the. The 2 f rom the charge
will cross over to become the subscript of the. The f ormula for aluminum oxide is.
Be aware that ionic compounds are empirical formulas and so must be written as the lowest ratio of the ion s. In the case of
aluminum nitride, the crisscross method would yield a formula of, which is not correct. It must be reduced to. Following
the crisscross method to write the formula for lead (IV) o xide would involve the following steps:

7.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332123
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The crisscross first yields for the formula, but that m ust be reduced to the lower ratio, and is the correct for mula.
Summary
Formulas for binary compounds begin with the metal followed b y the nonmetal.
Positive and negative charges must cancel each other out.
Ionic compound formulas are written using the lowest rat io of ions.
Review
1. Write formulas for the binary ionic compounds formed b etween the following pairs of elements:
a. cesium and fluorine
b. calcium and sulfur
c. aluminum and chlorine
d. zinc and nitrogen
Writing Formulas for Ionic CompoundsWriting Formulas for Ionic Compounds
Formulas Lesson 1: Writing Formulas FFormulas Lesson 1: Writing Formulas F

7.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321232. Write the formula and give the name for the compound f ormed by the following ions:
a. Fe and O
b. Ni and S
c. Au and Cl
d. Sn and I
3. Give names for the following compounds:
a. Ag S
b. PdO
c. PtCl
d. V O
This page titled 7.8: Formulas for Binary Ionic Compounds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.8: Formulas for Binary Ionic Compounds by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.3+ 22+ 2+ 4+ 2
2 5

7.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321247.9: Polyatomic Ions
Shakespeare wrote, "A rose by any other name would smel l as sweet" as part of the romantic balcony scene be tween Romeo and
Juliet in the famous play. The two families were bitt er rivals, but Juliet meant this statement to mean th at she loved Romeo no
matter what his name was. Some names are simple—we know Romeo mainly as Romeo. Most of us have a first name, m iddle
name (often not used), and last name. In some cultur es, names will be much more complex. The full name of t he famous 20
century artist Pablo Picasso is Pablo Diego José Francisco de Paula Juan Neponuceno María de los Remedios Cipria no de la
Santísima Trinidad Martyr Patricio Clito Ruíz y Picasso.
Many materials exist as simply binary compounds comp osed of a metal cation and a nonmetal anion, with ea ch ion consisting of
only one type of atom. Other combinations of atoms als o exist, either as larger ionic complexes or complete molecules. Some of the
most useful materials we work with contain polyatomic ions.
Polyatomic Ions
A polyatomic ion is an ion composed of more than one atom. The amm onium ion consists of one nitrogen atom and four hy drogen
atoms. Together, they comprise a single ion with a ch arge and a formula of. The carbonate ion consists o f one carbon
atom and three oxygen atoms, and carries an overall ch arge of. The formula of the carbonate ion is. The atoms of a
polyatomic ion are tightly bonded together, and so the enti re ion behaves as a single unit. The figures below show sev eral models.
Figure: (Top) The ammonium ion is a nitrogen atom (blue) b onded to four hydrogen atoms (white). (Middle) The
hydroxide ion is an oxygen atom (red) bonded to a h ydrogen atom. (Bottom) The carbonate ion is a carbon atom
(black) bonded to three oxygen atoms.
The table below lists a number of polyatomic ions by name and by formula. The heading for each column i ndicates the charge on
the polyatomic ions in that group. Note that the vast maj ority of the ions listed are anions—there are very few p olyatomic cations.
Table: Common Polyatomic Ions

7.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332124acetate, carbonate, arsenate, ammonium, dimercury,
bromate, chromate, phosphite,
chlorate, dichromate, phosphate,
chlorite, hydrogen phosphate,
cyanide, oxalate,
dihydrogen phosphate,peroxide,
bicarbonate, silicate,
hydrogen sulfate, sulfate,
hydrogen sulfide, sulfite,
hydroxide,
hypochlorite,
nitrate,
nitrite,
perchlorate,
permanganate,
The vast majority of polyatomic ions are anions, ma ny of which end in -ate or -ite. Notice that in some cases, such as nitrate
and nitrite, there are multiple anions that consi st of the same two elements. In these cases, the differ ence between
the ions is in the number of oxygen atoms present, whi le the overall charge is the same. As a class, these ar e called oxoanions.
When there are two oxoanions for a particular elemen t, the one with the greater number of oxygen atoms get s the -ate suffix, while
the one with the fewer number of oxygen atoms gets the -ite suffix. The four oxoanions of chlorine are as follows:
, hypochlorite
, chlorite
, chlorate
, perchlorate
In cases such as this, the ion with one more oxygen atom than the -ate anion is given a per- prefix. The ion with one fewer oxygen
atom than the -ite anion is given a hypo- prefix.
Summary
Polyatomic ions contain more than one type of atom in the ion.
The majority of polyatomic ions are anions that are nam ed ending in -ate or -ite.
Some anions have multiple forms and are named accordingly.
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 7.9: Polyatomic Ions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

7.9.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321247.9: Polyatomic Ions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

7.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321257.10: Names and Formulas of Ternary Ionic Compounds
Figure (Public Domain; Jon Sullivan via Commons Wikimedia, Pepperoni Pizza [commons.wikimedia.org])
How many varieties of pizza can you think of?
Many people enjoy eating pizza. When someone orders a pizza (either by phone, online, or in a restaurant), they don't just order
"pizza". Even the simplest "binary" pizza will have a topping and cheese—maybe pepperoni, maybe something else. However,
many pizzas quickly become more complex. One person m ay want pepperoni and sausage, another may wish to ord er Canadian
bacon and pineapple; then you have the folks that c an't decide, so they order half-this and half-that. The combinations may be more
complex, but the same basic ideas about pizza are vali d.
Ternary Ionic Compounds
Not all ionic compounds are composed of only monatomic ions. A ternary ionic compound is an ionic compound composed of
three elements. In a typical ternary ionic compound, t here is still one type of cation and one type of an ion involved. The cation, the
anion, or both, are polyatomic ions.
Naming Ternary Ionic Compounds
The process of naming ternary ionic compounds is the same as naming binary ionic compounds. The cation i s named first, followed
by the anion. Some examples are shown in the table belo w:
Table: Examples of Ternary Ionic Compounds
Formula Name
sodium nitrate
ammonium chloride
iron (III) hydroxide
When more than one polyatomic ion is present in a co mpound, the formula of the ion is placed in parenthe ses with a subscript
outside of the parentheses that indicates how many o f those ions are in the compound. In the last examp le above, there is one
cation and three anions.
Writing Formulas for Ternary Ionic Compounds
Writing a formula for a ternary ionic compound also involves the same steps as for a binary ionic compound. Write the symbol and
charge of the cation followed by the symbol and char ge of the anion. Use the crisscross method to ensure that the final formula is
neutral. Calcium nitrate is composed of a calcium cation and a nitrate anion.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The charge is balanced by the presence of two nitrat e ions and one calcium ion. Parentheses are used aro und the nitrate ion because
more than one of the polyatomic ion is needed. If o nly one polyatomic ion is in a formula, parentheses a re not used. As an example,

7.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332125the formula for calcium carbonate is. The carbonate ion carries a charge and so exactly balances the c harge of the
calcium ion.
There are two polyatomic ions that produce unusual f ormulas. The ion is called either the dimercury ion or, preferably, the
mercury (I) ion. When bonded with an anion with a ch arge, such as chloride, the formula is. Because the ca tion consists
of two atoms bonded together, this formula is not reduced to. Likewise, the peroxide ion,, is also a unit that must stay
together in its formulas. For example, the formula for potass ium peroxide is.
Summary
Ternary compounds are composed of three or more elements.
Ternary compounds are named by stating the cation first, followed by the anion.
Positive and negative charges must balance.
Review
1. What is a ternary compound?
2. What is the basic rule for naming ternary compounds?
3. Write the formulas for the following compounds:
a. mercury(II) nitrate
b. ammonium phosphate
c. calcium silicate
d. lead(II) chromate
4. Name the following compounds:
a. KClO
b. Rb SO
c. Cd(NO)
d. NaCN
This page titled 7.10: Names and Formulas of Ternary Ionic Compounds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.10: Ternary Ionic Compounds: Naming and Formulas by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.3
2 4
3 2

7.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321267.11: Naming Binary Molecular Compounds
Figure (Public Domain; Anonymous via Wikipedia)
Why do so many relatives in royalty share the same name?
Some families name a son (usually the first born) aft er his father. So, it is somewhat common to meet a John Smith, Jr. named after
John Smith the father. Certain families may name a gr andson John Smith III. Countries with long histories of royalty take the
naming even further. One line of kings named Henry goe s up to Henry the Eighth (not the nicest guy in the world—he had six
wives and two of them met untimely ends). The use of numbering for names adds clarity to a system—it's easi ly discernible which
Henry is being spoken of.
Inorganic chemical compounds can be broadly classifi ed into two groups: ionic compounds and molecular co mpounds. The
structure of all ionic compounds is an extended thre e-dimensional array of alternating positive and neg ative ions. Since ionic
compounds do not take the form of individual molecul es, they are represented by empirical formulas. Now we will begin to
examine the formulas and nomenclature of molecular comp ounds.
Molecular Compounds
Molecular compounds are inorganic compounds that take the form of discrete molecules. Examples include such familiar
substances as water and carbon dioxide. These compoun ds are very different from ionic compounds like sodi um
chloride. Ionic compounds are formed when metal ato ms lose one or more of their electrons to nonmetal at oms. The
resulting cations and anions are electrostatically attra cted to each other.
So what holds the atoms of a molecule together? Rathe r than forming ions, the atoms of a molecule share t heir valence electrons in
such a way that a bond forms between pairs of atoms. In a carbon dioxide m olecule, there are two of these bonds, each occurrin g
between the carbon atom and one of the two oxygen atoms.
Figure: Carbon dioxide molecules consist of a central carbon atom bonded to two oxygen atoms. (Public Domai n; Ben Mills
(Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Wikipedia)
Larger molecules can have many, many bonds that serv e to keep the molecule together. In a large sample of a given molecular
compound, all of the individual molecules are identical.
Naming Binary Molecular Compounds
Recall that a molecular formula shows the number of a toms of each element that a molecule contains. A mol ecule of water contains
two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom, so its formul a is. A molecule of octane, which is a component of gasoline, contains
8 atoms of carbon and 18 atoms of hydrogen. The molecular formula of octane is.

7.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332126
Figure: Nitrogen dioxide is a reddish-brown toxic ga s that is a prominent air pollutant produced by inter nal
combustion engines. (Public Domain; User:Greenhorn1/Wik imedia Commons via Wikipedia)
A binary molecular compound is a molecular compound that is composed of two elements. The elements that combine to form
binary molecular compounds are both nonmetal atoms. This contrasts with ionic compounds, which are formed f rom a metal ion
and a nonmetal ion. Therefore, binary molecular comp ounds are different because ionic charges cannot be used to name them or to
write their formulas. Another difference is that two n onmetal atoms will frequently combine with one another in a variety of ratios.
Consider the elements nitrogen and oxygen. They combi ne to make several compounds including,, and. Th ey cannot
all be called nitrogen oxide. How would someone know whi ch one you were talking about? Each of the three com pounds has very
different properties and reactivities. A system to di stinguish between compounds such as these is necessary.
Prefixes are used in the names of binary molecular com pounds to identify the number of atoms of each elem ent. The table below
shows the prefixes up to ten.
Table: Numerical Prefixes
Number of Atoms Prefix
1 mono2 di3 tri4 tetra5 penta6 hexa7 hepta8 octa9 nona10 decaThe rules for using the prefix system of nomenclature of binary compounds can be summarized as follows:
1. Generally, the less electronegative element is written first in the formula, though there are a few exceptions. Ca rbon is always
first in a formula and hydrogen is after nitrogen in a fo rmula such as. The order of common nonmetals in binary com pound
formulas is,,,,,,,,,.
2. When naming, the appropriate prefix is used only if the re are more than one atom of that element in the formula.
3. The second element is named after the first, but with th e ending of the element's name changed to -ide. The appropriate prefix is
always used for the second element.
4. The a or o at the end of a prefix is usually dropped from the name whe n the name of the element begins with a vowel. As an
example, four oxygen atoms are tetroxide instead of tet raoxide.
Some examples of molecular compounds are listed in Table.
Table

7.11.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332126Formula Name
nitrogen monoxide
dinitrogen monoxide
disulfur dichloride
dichlorine heptoxide
Notice that the mono- prefix is not used with the nitrogen in the first com pound, but is used with the oxygen in both of the fir st two
examples. The emphasizes that the formulas for molecu lar compounds are not reduced to their lowest ratios. The o of the
mono- and the a of hepta- are dropped from the name when paired with oxide.
Summary
Molecular compounds are inorganic compounds that take the f orm of discrete molecules.
The atoms of these compounds are held together by cova lent bonds.
Prefixes are used to indicate the number of atoms of an el ement that are in the compound.
Review
1. What are molecular compounds?
2. How do they differ from ionic compounds?
Naming Covalent Molecular CompoundsNaming Covalent Molecular Compounds
Ionic vs. MolecularIonic vs. Molecular

7.11.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321263. What holds the atoms of a molecule together?
4. Are the elements of molecular compounds metals or non-met als?
5. What is the prefix for the number of atoms of an elem ent when there are four atoms of that element in the compo und?
6. What is the prefix for the number of atoms of an elem ent when there are 7 atoms of that element in the compound?
7. Name the following compounds:
a. ClF
b. As O
c. B H
This page titled 7.11: Naming Binary Molecular Compounds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.11: Binary Molecular Compounds: Naming and Formulas by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.3
2 5
4 10

7.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321277.12: Naming Acids
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Fou ndation via CK-12 Foundation)
How is gold tested?
A spot test for gold has been in use for decades. The s ample is first treated with nitric acid. Other metals m ay react or dissolve in this acid, but gold
will not. Then the sample is added to a mixture of ni tric acid and hydrochloric acid. Gold will only dissolve in this mixture. The term "acid test"
arose from the California gold rush in the late 1840s, when this combination was used to test for the presence of r eal gold. It has since come to mean
"tested and approved" in a number of fields.
Acids
An acid can be defined in several ways. The most straightforward definition is that an acid is a molecular compound th at contains one or more
hydrogen atoms and produces hydrogen ions when dissolve d in water.
Figure: (A) Vinegar comes in a variety of types, but all contain acetic acid. (B) Citrus fruits like grap efruit contain citric and ascorbic acids.
(CC BY 2.0; (A) Becky Cortino; (B) Flickr: isox4 via (A) http://www.flickr.com/photos/mediasavvy/8239231530; (B)
http://www.flickr.com/photos/isox4/5167980026)
This is a different type of compound than the others we have seen so far. Acids are molecular, which means tha t in their pure state they are individual
molecules and do not adopt the extended three-dimensi onal structures of ionic compounds like. However, when t hese molecules are dissolved
in water, the chemical bond between the hydrogen atom and the rest of the molecule breaks, leaving a positive ly-charged hydrogen ion and an anion.
This can be symbolized in a chemical equation:
Since acids produce cations upon dissolving in water, the of an acid is written first in the formula of an i norganic acid. The remainder of the
acid (other than the) is the anion after the acid di ssolves. Organic acids are also an important class of c ompounds, but will not be discussed here. A
binary acid is an acid that consists of hydrogen and one other element. The most common binary acids contain a halog en. An oxoacid is an acid that
consists of hydrogen, oxygen, and a third element. Th e third element is usually a nonmetal.
Naming Acids
Since all acids contain hydrogen, the name of an acid is based on the anion that goes with it. These anions can either be monatomic or polyatomic.
The name of all monatomic ions ends in -ide. The majority of polyatomic ions end in either -ate or -ite, though there are a few exceptions such as the
cyanide ion. It is the suffix of the anion that de termines how the acid is named, as displayed in the rul es and table below.
Table: Naming System for Acids
Anion Suffix Example Name of Acid Example
-ide chloride hydro_____ic acid hydrochloric acid
-ate sulfate ______ic acid sulfuric acid
-ite nitrite ____ous acid nitrous acid
The three different suffixes that are possible for the anions lead to three rules:

7.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321271. When the anion ends in -ide, the acid name begins with the prefix hydro-. The root of the anion name goes in the blank (chlor for chloride),
followed by the suffix -ic. is hydrochloric acid because is the chloride ion. is hydrocyanic acid because is the cyanide ion.
2. When the anion ends in -ate, the name of the acid is the root of the anion followed by the suffix -ic. There is no prefix. is sulfuric acid (not
sulfic) because is the sulfate ion.
3. When the anion ends in -ite, the name of the acid is the root of the anion followed by the suffix -ous. Again, there is no prefix. is nitrous
acid because is the nitrite ion.
Note how the root for a sulfur-containing oxoacid is sulfur- instead of just sulf-. The same is true for a phosphorus-containing oxoacid. The root is
phosphor- instead of simply phosph-.
Many foods and beverages contain citric acid. Vinegar is a dilute solution of acetic acid. Car batteries contain sulfuric acid that helps in the release of
electrons to create electricity.
Writing Formulas for Acids
Like other compounds that we have studied, acids are el ectrically neutral. Therefore, the charge of the anion part of the formula must be exactly
balanced out by the ions. Since ions carry a single positive charge, the number of ions in the formula is equal to the quantity of negative
charge on the anion. Two examples from the table abo ve illustrate this point. The chloride ion carries a charge, so only one is needed in the
formula of the acid. The sulfate ion carries a charge, so two s are needed in the formula of the acid. Anoth er way to write the
correct formula is to utilize the crisscross method, s hown below for sulfuric acid.
Figure: Crisscross approach to writing the formula for sulfuric acid. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
0:00
Summary
Acids are molecular compounds that release hydrogen ions.
A binary acid consists of hydrogen and one other eleme nt.
Oxoacids contain hydrogen, oxygen, and one other eleme nt.
The name of the acid is based on the anion attached to the hydrogen.
Writing formulas for acids follows the same rules as for binary ionic compounds.
Review
1. Define “acid.”
2. What is a binary acid?
3. What is an oxoacid?

7.12.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321274. Name the following acids:
a. H SO
b. HCN
c. HCl
d. H PO
5. Write formulas for the following acids:
a. hydrobromic acid
b. perchloric acid
c. nitrous acid
This page titled 7.12: Naming Acids is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was
edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts pla tform.
7.12: Acids - Naming and Formulas by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.2 4
3 4

7.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321287.13: Names and Formulas of Bases
Figure (Public Domain; Unknown Author via Wikipedia)
What different things are these workers doing to make soap?
Soap making has a long history. Until recently, soap was made using animal fats and lye from wood ashes. The lye served as a base
to break down the fats and help form the soap. Needles s to say, unless the soap was washed to remove the lye, it was very harsh on
the skin. Many families would make their own soap by bo iling the lye and fat in a large kettle over an ope n fire—a long and hot
task.
Bases
A base can be simply defined as an ionic compound that pr oduces hydroxide ions when dissolved in water. One of the most
commonly used bases is sodium hydroxide, illustrated below.
Figure: (A) Sodium hydroxide, a base, is a solid that i s typically produced as small white pellets. (B) The str ucture of sodium
hydroxide is an extended three-dimensional network. T he purple spheres are the sodium ions. The red and whi te spheres are
oxygen and hydrogen atoms, respectively, which are bo nded together to form hydroxide ions. (Public Domai n; (A) Martin
Walker (Wikimedia: Walkerma); (B) Ben Mills (Wikimed ia: Benjah-bmm27) via (A)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:SodiumHydroxide.jpg; (B) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sodium-hydroxi decrystal-3D-vdW.png)
Names and Formulas of Bases
There is no special system for naming bases. Since they a ll contain the anion, names of bases end in hydroxide. The cation is
simply named first. Some examples of names and formulas for b ases are shown in the table below.
Names and Formulas of Bases
Table
Formula Name
sodium hydroxide
calcium hydroxide
ammonium hydroxide
Notice that because bases are ionic compounds, the numbe r of hydroxides in the formula does not affect the n ame. The compound
must be neutral, so the charges of the ions are bal anced just as for other ionic compounds. The sodium io n requires one

7.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332128ion to balance the charge, so the formula is. Calci um requires two ions to balance the charge, so the f ormula is
. Hydroxide ion is a polyatomic ion, and must be in parenthe ses when there is more than one in a formula.
Summary
Bases are ionic compounds that produce hydroxide ions whe n dissolved in water.
The cation is named first followed by " hydroxide."
Review
1. What is a base?
2. What is the charge on the hydroxide anion?
3. Name the following bases:
a. LiOH
b. Mg(OH)
c. Fe(OH)
4. Write the formulas for the following bases:
a. nickel (II) hydroxide
b. aluminum hydroxide
c. silver hydroxide
This page titled 7.13: Names and Formulas of Bases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
7.13: Bases: Naming and Formulas by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.2

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Ionic Bonding
8.1: Electron Dot Diagrams
8.2: Octet Rule
8.3: Cation Formation
8.4: Anion Formation
8.5: Transition Metal Ion Formation
8.6: Ionic Bonding
8.7: Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds
8.8: Metallic Bonding
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 8: Ionic Bonding is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

8.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321308.1: Electron Dot Diagrams
Figure (Public Domain; User:Veatchw/Wikipedia via Commons Wikimedia, Veer vs 34 [commons.wikimedia.org])
How do we show electrons in atoms?
Diagrams contain a lot of useful information in a com pact format. What does the diagram above tell us? Th e football play
diagrammed above describes the lineup of each player on the team and describes how they will move when the ball is snapped.
Diagrams of electrons give similar information about where certain electrons are. We can mark these elect rons and indicate what
happens to them when an element reacts.
Electron Dot Diagrams
Recall that the valence electrons of an atom are the electrons located in the highest occupied principal energy level. Valence
electrons are primarily responsible for the chemical properties of elements. The number of valence elec trons can be easily
determined from the electron configuration. Several exam ples from the second period elements are shown in the tab le below.
Table:
Element Electron Configuration Number of Valence Electrons
lithium 1
beryllium 2
nitrogen 5
neon 8
In each case, valence electrons are those in the sec ond principal energy level. As one proceeds left to ri ght across a period, the
number of valence electrons increases by one. In th e block, Group 1 elements have one valence electron, while Group 2 elements
have two valence electrons. In the block, the number of valence electrons is equal to the group number mi nus ten. Group 13 has
three valence electrons, Group 14 has four, and so o n...up through Group 18 with eight. The eight valence electrons, a full outer
and sublevel, give the noble gases their special stabili ty.
When examining chemical bonding, it is necessary to k eep track of the valence electrons of each atom. Electron dot diagrams are
diagrams in which the valence electrons of an atom a re shown as dots distributed around the element's symbol. A beryllium atom,
with two valence electrons, has the electron dot diagram bel ow:
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Since electrons repel each other, the dots for a giv en atom are distributed evenly around the symbol be fore they are paired. The
table below shows the electron dot diagrams for the entire seco nd period.
Table: Electron Dot Diagrams for the Second Period Elements
Electron Dot Diagrams for the Second Period Elements

8.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332130Group Number Electron Dot Diagram
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12
Foundation)
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12
Foundation)
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12
Foundation)
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12
Foundation)
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12
Foundation)
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12
Foundation)
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12
Foundation)
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12
Foundation)
Electron dot diagrams would be the same for each elem ent in the representative element groups. Most transi tion elements have two
valence electrons, though some that have unusual electr on configurations have only one.

8.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332130Summary
Electron dot diagrams show the valence electrons for an atom.
The dot diagrams are the same for each element in the rep resentative element groups.
Review
1. What are valence electrons primarily responsible for?
2. Calcium would have the same electron dot structure as wh ich element pictured in the table?
3. What is the symbol for an element that would have the same electron dot structure as carbon?
4. Would you expect the group 18 elements to have the sam e electron dot diagram as neon?
This page titled 8.1: Electron Dot Diagrams is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.1: Electron Dot Diagrams by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Electron Dot DiagramsElectron Dot Diagrams

8.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321318.2: Octet Rule
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
How are electrons organized in atoms?
Graduations are exciting events in one's life. The pro cessional, the ceremonies, even the speeches can be ha ndled because this
marks the end of a stage of life and the beginning of another one. The ceremony itself is challenging for those organizing it. There
are just enough seats on the stage for the graduates. How do you avoid getting too many people in a row and not enough in the next
row? Someone is stationed at the end of the row to coun t the students as they enter. Only so many are allowed to go into a row, and
then you begin to fill the next row. Electrons in ato ms behave the same way. There are rules that determine where electrons go in
compounds.
Octet Rule
The noble gases are unreactive because of their ele ctron configurations. The noble gas neon has the ele ctron configuration of
. It has a full outer shell and cannot incorporate any more electrons into the valence shell. The other noble gases have the
same outer shell electron configuration, even though the y have different numbers of inner-shell electrons.
Figure: Electron configuration of neon atom. (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
American chemist Gilbert Lewis (1875-1946) used this obs ervation to explain the types of ions and molecules that are formed by
other elements. He called his explanation the octet rule. The octet rule states that atoms tend to form compo unds in ways that give
them eight valence electrons, and thus the electron configuration of a noble gas. An exception to an oc tet of electrons is in the case
of the first noble gas, helium, which only has two val ence electrons. This primarily affects the element h ydrogen, which forms
stable compounds by achieving two valence electrons. Lithium, an alkali metal with three valence electron s, is also an exception to
the octet rule. Lithium tends to lose one electron to take on the electron configuration of the neares t noble gas, helium, leaving it
with two valence electrons.
There are two ways in which atoms can satisfy the octet r ule. One way is by sharing their valence electrons with other atoms. The
second way is by transferring valence electrons from one atom to another. Atoms of metals tend to lose al l of their valence
electrons, which leaves them with an octet from the next lowest principal energy level. Atoms of nonmetals tend to gain electrons
in order to fill their outermost principal energy level wit h an octet.
Watch the following video to learn how to use the octet rul e to predict the charge of an ion.

8.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332131Summary
Atoms form compounds in ways that give them eight valenc e electrons.
Metals tend to lose electrons to achieve this configur ation.
Nonmetals tend to gain electrons to achieve this configuration.
Review
1. What is the electron configuration of a noble gas?
2. Why is this configuration important?
3. What are the two ways in which atoms can satisfy the octet rule?
4. How do metals change to obey the octet rule?
5. How do nonmetals change to obey the octet rule?
This page titled 8.2: Octet Rule is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.2: Octet Rule by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
110: #2 Ions and the Octet Rule110: #2 Ions and the Octet Rule

8.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321328.3: Cation Formation
Figure (Public Domain; User:Bugman/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
How are cations formed?
In many parts of the country, the water contains high concentrations of minerals that stain clothes, build u p deposits on bathtubs
and water heaters, and create problems with soap foam ing properly. This problem is caused by "hard water". Th e water contains
excessive amounts of cations such as iron and calcium. These ions create a lot of problems in the water. I on exchange resins can
remove these minerals and clean up the water.
Cation Formation
Cations are the positive ions formed by the loss of one or more electrons. The most commonly formed ca tions of the representative
elements are those that involve the loss of all of the valence electrons. Consider the alkali metal sodi um. It has one valence
electron in the third principal energy level. Upon l osing that electron, the sodium ion now has an octet o f electrons from the second
principal energy level. The equation below illustrates this process.
The electron configuration of the sodium ion is now the same as that of the noble gas neon. The term isoelectronic refers to an
atom and an ion of a different atom (or two differen t ions) that have the same electron configuration. T he sodium ion is
isoelectronic with the neon atom. Consider a similar process with magnesium and with aluminum:
In this case, the magnesium atom loses its two valence electrons in order to achieve the same noble gas conf iguration. The
aluminum atom loses its three valence electrons. The i on, the ion, the ion, and the atom are all isoel ectronic.
For representative elements under typical conditions, three electrons are the maximum number that will be lost.
We can also show the loss of valence electron(s) with a n electron dot diagram:

8.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332132Summary
Cations form when an atom loses one or more electrons.
The resulting cation has the electron configuration of t he noble gas atom in the row above it in the periodic table.
Review
1. What is a cation?
2. How many valence electrons does the sodium atom have?
3. Which atom is the sodium ion isoelectronic with?
4. How many electrons does magnesium lose to form the magnesi um ion?
This page titled 8.3: Cation Formation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.3: Cation Formation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Introduction to Ions Part 04 - Formation Introduction to Ions Part 04 - Formation
Cation and Anion Formation - Ionic ComCation and Anion Formation - Ionic Com

8.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321338.4: Anion Formation
Figure: A pressed glass open salt dish made in the early 1830s. (Public Domain; User:Daderot/Wikimedia Commons v ia
Wikipedia)
How do you make chlorine safe to eat?
How do you transform a deadly gas into something you can sprinkle on your eggs and eat for breakfast? Chl orine in its free form is
very dangerous if you breathe the fumes or come in co ntact with the gas. However, in reaction with sodium, sodiu m chloride forms
as the sodium atom gives up an electron to chlorine, which a ccepts the electron to form the chloride anion.
Anions
Anions are the negative ions formed from the gain of one o r more electrons. When nonmetal atoms gain electrons, they often do so
until their outermost principal energy level achieve s an octet. This process is illustrated below for the elements fluorine, oxygen,
and nitrogen:
All of these anions are isoelectronic with each other a nd with neon. They are also isoelectronic with the thre e cations from the
previous section. Under typical conditions, three electro ns are the maximum that will be gained in the formation of a nions.
Outer electron configurations are constant within a gr oup, so this pattern of ion formation repeats itself for Periods 3, 4, and
following (see below).

8.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332133
Figure: Ion charges. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
It is important not to misinterpret the concept of b eing isoelectronic. A sodium ion is very different fr om a neon atom, because the
nuclei of the two contain different numbers of proto ns. One is an essential ion that is a part of table salt, while the other is an
unreactive gas that is a very small part of the atmo sphere. Likewise, sodium ions are very different than m agnesium ions, fluoride
ions, and all the other members of this isoelectronic series.
Figure: Neon gas (A) and sodium chloride crystals (B). Neon atoms and sodium ions are isoelectronic. Neon is a colorless and
unreactive gas that glows a distinctive red-orange col or in a gas discharge tube. Sodium ions are most common ly found in crystals
of sodium chloride—ordinary table salt. (CC BY 2.0; (A) Andy Wright (Flickr: rightee); (B) Kevin
Dooley;User:Bugman/Wikipedia via (A) http://www.flickr.com/photos/rightee/4356950; (B)
http://www.flickr.com/photos/pagedooley/2769134850; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ion_exchange_r esin_beads.jpg)
Introduction to Ions Part 05 - Formation Introduction to Ions Part 05 - Formation

8.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332133Summary
Anions are negative ions formed by accepting electrons.
The outermost principal energy level of an anion is us ually an octet.
Review
1. What is an anion?
2. Write the electronic configurations for the chlorine a tom and the chloride anion.
3. What does isoelectronic mean?
This page titled 8.4: Anion Formation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.4: Anion Formation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Cation and Anion Formation - Ionic ComCation and Anion Formation - Ionic Com

8.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321348.5: Transition Metal Ion Formation
Figure (Public Domain; User:Cepheus/Wikimedia Commons, modified by CK-12 Foundation via Wikipedia)
How do transition metals form ions?
The transition metals are an interesting and challen ging group of elements. They have perplexing patter ns of electron distribution
that do not always follow the electron filling rules. Predicti ng how they will form ions is also not always obvious.
Transition Metal Ions
Transition metals belong to the block, meaning that the sublevel o f electrons is in the process of being filled with up t o ten
electrons. Many transition metals cannot lose enough electrons to attain a noble-gas electron configurati on. In addition, the
majority of transition metals are capable of adopti ng ions with different charges. Iron, which forms either the or ions,
loses electrons as shown below.
According to the Aufbau process, the electrons fill th e sublevel before beginning to fill the sublevel. However, the outermost
electrons are always the first to be removed in the p rocess of forming transition metal cations. Because m ost transition metals
have two valence electrons, the charge of is a very co mmon one for their ions. This is the case for iron above. A half-filled
sublevel is particularly stable, which is the result of an iron atom losing a third electron.
Figure: A. Rust is a complex combination of oxides of iron, among them iron (III) oxide,. B. Iron (II) su lfate,,
has been known since ancient times as green vitriol and was used for centuries in the manufacture of inks. (CC by 2.0; Public
Domain; (A) Paulnasca; (B) Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benj ah-bmm27) via (A)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Rust_screw.jpg; (B) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Iron%2528II%25 29-sulfateheptahydrate-sample.jpg)
Some transition metals that have relatively few electrons may attain a noble-gas electron configuration. Scandium is an example.

8.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332134Others may attain configurations with a full sublevel, such as zinc and copper.
The resulting configuration above, with 18 electrons in the outermost principal energy level, is referre d to as a pseudo noble-gas
electron configuration. It gives particular stability to the and ions.
Summary
Transition metal ion formation is more complex than simple cation formation.
Transition metal ions often involve rearrangements of bot h and electrons.
Review
1. What block do the transition metals fall in?
2. When writing the electron configuration for a transiti on metal, which sublevel () is filled first?
3. When forming transition metal ions, which sublevel () loses electrons first? What is the pseudo noble-gas ele ctron
configuration?
This page titled 8.5: Transition Metal Ion Formation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.5: Transition Metal Ion Formation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
13.2.3 The existence of variable oxidati13.2.3 The existence of variable oxidati
7.3 T ransition Element Ion Formation7.3 T ransition Element Ion Formation

8.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321358.6: Ionic Bonding
Figure (Public Domain; Leon Brooks via Commons Wikimedia, Waneroo Beach [commons.wikimedia.org])
Does the sea really have salt in it?
We can get common table salt from several sources. It can be mined in the solid form in salt mines, or fo und as a solid in deposits.
We can also get salt from the ocean, but it really does not exist as a salt when in solution. The sodium i ons and chloride ions are
dissolved, but not combined into a structure until all the water is removed.
Most of the rocks and minerals that make up the Earth' s crust are composed of positive and negative ions he ld together by ionic
bonding. An ionic compound is an electrically neutral compound consisting of positive and negative ions. Y ou are very familiar
with some ionic compounds, such as sodium chloride. A sodium chloride crystal consists of equal numbers of po sitive
sodium ions and negative chloride ions.
Ionic Bonds
Oppositely charged particles attract each other. This attractive force is often referred to as an electrostatic force. An ionic bond is
the electrostatic force that holds ions together in an ionic compound. The strength of the ionic bond is directly depend ent upon the
quantity of the charges and inversely dependent on t he distance between the charged particles. A cation with a charge will make
a stronger ionic bond than a cation with a charge. A larger ion makes a weaker ionic bond because of the g reater distance
between its electrons and the nucleus of the oppositel y charged ion.
Electron Dot Diagrams
We will use sodium chloride as an example to demonstra te the nature of the ionic bond and how it forms. As you know, sodium is a
metal and loses its one valence electron to become a cation. Chlorine is a nonmetal and gains one electro n in becoming an anion.
Both achieve a noble-gas electron configuration. Howev er, electrons cannot be simply "lost" to nowhere in particular. A more
accurate way to describe what is happening is that a s ingle electron is transferred from the sodium atom t o the chlorine atom, as
shown below.
Ionic BondingIonic Bonding

8.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332135
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; CK-12 Foundation via CK-12 Foundation)
The ionic bond is the attraction of the ion for th e ion. It is conventional to show the cation without dots around the symbol
to emphasize that the original energy level that co ntained the valence electron is now empty. The anion i s now shown with a
complete octet of electrons.
For a compound such as magnesium chloride, it is not q uite as simple. Because magnesium has two valence elec trons, it needs to
lose both to achieve the noble-gas configuration. Theref ore, two chlorine atoms will be needed.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; CK-12 Foundation via CK-12 Foundation)
The final formula for magnesium chloride is.
Summary
An ionic compound contains positive and negative ions.
An ionic bond is electrostatic in nature.
Electron dot diagrams can be used to illustrate electron movements and ion formation.
Review
1. What is an ionic compound?
2. What is an ionic bond?
3. Which cation (Na or Ca) would form a stronger ionic bond wi th Cl?
This page titled 8.6: Ionic Bonding is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.6: Ionic Bonding by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.+ 2+ -

8.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321368.7: Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds
Figure: In nature, the ordered arrangement of ionic solids gives rise to beautiful crystals. (A) Amethyst: a form of quartz,,
whose purple color comes from iron ions. (B) Cinnabar: the primary ore of mercury, is mercury (II) sulfide,. (C) Azurite: a
copper mineral,. (D) Vanadinite: the primary ore o f vanadium,. ((A; (A) Mauro Cateb; (B) Parent
Géry; (C) Parent Géry; (D) User:vassil/Wikimedia Common s via (A) http://www.flickr.com/photos/mauroescritor/6544460363; (B)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cinabre_macl%2 5C3%25A9_%2528Chine%2529_.jpg; (C)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Azurite_cristal lis%25C3%25A9e_%2528Chine%2529_2_.jpg; (D)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Vanadinite_212 07.jpg) CC BY 2.0; (B) Public Domain; (C) Public Domain; (D) Public
Domain)
What produces colored crystals?
The figure above shows just a few examples of the colo r and brilliance of naturally occurring ionic cryst als. The regular and
orderly arrangement of ions in the crystal lattice i s responsible for the various shapes of these crystals, while transition metal ions
give rise to the colors.
Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds
Melting Points
Because of the many simultaneous attractions between cations and anions that occur, ionic crystal lattices are very strong. The
process of melting an ionic compound requires the ad dition of large amounts of energy in order to break all of the ionic bonds in
the crystal. For example, sodium chloride has a melting te mperature of about.
Shattering
Ionic compounds are generally hard, but brittle. Why? It takes a large amount of mechanical force, s uch as striking a crystal with a
hammer, to force one layer of ions to shift relative to its neighbor. However, when that happens, it brings i ons of the same charge
next to one another (see below). The repulsive forces between like-charged ions cause the crystal to shat ter. When an ionic crystal
breaks, it tends to do so along smooth planes because of t he regular arrangement of the ions.
Figure: (A) The sodium chloride crystal is shown in two dimensions. (B) When struck by a hammer, the negative ly-charged
chloride ions are forced near one another and the re pulsive force causes the crystal to shatter. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher
Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)

8.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332136Conductivity
Another characteristic property of ionic compounds i s their electrical conductivity. The figure below shows three experiments in
which two electrodes that are connected to a light bulb are placed in beakers containing three different substances.
Figure: (A) Distilled water does not conduct electric ity. (B) A solid ionic compound does not conduct elec tricity either. (C) A
water solution of an ionic compound conducts electric ity well. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
In the first beaker, distilled water does not conduct a current because water is a molecular compound. In th e second beaker, solid
sodium chloride also does not conduct a current. Des pite being ionic and thus composed of charged parti cles, the solid crystal
lattice does not allow the ions to move between the el ectrodes. Mobile charged particles are required for th e circuit to be complete
and the light bulb to light up. In the third beaker, the has been dissolved into the distilled water. Now t he crystal lattice has
been broken apart and the individual positive and n egative ions can move. Cations move to one electrode, while anions move to the
other, allowing electricity to flow (see figure below). Melting an ionic compound also frees the ions to cond uct a current. Ionic
compounds conduct an electric current when melted or dis solved in water.
Figure: In an ionic solution, the ions migrate towar d the negative electrode, while the ions migrate to ward the positive
electrode. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)

8.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332136Summary
Ionic compounds have high melting points.
Ionic compounds are hard and brittle.
Solutions of ionic compounds and melted ionic compounds con duct electricity, but solid materials do not.
Review
1. Why are ionic compounds brittle?
2. Why are melting points high for ionic compounds?
3. What happens when an electric current is passed through a solution of an ionic compound?
Explore More
Watch the video below and answer the following questions:
1. Do all ionic compounds form crystals?
2. Will melted ionic compounds conduct electricity?
Properties of Ionic CompoundsProperties of Ionic Compounds
ionic compound properties. vionic compound properties. v

8.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321363. What are the melting and boiling points of KI?
This page titled 8.7: Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.9: Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

8.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321378.8: Metallic Bonding
Figure: A nineteenth century copper plate. (Public Domain; John Pearson via Wikipedia)
Why do metals behave the way they do?
The image below is of a copper plate that was made in 1 893. The utensil has a great deal of elaborate deco ration, and the item is
very useful. What would have happened if this plate was made of copper (I) chloride instead? Copper (I) chl oride does contain
copper, after all. However, the would end up as a powd er when a metalworker pounded on it to shape it. Metals be have in
unique ways. The bonding that occurs in a metal is re sponsible for its distinctive properties: luster, mal leability, ductility, and
excellent conductivity.
The Metallic Bond
Pure metals are crystalline solids, but unlike ionic c ompounds, every point in the crystal lattice is occ upied by an identical atom.
The electrons in the outer energy levels of a metal are mobile and capable of drifting from one metal atom to another. This means
that the metal is more properly viewed as an array o f positive ions surrounded by a sea of mobile valenc e electrons. Electrons
which are capable of moving freely throughout the em pty orbitals of the metallic crystal are called delocalized electrons (see
below). A metallic bond is the attraction of the stationary metal cations to t he surrounding mobile electrons.
Figure: In a metal, the stationary metal cations are surrounded by a sea of mobile valence electrons that a re not associated with
any one cation. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)

8.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332137Properties of Metals
The metallic bonding model explains the physical pro perties of metals. Metals conduct electricity and he at very well because of
their free-flowing electrons. As electrons enter one end of a piece of metal, an equal number of electro ns flow outward from the
other end. When light is shone onto the surface of a metal, its electrons absorb small amounts of energy and become excited into
one of its many empty orbitals. The electrons immedi ately fall back down to lower energy levels and emit light. This process is
responsible for the high luster of metals.
Figure: The American Platinum Eagle is the official platinum bullion coin of the United States and was fir st minted in 1997.
The luster of a metal is due to its metallic bonds. (Pub lic Domain; the US Mint via Front:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:2005_AEPlat_Pro of_Obv.png; Back:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:American_Platin um_Eagle_2008_Proof_Rev.jpg)
Recall that ionic compounds are very brittle. Applic ation of a force results in like-charged ions in the crystal coming too close to
one another, causing the crystal to shatter. When a f orce is applied to a metal, the free-flowing electro ns can slip in between the
stationary cations and prevent them from coming in c ontact. Imagine ball bearings that have been coated wi th oil sliding past one
another. As a result, metals are very malleable and ductile. They can be hammered into shapes, rolled into thin sheets, or pulled
into thin wires.
Summary
The metallic bond is responsible for the properties of m etals.
Metals conduct electricity and heat well.
Metals are ductile and malleable.
Metals have luster.
Review
1. What is a delocalized electron?
2. Why do metals conduct electricity and heat well?
3. Why do metals have luster?
Metallic BondingMetallic Bonding

8.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332137This page titled 8.8: Metallic Bonding is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
8.10: Metallic Bonding by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: Covalent Bonding
Molecules are groups of atoms that behave as a single unit. Some elements exist as molecules: hydrogen, oxyg en, sulfur, and so
forth. There are rules that can express a unique name for any given molecule, and a unique formula for any given n ame.
9.1: Energy and Covalent Bond Formation
9.2: Lewis Electron-Dot Structures
9.3: Single Covalent Bonds
9.4: Multiple Covalent Bonds
9.5: Coordinate Covalent Bond
9.6: Covalent Bonding in Polyatomic Ions
9.7: Resonance
9.8: Exceptions to the Octet Rule
9.9: Bond Energy
9.10: VSEPR Theory
9.11: Molecular Shapes- No Lone Pairs on Central Atoms
9.12: Molecular Shapes - Lone Pair(s) on Central Atom
9.13: Periodic Trends- Electronegativity
9.14: Bond Polarity
9.15: Polar Molecules
9.16: Van der Waals Forces
9.17: Hydrogen Bonding
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 9: Covalent Bonding is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

9.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321399.1: Energy and Covalent Bond Formation
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Why do BeCl and LiCl bond differently?
We have learned that halide salts of elements in gro up 1 are typically ionic compounds. We would expect t o exist as
cations and anions (and it does). However, if we move o ne column to the right, lithium's neighbor berylliu m forms a different
type of bond altogether. This bond consists of shar ed electrons between the and atoms, not electrostatic attraction among
ions.
Energy and Covalent Bond Formation
Molecular compounds are those that take the form of a n individual molecule. Molecular compounds are genera lly comprised of
two or more nonmetal atoms. Familiar examples include wa ter, carbon dioxide, and ammonia. Recall that th e
molecular formula shows the number of each atom that occurs in a molecule of that compound. One molecule of water contains
two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Hydrogen is an example of an element that exists naturally as a di atomic molecule.
A diatomic molecule is a molecule containing two atoms.
Most atoms attain a lower potential energy when they ar e bonded to other atoms than when they are separated. Consider two
isolated hydrogen atoms that are separated by a dis tance large enough to prevent any interaction betwee n them. At this distance, the
potential energy of the system is said to be equal to zero (see figure below).
Figure: The graph shows how the potential energy of t wo hydrogen atoms changes as a function of their separa tion distance.
(CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
As the atoms approach one another, their electron clou ds gradually begin to overlap. Now there are several i nteractions which
begin to occur. One is that the single electrons that e ach hydrogen atom possesses begin to repel each other. This repulsive force
would tend to make the potential energy of the system increase. However, the electron of each atom begins to be attracted to the
nucleus of the other atom. This attractive force tends to make the potential energy of the system decrease.
As the atoms first begin to interact, the attractive force is stronger than the repulsive force and so th e potential energy of the system
decreases, as seen in the diagram. Remember that the lower potential energy increases the stability of th e system. As the two
hydrogen atoms move closer and closer together, the p otential energy is at its lowest possible point. If the hydrogen atoms move
any closer together, a third interaction begins to do minate, and that is the repulsive force between the t wo positively-charged nuclei.
This repulsive force is very strong, as can be seen by the sh arp rise in energy at the far left of the diagram.
The point at which the potential energy reached its minimum represents the ideal distance between hydrog en atoms for a stable
chemical bond to occur. This type of chemical bond i s called a covalent bond. A covalent bond is a bond in which two atoms share
one or more pairs of electrons. The single electrons from each of the two hydrogen atoms are shared when the atoms come together
to form a hydrogen molecule.2

9.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332139Summary
Covalent bonds are formed when atoms share electrons between them.
Review
1. What is a diatomic molecule?
2. What does lower potential energy do to a system?
3. What is the ideal distance for two atoms?
This page titled 9.1: Energy and Covalent Bond Formation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.4: Energy and Covalent Bond Formation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Covalent BondingCovalent Bonding

9.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321409.2: Lewis Electron-Dot Structures
Figure
(Public Domain; User:BorisTM/Wikimedia Commons via
Wikipedia
What does cholesterol really look like?
We can write the structure of the cholesterol molecu le a couple of different ways. The simplest approach is to simply write
. This "structure" is not very useful because it does not tell us how the carbons, hydrogens, and oxygen are connected to
one another. The structure in the figure above is mu ch more helpful—we see how the different atoms are con nected together to
form the molecule.
Lewis Electron-Dot Structures
In a previous chapter, you learned that the valence e lectrons of an atom can be shown in a simple way with a n electron dot diagram.
A hydrogen atom is shown as because of its one valenc e electron. The structures of molecules that are held together by covalent
bonds can be diagrammed by Lewis electron-dot structures. The hydrogen molecule is shown in the figure below.
Figure: On the left is a single hydrogen atom with on e electron. On the right is an molecule showing the electron cloud
overlap. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Jodi So via CK-12 Foundation)
The shared pair of electrons is shown as two dots in bet ween the two symbols. This is called a single covalent bond,
when two atoms are joined by the sharing of one pair o f electrons. The single covalent bond can also be shown by a dash in
between the two symbols. A structural formula is a formula that shows the arrangement of atoms in a molecule and
represents covalent bonds between atoms by dashes.
The Octet Rule and Covalent Bonds
When ions form, they conform to the octet rule by either losing or gaining electrons in order to achieve the electron configuration
of the nearest noble gas. In a similar way, nonmetal atoms share electrons in the formation of a covalent bond in such a way that
each of the atoms involved in the bond can attain a noble-gas electron configuration. The shared elect rons are "counted" for each of
the atoms involved in the sharing. For hydrogen, the shared pair of electrons means that each of the atom s is able to attain the
electron configuration of helium, the noble gas with two electrons. For atoms other than hydrogen, the sha ring of electrons will
usually provide each of the atoms with eight valence elect rons.

9.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332140Summary
Lewis electron-dot structures show the bonding in covalent molec ules.
Covalent bonds between atoms can be indicated either with d ots or a dash.
Review
1. What is a single covalent bond?
2. How can covalently-bound atoms obey the octet rule?
3. Does the hydrogen molecule obey the octet rule?
This page titled 9.2: Lewis Electron-Dot Structures is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.5: Lewis Electron-Dot Structures by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
How to Draw Lew is Structures: Five EasHow to Draw Lew is Structures: Five Eas
How to Draw Lew is Structures (w ith exHow to Draw Lew is Structures (w ith ex

9.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321419.3: Single Covalent Bonds
Figure (Public Domain; the US Department of the Interior via Commons Wikimedia, Fishhook [commons.wikimedia.org])
What holds molecules together?
In one form or another, the idea of atoms connectin g to form larger substances has been with us for a lo ng time. The Greek
philosopher Democritus (460-370 BCE) believed that ato ms had hooks that allowed them to connect with one ano ther. Today, we
believe that atoms are held together by bonds formed when two atoms share a set of electrons—a much more com plicated picture
than the simple hooks that Democritus believed in.
Single Covalent Bonds
A covalent bond forms when two orbitals with one elect ron each overlap one another. For the hydrogen molecu le, this can be
shown as:
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Upon formation of the molecule, the shared electrons must have opposite spin, so they are shown with opposit e spin in the
atomic orbital.
The halogens also form single covalent bonds in thei r diatomic molecules. An atom of any halogen, such as fluorine, has seven
valence electrons. Its unpaired electron is located in t he orbital.
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The single electrons in the third orbital combine to form the covalent bond:
Figure: On the left is a fluorine atom with seven val ence electrons. On the right is the molecule. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Jodi So
via CK-12 Foundation)
The diatomic fluorine molecule contains a single sh ared pair of electrons. Each atom also has three pa ir of electrons that are
not shared with the other atom. A lone pair is a pair of electrons in a Lewis electron-dot structu re that is not shared between atoms.
The oxygen atom in the water molecule shown below has two lone pair sets of electrons. Each atom has three l one pairs.
Combined with the two electrons in the covalent bond, eac h atom follows the octet rule.

9.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332141Draw the Lewis electron dot structure for water.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Molecular formula of water
atom valence electrons
atoms valence electrons
Total number of valence electrons
Use the periodic table to determine the number of val ence electrons for each atom and the total number of valence electrons.
Arrange the atoms and distribute the electrons so tha t each atom follows the octet rule. The oxygen atom wi ll have 8 electrons,
while the hydrogen atoms will each have 2.
Step 2: Solve.
Electron dot diagrams for each atom are:
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Each hydrogen atom with its single electron will form a covalent bond with the oxygen atom where it has a single electron.
The resulting Lewis electron dot structure is:
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Step 3: Think about your result.
The oxygen atom follows the octet rule with two pairs o f bonding electrons and two lone pairs. Each hydrogen atom follows
the octet rule with one bonding pair of electrons.
SINGLE, DOUBLE, & TRIPLE COV ALENT SINGLE, DOUBLE, & TRIPLE COV ALENT
Example

9.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332141Summary
Covalent bonds form when electrons in two atoms form overla pping orbitals.
Lone pair electrons in an atom are not shared with any ot her atom.
Review
1. How does a covalent bond form?
2. What relationship do the spins of shared electrons have wi th each other?
3. Do lone pair electrons form covalent bonds?
This page titled 9.3: Single Covalent Bonds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.6: Single Covalent Bonds by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Covalent BondCovalent Bond

9.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321429.4: Multiple Covalent Bonds
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
What do you do with your leftovers?
When working with covalent structures, it sometimes l ooks like there are leftover electrons. Maybe you ha ve applied the rules you
learned so far, but there are still some electrons ha nging out there, unattached. You can't just leave th em there...So, where do you
put them?
Multiple Covalent Bonds
Some molecules are not able to satisfy the octet rule by making only single covalent bonds between the ato ms. Consider the
compound ethene, which has a molecular formula of. T he carbon atoms are bonded together, with each carbon also bonded to
two hydrogen atoms.
two atoms valence electrons
four atoms valence electrons
= total of 12 valence electrons in the molecule
If the Lewis electron dot structure was drawn with a sing le bond between the carbon atoms and with the octet ru le followed, it
would look like this:
Figure: Incorrect dot structure of ethene. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
This Lewis structure is incorrect because it contains a total of 14 electrons. However, the Lewis structure can be changed by
eliminating the lone pairs on the carbon atoms and havin g the carbon atoms share two pairs, instead of only one pa ir, of electrons.
Figure: Correct dot structure for ethene. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
A double covalent bond is a covalent bond formed by atoms that share two pai rs of electrons. The double covalent bond that
occurs between the two carbon atoms in ethane can also be represented by a structural formula and with a mo lecular model, as
shown in the figure below.

9.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332142
Figure: (A) The structural model for consists of a dou ble covalent bond between the two carbon atoms and si ngle bonds
to the hydrogen atoms. (B) Molecular model of. (Publ ic Domain; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via (A)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-M W-dimensions-2D-Vector.svg; (B)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-M W-3D-balls.png)
A triple covalent bond is a covalent bond formed by atoms that share three pairs of electrons. The element nitrogen is a gas th at
composes the majority of Earth's atmosphere. A nitroge n atom has five valence electrons, which can be shown as one pair and three
single electrons. When combining with another nitrogen atom to form a diatomic molecule, the three single electrons on each atom
combine to form three shared pairs of electrons.
Figure: Triple bond in. (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Molecule Public Domain; CK-12 Foundation - Joy She ng, using 3D molecular
structure by Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Molecular structure: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nitrogen3D-vdW.png)
Each nitrogen atom follows the octet rule with one lone pair of electrons, and six electrons that are shared betwee n the atoms.
Summary
Lewis structures can be drawn for molecules that share mul tiple pairs of electrons.
A double covalent bond is a covalent bond formed by ato ms that share two pairs of electrons.
A triple covalent bond is a covalent bond formed by at oms that share three pairs of electrons.
Review
1. Why is the first ethene Lewis structure incorrect?
2. What do the single electrons in nitrogen do to form a triple bond?
3. Draw the Lewis structure for ethyne C H.
Double and T riple Covalent BondsDouble and T riple Covalent Bonds
2 2

9.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332142This page titled 9.4: Multiple Covalent Bonds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.7: Multiple Covalent Bonds by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

9.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321439.5: Coordinate Covalent Bond
Figure (Public Domain; P. Periyannan (Wikimedia: TRYP PN) via Wikipedia)
Is sharing a good thing?
Remember when you were younger, and were told to share your favorite toy with your brother, sister, or friend? You probably
didn't want to share, but did anyway. It likely turned out that you had more fun playing with the toy toget her than if you had kept it
to yourself. Atoms often share electrons with other ato ms that have nothing to contribute to the situation; the end result is a new
structure.
Coordinate Covalent Bonds
Each of the covalent bonds that we have looked at so far has involved each of the atoms that are bonding contributing one of the
electrons to the shared pair. There is an alternate t ype of covalent bond in which one of the atoms provi des both of the electrons in a
shared pair. Carbon monoxide,, is a toxic gas that is released as a byproduct during the burning of fo ssil fuels. The bonding
between the atom and the atom can be thought of in the following procession:
Figure: Formation of a double bond (incorrect struct ure). (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
At this point, a double bond has formed between the t wo atoms, with each atom providing one of the electrons to each bond. The
oxygen atom now has a stable octet of electrons, but t he carbon atom only has six electrons and is unstabl e. This situation is
resolved if the oxygen atom contributes one of its lone pairs in order to make a third bond with the carbon atom.
Figure: Correct structure. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The carbon monoxide molecule is correctly represent ed by a triple covalent bond between the carbon and oxygen atoms. One of the
bonds is a coordinate covalent bond, a covalent bond in which one of the atoms contribu tes both of the electrons in the shared
pair.
Once formed, a coordinate covalent bond is the same a s any other covalent bond. It is not as if the two con ventional bonds in the
molecule are stronger or different in any other way t han the coordinate covalent bond.

9.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332143Summary
Coordinate covalent bonds can form when one atom provide s a lone pair of electrons to the bond.
Coordinate covalent bonds are as strong as other coval ent bonds.
Review
1. Where does the third covalent bond in the CO molecule come from?
2. Why is the incorrect structure for CO above wrong?
3. Are coordinate covalent bonds stronger or weaker than r egular covalent bonds?
This page titled 9.5: Coordinate Covalent Bond is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.8: Coordinate Covalent Bond by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Coordinate Covalent Bonds & ResonancCoordinate Covalent Bonds & Resonanc

9.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321449.6: Covalent Bonding in Polyatomic Ions
Figure (CC by 2.0; Jan Seifert via Flickr)
How do we extend basic principles?
The United States Supreme Court has the unenviable task of determining what the law dictates. This responsibili ty can be a major
challenge when there is no clear principle involved, o r when they face a situation not previously encounte red. Chemistry faces the
same challenge in extending basic concepts to fit a new situation. Drawing of Lewis structures for polyatomic ions uses the same
approach, but tweaks the process a little to fit a somewhat d ifferent set of circumstances.
Polyatomic Ions
Recall that a polyatomic ion is a group of atoms that are covalently bonded toge ther, and which carry an overall electrical charge.
The ammonium ion,, is formed when a hydrogen ion a ttaches to the lone pair of an ammonia molecule in a
coordinate covalent bond.
Figure: The ammonium ion. (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; CK-12 Foundation - Joy Sheng, using 3D molecular stru cture by Ben Mills
(Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Wikipedia; Molecule Public Domain)
When drawing the Lewis structure of a polyatomic ion, the charge of the ion is reflected in the number of total valence electrons in
the structure. In the case of the ammonium ion:
atom valence electrons
atoms valence electrons
subtract 1 electron for the charge of the ion
total of 8 valence electrons in the ion
It is customary to put the Lewis structure of a polya tomic ion into a large set of brackets, with the cha rge of the ion as a superscript
outside of the brackets.
Draw the Lewis electron dot structure for the sulfate ion.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Molecular formula of sulfate ion: Example

9.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332144 atom valence electrons
atoms valence electrons
add 2 electrons for the charge of the ion
= total of 32 valence electrons
The less electronegative sulfur atom is the central atom in the structure. Place the oxygen atoms around the sulfur atom, each
with a single covalent bond. Distribute lone pairs to each oxygen atom in order to satisfy the octet rule. Count the total number
of atoms. If there are too many electrons in the structur e, make multiple bonds between the and.
Step 2: Solve.
Figure: The sulfate ion. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Step 3: Think about your result.
The Lewis structure for the sulfate ion consists of a cen tral sulfur atom with four single bonds to oxygen at oms. This yields the
expected total of 32 electrons. Since the sulfur ato m started with six valence electrons, two of the bond s are coordinate
covalent.
Summary
Lewis structures for polyatomic ions follow the same rules as those for other covalent compounds.
Review
1. What are two characteristics of polyatomic ions?
2. Which atom becomes the central atom in the structure?
3. Where is the charge on an ion placed in a lewis dot diag ram?
This page titled 9.6: Covalent Bonding in Polyatomic Ions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.9: Covalent Bonding in Polyatomic Ions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Lew is Dot Structures Poly atomic Ions P1Lew is Dot Structures Poly atomic Ions P1

9.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321459.7: Resonance
Figure (Public Domain; User:Gouwenaar/Nl.Wikipedia vi a Wikipedia)
Is this a reflection or a doorway?
You may look at the picture below and think you are looking at the image of a room as reflected in a mi rror (and you probably are).
But the picture can be cropped in such a way as to g ive the impression of looking at the real room thro ugh a door. You would see
the same thing and receive the same information, but it would be from a different perspective. There are m olecules that can be
represented in different ways, such that reality becomes a m atter of interpretation.
Resonance
There are some cases in which more than one viable Lewi s structure can be drawn for a molecule. An example is the ozone
molecule in the figure below. There are a total of 18 electr ons in the structure, and so the following two structures are po ssible:
Figure: Resonance forms of ozone. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The structure on the left (see figure above) can be converted to the structure on the right by a shift ing of electrons without altering
the positions of the atoms.
It was once thought that the structure of a molecule such as consisted of one single bond and one doub le bond which then
shifted back and forth as shown above. However, further studies showed that the two bonds are identical. Any do uble covalent
bond between two given atoms is typically shorter than a single covalent bond. Studies of the and other s imilar molecules
showed that the bonds were identical in length. Interes tingly, the length of the bond is in between the leng ths expected for an
single bond and a double bond.
Resonance is the use of two or more Lewis structures to represen t the covalent bonding in a molecule. One of the vali d structures
is referred to as a resonance structure. It is now und erstood that the true structure of a molecule which di splays resonance is that of
an average or a hybrid of all the resonance structure s. In the case of the molecule, each of the covalent bonds between atoms
are best thought of as being "one and a half" bonds, as opposed to either a pure single bond or a pure double bond. This "half-bond"
can be shown as a dotted line in both the Lewis structu re and the molecular model (see figure below).
Figure: "Half-bond" model of ozone molecule. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Molecule Public Domain; CK-12 Foundation - Joy Shen g,
using 3D molecular structure by Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Molecular structure:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ozone-CRC-MW-3 D-balls.png)

9.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332145Many polyatomic ions also display resonance. In some cases, the true structure may be an average of thr ee valid resonance
structures, as in the case of the nitrate ion, (see fig ure below).
Figure: Resonance structure of nitrate anion. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The bond lengths between the central atom and each atom are identical and the bonds can be approximated as being equal to
one and one-third bonds.
Summary
Resonance structures are averages of different Lewis stru cture possibilities.
Bond lengths are intermediate between covalent bonds and covalent double bonds.
Review
1. How many electrons total are in the ozone structure?
2. What is changed in the two resonance structures of ozone?
3. How can we think of the covalent bonds in ozone?
Chemistry - Chemical Bonding (26 of 35Chemistry - Chemical Bonding (26 of 35
Resonance Structures of NO3- (Nitrate iResonance Structures of NO3- (Nitrate i

9.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332145This page titled 9.7: Resonance is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.10: Resonance by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

9.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321469.8: Exceptions to the Octet Rule
Figure (Public Domain; the US Internal Revenue Service via Wikipedia)
Are rules always followed?
Every spring, millions of Americans file their income tax forms. The different rules determine how much ta x a person pays. There
are also exceptions to the rules. You pay less tax if you are married and/or have children. There are cert ain limits on how much
money you can make before paying taxes. The rule is that you pay taxes, but there are also exceptions ba sed on your personal
situation. The bonding rules for molecules are general ly applicable, but there are some exceptions allowed.
Exceptions to the Octet Rule
As the saying goes, all rules are made to be broken. W hen it comes to the octet rule, this is true. Exceptio ns to the octet rule fall
into one of three categories: (1) an incomplete octet, (2) odd-electron molecules, and (3) an expanded octet.
Incomplete Octet
In some compounds, the number of electrons surrounding the central atom in a stable molecule is fewer than e ight. Beryllium is an
alkaline earth metal and so may be expected to form ionic bonds. However, its very small size and somewhat higher ionization
energy compared to other metals actually leads bery llium to form primarily molecular compounds. Since b eryllium only has two
valence electrons, it does not typically attain an octet through sharing of electrons. The Lewis structure o f gaseous beryllium
hydride consists of two single covalent bonds between a nd (see figure below).
Figure: Beryllium hydride. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung, Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Boron and aluminum, with three valence electrons, also tend to form covalent compounds with an incomplete octet. The central
boron atom in boron trichloride has six valence elect rons, as shown in the figure below.
Figure: Boron trichloride. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)

9.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332146Odd-Electron Molecules
There are a number of molecules whose total number of valence electrons is an odd number. It is not possible for all of the atoms in
such a molecule to satisfy the octet rule. An example is nitrogen dioxide. Each oxygen atom contributes six valence electrons
and the nitrogen atom contributes five for a total of se venteen. The Lewis structure for appears in the figure bel ow.
Figure: The Lewis structure for nitrogen dioxide, an odd electron molecule. (CC BY-NC-SA; Todd Helmenstine via
about.com)
Expanded Octets
Atoms of the second period cannot have more than eig ht valence electrons around the central atom. However, atoms of the third
period and beyond are capable of exceeding the octe t rule by having more than eight electrons around th e central atom. Starting
with the third period, the sublevel becomes availabl e, so it is possible to use these orbitals in bondin g, resulting in an expanded
octet.
Phosphorus and sulfur are two elements that react with h alogen elements and make stable compounds with expand ed octets. In
phosphorus pentachloride, the central phosphorus atom makes five single bonds to chlorine atoms and, as a r esult, has ten electrons
surrounding it (see figure below). In sulfur hexafluori de, the central sulfur atom has twelve electrons from i ts six bonds to fluorine
atoms (see figure below).
Figure: Phosphorus pentachloride. Left image: Lewis stru cture. Right image: molecular model. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Molecule
Public Domain; CK-12 Foundation - Joy Sheng, using 3D m olecular structure by Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bm m27) via
Molecular structure: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Phosphorus-pentac hloride-3D-vdW.png)
Figure: Sulfur hexafluoride. Left image: Lewis structu re. Right image: molecular model. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Molecule Public
Domain; CK-12 Foundation - Joy Sheng, using 3D molecul ar structure by Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) v ia Molecular
structure: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sulfur-hexafluo ride-3D-vdW.png)

9.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332146Summary
Exceptions exist to the rules for covalent bonding
These exceptions apply to atoms whose electrons will not a ccommodate the normal octet rule.
Review
1. What is an incomplete octet?
2. What is an odd-electron molecule?
3. Why are there extra electrons in the expanded octet?
This page titled 9.8: Exceptions to the Octet Rule is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.11: Exceptions to the Octet Rule by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Octet Rule Exceptions: ALL OF THEM.Octet Rule Exceptions: ALL OF THEM.

9.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321479.9: Bond Energy
Figure (CC by 2.0; Warner Hocker (Flickr: TravelingOtter) via Flickr)
How does smog form?
We know that nitrogen makes up about of the gases in t he air, and that this gas is chemically very inert. However, we also
know that a major contributor to the production of sm og is a mixture of nitrogen compounds referred to a s. Due to the high
combustion temperatures in modern car engines (broug ht about by the need for better fuel efficiency), we m ake more that will
react with other materials to create smog. So, our inert nitrogen gas can be converted to other compounds if enough energy is
available to break the triple bonds in the molecule.
Bond Energy
The formation of a chemical bond results in a decrea se in potential energy. Consequently, breaking a chemi cal bond requires an
input of energy. Bond energy is the energy required to break a covalent bond bet ween two atoms. A high bond energy means that a
bond is strong and the molecule that contains that bo nd is likely to be stable and less reactive. More rea ctive compounds will
contain bonds that have generally lower bond energies. Som e bond energies are listed in the table below.
Table: Bond Energies
Bond Bond Energy
The halogen elements all exist naturally as diatomic molecules (,,, and). They are generally very reac tive and thus have
relatively low bond energies.
As can be seen by a comparison of the bond energies fo r the various carbon-carbon bonds, double bonds are substantially stronger
than single bonds. Likewise, triple bonds are even stro nger. The triple bond that exists between the nitroge n atoms in nitrogen gas
makes it very unreactive. All plants and animals requ ire the element nitrogen, but it cannot be obtained from the direct
absorption of nitrogen gas from the atmosphere becau se of its strong, unreactive triple bond. Instead, bacte ria convert the nitrogen

9.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332147to a more usable form such as ammonium and nitrate i ons, which are then absorbed by plants from the soil. Animals only obtain
nitrogen by eating those plants.
Summary
Bond energy is an indication of the amount of energy ne eded for a chemical reaction.
The higher the bond energy, the less reactive the bond is.
Review
1. What does a high bond energy mean?
2. What kind of bonds do more reactive compounds have?
3. Which will react more readily: a C-H bond or a Cl-Cl bond?
This page titled 9.9: Bond Energy is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.12: Bond Energy by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
GCSE Chemistry. Breaking bonds - makiGCSE Chemistry. Breaking bonds - maki

9.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321489.10: VSEPR Theory
Figure: Copy and Paste Caption here. (CK-12 Curriculu m Materials license; CK-12 Foundation via CK-12 Founda tion)
Why is the water molecule bent like that?
The characteristic bent shape of the water molecule s hown above was a puzzling discovery for scientists at fi rst. The shape allows
the molecule to be polar, increasing its boiling poin t and making it possible for life on earth to exist as we know it. But what makes
it bend? The structure is almost the same as carbon dioxi de which is known to be a gas at room temperature, why not water too?
Putting atoms together to form compounds can be done on paper or in the lab. However, when the shape of the m olecule made in
the lab is different from the shape of the molecule drawn o n paper, then we need to rethink our ideas and find better exp lanations.
VSEPR Theory
In 1956, British scientists R.J. Gillespie and R.S. Nyholm r ecognized that the current model for explaining bon d angles did not
work well. The theory at that time relied on hybrid or bitals to explain all aspects of bonding. The proble m was that this theory gave
an incorrect prediction of bond angles for many comp ounds. They developed a new approach based on earlier work by other
scientists that incorporated a consideration of electr on pairs in predicting three-dimensional structure.
The valence shell is the outermost electron-occupied shell of an atom. The valence shell holds the electrons that are inv olved in
bonding and are the electrons shown in a Lewis structur e. The acronym VSEPR stands for the valence-shell electron pair
repulsion model. The model states that electron pairs will re pel each other such that the shape of the molecule wi ll adjust, so that
the valence electron-pairs stay as far apart from one another as possible. Molecules can be systematical ly classified according to the
number of bonding pairs of electrons; as well as the n umber of nonbonding, or lone pairs, around the cent ral atom. For the purposes
of the VSEPR model, a double or triple bond is no different in terms of repulsion than a single bond.
Summary
VSEPR theory allows more accurate predictions of molecular shap e.
Review
1. Who did the major work in developing the VSEPR theory?
2. Where are the electrons that are involved in bonding?
V SEPR TheoryV SEPR Theory

9.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321483. What is the basic idea behind the VSEPR theory?
This page titled 9.10: VSEPR Theory is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.13: VSEPR Theory by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

9.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321499.11: Molecular Shapes- No Lone Pairs on Central Atoms
Figure (Public Domain; Sylvanus P. Thompson via Wikipedia)
How does an electroscope work?
An electroscope is a device used to study charge. Whe n a positively charged object (the rod) nears the u pper post, electrons flow to
the top of the jar, leaving the two gold leaves posit ively charged. The leaves repel each other since bot h hold positive, like charges.
The VSEPR theory says that electron pairs, also a set of like charges, will repel each other such that the shape o f the molecule will
adjust, so that the valence electron pairs stay as far apa rt from each other as possible.
Central Atom with No Lone Pairs
In order to easily understand the types of molecules po ssible, we will use a simple system to identify the parts of any molecule:
A = central atom in a molecule
B = atoms surrounding the central atom
Subscripts after the B will denote the number of B ato ms that are bonded to the central A atom. For example, AB is a molecule
with a central atom surrounded by four covalently bon ded atoms. Again, it does not matter if those bonds are single, double, or
triple bonds.
AB: Beryllium Hydride
Beryllium hydride consists of a central beryllium ato m with two single bonds to hydrogen atoms. Recall that it violates the octet
rule.
According to the requirement that electron pairs max imize their distance from one another, the two bondi ng pairs in the
molecules will arrange themselves on directly opposit e sides of the central atom. The resulting geometry is a linear molecule,
shown in the figure below in a "ball and stick" model.
Figure: Beryllium hydride model. (Public Domain; Be n Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Commons) via Wikipedia)
The bond angle from is because of its linear geometr y.
Carbon dioxide is another example of a molecule which falls under the AB category. Its Lewis structure cons ists of double bonds
between the central carbon and the oxygen atoms (see f igure below).
Figure: Carbon dioxide bonding. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The repulsion between the two groups of four electron s (two pairs) is no different than the repulsion of th e two groups of two
electrons (one pair) in the molecule. Carbon dioxide is al so linear (see figure below).

9.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332149
Figure: Carbon dioxide. (Public Domain; User:Benji907 2/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
AB: Boron Trifluoride
Boron trifluoride consists of a central boron atom with three single bonds to fluorine atoms (see figure bel ow). The boron atom also
has an incomplete octet.
Figure: Boron trifluoride bonding. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The geometry of the molecule is called trigonal pl anar (figure). The fluorine atoms are positioned at t he vertices of an
equilateral triangle. The angle is and all four ato ms lie in the same plane.
Figure: Boron trifluoride model. (Public Domain; User:Benji90 72/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
AB: Methane
Methane is an organic compound that is the primary c omponent of natural gas. Its structure consists of a c entral carbon atom with
four single bonds to hydrogen atoms (see figure below). In order to maximize their distance from one anothe r, the four groups of
bonding electrons do not lie in the same plane. Inst ead, each of the hydrogen atoms lie at the corners o f a geometrical shape called
a tetrahedron. The carbon atom is at the center of the tetrahedron. Each face of a tetrahedron is an equilate ral triangle.
Figure: Tetrahedral structure of methane. (Public Domain; (L eft) Pearson Scott Foresman; (Right) Ben Mills (Wikime dia:
Benjah-bmm27) via (Left) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tetrahedron_(P SF).png; (Right)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Methane-CRC-MW -3D-balls.png)
The molecular geometry of the methane molecule is te trahedral (see figure). The bond angles are, which is
larger than the that they would be if the molecule was planar. When drawing a structural formula for a mol ecule such as
methane, it is advantageous to be able to indicate th e three-dimensional character of its shape. The structu ral formula below is
called a perspective drawing. The dotted line bond is to be visualized as receding into the page, while the solid triangle bond is to
be visualized as coming out of the page.

9.11.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332149
Figure: Methane perspective model. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Summary
Electron pairs repel each other and influence bond an gles and molecular shape.
Review
1. What are the bond angles in carbon dioxide?
2. What molecule has bond angles of 109.5?
3. What is the geometry of the BF molecule?
This page titled 9.11: Molecular Shapes- No Lone Pairs on Central Atoms is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.14: Molecular Shapes- No Lone Pairs on Central Atoms by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Chemistry - Molecular Structure (1 of 45Chemistry - Molecular Structure (1 of 45
Chemistry V SEPR TheoryChemistry V SEPR Theory

9.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321509.12: Molecular Shapes - Lone Pair(s) on Central Atom
Figure (Used under license from Shutterstock.com; Image copyright Jandrie Lombard, 2014 via
http://www.shutterstock.com)
How can all these clothes fit into such a small space?
When we travel, we often take a lot more stuff than we need. Trying to fit it all into a suitcase can be a r eal challenge. We may have
to repack or just squeeze it all in. Atoms often have to r earrange where the electrons are in order to create a more stable structure.
Central Atom with One or More Lone Pairs
The molecular geometries of molecules change when the central atom has one or more lone pairs of electrons. The total number of
electron pairs, both bonding pairs and lone pairs, l eads to what is called the electron domain geometry. When one or more of the
bonding pairs of electrons is replaced with a lone p air, the molecular geometry (actual shape) of the mol ecule is altered. In keeping
with the A and B symbols established in the previous section, we will use E to represent a lone pair on the central atom (A). A
subscript will be used when there is more than one lone pair. Lone pairs on the surrounding atoms (B) do not affect the geometry.
AB E: Ammonia,
The ammonia molecule contains three single bonds and one lone pair on the central nitrogen atom (see figure be low).
Figure: Lone pair electrons in ammonia. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The domain geometry for a molecule with four electro n pairs is tetrahedral, as was seen with. In the ammonia molecule, one of
the electron pairs is a lone pair rather than a bon ding pair. The molecular geometry of is called trigon al pyramidal (see figure
below).
Figure: Ammonia molecule. (Public Domain; (Left) User: Booya bazooka/ Wikimedia Commons; (Right) Ben Mills
(Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via (Left) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonia_lone_e lectron_pair.svg; (Right)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonia-3D-bal ls-A.png)
Recall that the bond angle in the tetrahedral mole cule is. Again, the replacement of one of the bonded electron pairs
with a lone pair compresses the angle slightly. The angl e is approximately.
AB E: Water,
A water molecule consists of two bonding pairs and two lo ne pairs (see figure below).

9.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332150
Figure: Lone pair electrons on water. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
As for methane and ammonia, the domain geometry for a molecule with four electron pairs is tetrahedral. In t he water molecule,
two of the electron pairs are lone pairs rather than bonding pairs. The molecular geometry of the water molecule is bent. The
bond angle is, which is smaller than the bond angle in (se e figure below).
Figure: Water molecule. (Public Domain; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via (Left)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Water-dimension s-from-Greenwood%2526Earnshaw-2D.png; (Right)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Water-3D-balls- A.png; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Zeepzieden.jpg)
AB E: Sulfur Tetrafluoride,
The Lewis structure for contains four single bonds and a lo ne pair on the sulfur atom (see figure below).
Figure: Lone pair electrons in. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The sulfur atom has five electron groups around it, which corresponds to the trigonal bipyramidal domain geometry, as in (see
figure below). Recall that the trigonal bipyramidal g eometry has three equatorial atoms and two axial ato ms attached to the central
atom. Because of the greater repulsion of a lone pai r, it is one of the equatorial atoms that are repla ced by a lone pair. The geometry
of the molecule is called a distorted tetrahedron, or sees aw.
Figure: Ball and stick model for. (Public Domain; B en Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Wikipedia)
Table: Geometries in Which the Central Atom Has One or More Lone Pairs

9.12.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332150Total Number of
Electron PairsNumber of
Bonding PairsNumber of Lone
PairsElectron Domain
GeometryMolecular
GeometryExamples
3 2 1 Trigonal Planar Bent
4 3 1 Tetrahedral Trigonal Pyramidal
4 2 2 Tetrahedral Bent
5 4 1Trigonal
BipyramidalDistorted
Tetrahedron
(Seesaw)
5 3 2Trigonal
BipyramidalT-shaped
5 2 3Trigonal
BipyramidalLinear
6 5 1 Octahedral Square Pyramidal
6 4 2 Octahedral Square Planar
Molecular ShapeMolecular Shape

9.12.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332150Summary
The presence of lone pair electrons influences the three- dimensional shape of the molecule.
Review
1. Why does water have a bent geometry?
2. Why is ammonia not a planar molecule?
3. How would we write the configuration for xenon tetrafluori de using the ABE system?
This page titled 9.12: Molecular Shapes - Lone Pair(s) on Central Atom is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.15: Molecular Shapes - Lone Pair(s) on Central Atom by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Chemistry V SEPR TheoryChemistry V SEPR Theory

9.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321139.13: Periodic Trends- Electronegativity
Figure (Used under licenses from Shutterstock.com; (left) Image copyright Pressmaster, 2013; (right) Image copy right cdrin,
2013 via http://www.shutterstock.com; http://www.shutterstock.com)
Is it easy or hard for you to make new friends?
Have you ever noticed how some people attract others t o them? Whether it be their personality, attractiven ess, or athletic skills—
something pulls people toward them; while others have a smaller group of friends and acquaintances. Atoms do the same thing.
One atom may pull electrons strongly to it, while a seco nd type of atom has much less "pulling power".
Electronegativity
Valence electrons of both atoms are always involved when those two atoms come together to form a chemical bo nd. Chemical
bonds are the basis for how elements combine with one another to form compounds. When these chemical bon ds form, atoms of
some elements have a greater ability to attract the va lence electrons involved in the bond than other elemen ts.
Electronegativity is a measure of the ability of an atom to attract the electrons when the atom is part of a compound.
Electronegativity differs from electron affinity bec ause electron affinity is the actual energy released when an atom gains an
electron. Electronegativity is not measured in ener gy units, but instead a relative scale. All elements a re compared to one another,
with the most electronegative element, fluorine, bein g assigned an electronegativity value of 3.98. Fluorin e attracts electrons better
than any other element. The table below shows the electro negativity values for the elements.
Figure: The electronegativity scale was developed by Nobel Prize winning American chemist Linus Pauling. T he largest
electronegativity (3.98) is assigned to fluorine and a ll other electronegativity measurements are on a rela tive scale. (CC BY-NC
3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Since metals have few valence electrons, they tend to increase their stability by losing electrons to becom e cations. Consequently,
the electronegativities of metals are generally low. Nonmetals have more valence electrons and increase their stability by gaining
electrons to become anions. The electronegativities of nonm etals are generally high.
Trends
Electronegativities generally increase from left to right across a period. This is due to an increase in nuclear charge. Alkali metals
have the lowest electronegativities, while halogens h ave the highest. Because most noble gases do not for m compounds, they do
not have electronegativities. Note that there is little variation among the transition metals. Electronegativ ities generally decrease
from top to bottom within a group, due to the larger atomi c size.
Of the main group elements, fluorine has the highest e lectronegativity (EN) and cesium the lowest (EN). This
indicates that fluorine has a high tendency to gain electrons from other elements with lower electronegat ivities. We can use these
values to predict what happens when certain elements combine.

9.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332113When the difference between atom electronegativities is greater than ~1.7, then a complete exchange of el ectrons occurs. Typically
this exchange is between a metal and a nonmetal. For in stance, sodium and chlorine will typically combine t o form a new
compound and each ion becomes isoelectronic with its nearest noble gas. When we compare the EN values, we see that the
electronegativity for is 0.93 and the value for is 3.2. The absolute difference between ENs is. This valu e is
greater than 1.7, and therefore indicates the occurence of a complete electron exchange.
Summary
Electronegativity is a measure of the ability of an atom t o attract the electrons when the atom is part of a compoun d.
Electronegativity values generally increase from left t o right across the periodic table.
Electronegativities generally decrease from the top to bott om of a group.
The highest electronegativity value is for fluorine.
Review
1. Define “electronegativity.”
2. How does electronegativity differ from electron affinit y?
3. Why are the electronegativity values of metals genera lly low?
4. Describe the trend in electronegativities across the p eriodic table.
5. Describe the trends in electronegativities in a group of the periodic table.
This page titled 9.13: Periodic Trends- Electronegativity is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
6.21: Periodic Trends- Electronegativity by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

9.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321519.14: Bond Polarity
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
What makes people share?
Have you ever spent time with someone you really didn' t like? You had nothing in common with them and did not want to have
anything to do with them. On the other hand, there are people that you enjoy being with. You have a lot in common and like to
share with them. Atoms work the same way. If there are s trong differences in their attraction of electrons, one atom gets the
electrons and the other atom loses them. If they are simil ar, they share electrons to form a covalent bond.
Bond Polarity
Electronegativity is defined as the ability of an atom to attract el ectrons when the atoms are in a compound. Electronega tivities of
elements are shown in the periodic table below.
Figure: Electronegativities of elements. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
The degree to which a given bond is ionic or covalen t is determined by calculating the difference in ele ctronegativity between the
two atoms involved in the bond.
As an example, consider the bond that occurs between an a tom of potassium and an atom of fluorine. Using the t able, the
difference in electronegativity is equal to. Since t he difference in electronegativity is relatively la rge, the bond
between the two atoms is ionic. Since the fluorine ato m has a much larger attraction for electrons than t he potassium atom does, the
valence electron from the potassium atom is completel y transferred to the fluorine atom. The diagram belo w shows how difference
in electronegativity relates to the ionic or covalent character of a chemical bond.

9.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332151
Figure: Bond type is predicted on the difference in electronegativity of the two elements involved in th e bond. (CC BY-NC
3.0; Zachary Wilson via CK-12 Foundation)
Nonpolar Covalent Bonds
A bond in which the electronegativity difference is l ess than 1.7 is considered to be mostly covalent in cha racter. However, at this
point we need to distinguish between two general types of covalent bonds. A nonpolar covalent bond is a covalent bond in which
the bonding electrons are shared equally between the two atoms. In a nonpolar covalent bond, the distributi on of electrical charge is
balanced between the two atoms.
Figure: A nonpolar covalent bond is one in which the distribu tion of electron density between the two atoms is equa l. (CC
BY-NC 3.0; Jodi So via CK-12 Foundation)
The two chlorine atoms share the pair of electrons in the single covalent bond equally, and the electron d ensity surrounding the
molecule is symmetrical. Note that molecules in which the electronegativity difference is very small (<0.4) are also considered
nonpolar covalent. An example would be a bond between chlo rine and bromine (EN).
Polar Covalent Bonds
A bond in which the electronegativity difference bet ween the atoms is between 0.4 and 1.7 is called a polar covalent bond. A polar
covalent bond is a covalent bond in which the atoms have an unequa l attraction for electrons, and so the sharing is uneq ual. In a
polar covalent bond, sometimes simply called a pola r bond, the distribution of electrons around the mol ecule is no longer
symmetrical.

9.14.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332151
Figure: In the polar covalent bond of, the electro n density is unevenly distributed. There is a higher de nsity (red) near the
fluorine atom, and a lower density (blue) near the h ydrogen atom. (Public Domain; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via
Commons Wikimedia, Hydrogen fluoride elpot transparen t 3D balls [commons.wikimedia.org])
An easy way to illustrate the uneven electron distribut ion in a polar covalent bond is to use the Greek letter de lta.
Figure: Use of to indicate partial charge. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
The atom with the greater electronegativity acquires a partial negative charge, while the atom with the le sser electronegativity
acquires a partial positive charge. The delta symbo l is used to indicate that the quantity of charge is less than one. A crossed arrow
can also be used to indicate the direction of greater e lectron density.
Figure: Use of crossed arrow to indicate polarity. (Cr edit: Joy Sheng Source: CK-12 Foundation; License: CC BY-NC 3.0)
Polar bonds and electronegativityPolar bonds and electronegativity

9.14.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332151Summary
The electronegativity of an atom determines how strongly i t attracts electrons to itself.
The polarity of a bond is affected by the electronegat ivity values of the two atoms involved in that bond.
Review
1. If two atoms bonded together have an electronegativ ity difference of 1.9, what is the bond type?
2. What would be the bond type for BH?
3. Your friend tells you that the LiF bond is covalent. Ar e they correct? Why or why not.
This page titled 9.14: Bond Polarity is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.16: Bond Polarity by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
Polar Covalent BondsPolar Covalent Bonds

9.15.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321529.15: Polar Molecules
Figure (Public Domain; G. Kuebler/JILA and the NIST v ia Patapsco Image Gallery [patapsco.nist.gov])
How cold are ultracold polar molecules?
Ultracold polar molecules have been created by resea rch scientists. These "molecules" consist of and atom s excited by lasers
to form a type of compound where the has a positiv e charge and the has a negative charge. The material is formed at
temperatures extremely close to absolute zero. The r esearchers believe these techniques will help them mak e new reactions and
new materials.
Polar Molecules
A polar molecule is a molecule in which one end of the molecule is sl ightly positive, while the other end is slightly neg ative. A
diatomic molecule that consists of a polar covalent bond, such as, is a polar molecule. The two electric ally charged regions on
either end of the molecule are called poles, simila r to a magnet having a north and a south pole. A mol ecule with two poles is called
a dipole (see figure below). Hydrogen fluoride is a dipole.
Figure: A dipole is any molecule with a positive end and a negative end, resulting from unequal distributi on of electron
density throughout the molecule. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Polar molecules orient themselves in the presence of an electric field with the positive ends of the mol ecule being attracted to the
negative plate, while the negative ends of the molecules ar e attracted to the positive plate (see figure below).
Figure: Polar molecules are randomly oriented in the absence of an applied electric field (top). In an el ectric field, the
molecules orient themselves because of the attraction o f opposite charges (bottom). (CC BY-NC 3.0; Zachary Wilson via CK-12
Foundation)

9.15.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332152For molecules with more than two atoms, the molecular ge ometry must also be taken into account when determini ng if the
molecule is polar or nonpolar. The figure below shows a comparison between carbon dioxide and water. Carbon d ioxide is a
linear molecule. The oxygen atoms are more electrone gative than the carbon atom, so there are two individ ual dipoles pointing
outward from the atom to each atom. However, since t he dipoles are of equal strength and are oriented t his way, they cancel
out, and the overall molecular polarity of is zero.
Water is a bent molecule because of the two lone pair s on the central oxygen atom. The individual dipoles point from the atoms
toward the atom. Because of the shape, the dipoles do not cancel each other out, and the water molecule is polar. In the figure
below, the net dipole is shown in blue and points upward.
Figure: The molecular geometry of a molecule affect s its polarity. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Some other molecules are shown in the figure below. Not ice that a tetrahedral molecule such as is nonpolar. Ho wever, if one
of the peripheral atoms is replaced with another ato m that has a different electronegativity, the molec ule becomes polar. A
trigonal planar molecule may be nonpolar if all th ree peripheral atoms are the same, but a trigonal p yramidal molecule
is polar.
Figure: Some examples of polar and nonpolar molecules based on molecular geometry. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK12 Foundation)
Summary
Polar molecules result from differences in the electro negativity of the atoms in the molecule.
Dipoles that are directly opposite one another cancel each other out.
Polar Bonds and MoleculesPolar Bonds and Molecules

9.15.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332152Review
1. Why is a polar molecule called a dipole?
2. The molecular geometry of NH is trigonal pyramidal. W hat about the molecular geometry of NH makes it a polar mol ecule?
3. What happens to polar molecules when an electric fiel d is applied?
This page titled 9.15: Polar Molecules is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
9.17: Polar Molecules by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.3 3

9.16.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321539.16: Van der Waals Forces
Figure (Public Domain; User:MartinSaunders/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
How to Keep it Cool?
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) devices use liquid nitro gen to cool the superconducting magnets. Nitrogen is a gas at room temperature and
liquefies at. Its neighbor on the periodic table (oxyg en) boils at. The interactions between nitrogen molec ules are weaker,
so the boiling point is lower. Interactions between n onpolar molecules depend on the degree of electron fl uctuation within the molecule.
Van der Waals Forces
The first type of intermolecular forces that we conside r are van der Waals forces, after Dutch chemist Johannes van der Waals (1837-1923). Van der
Waals forces are the weakest intermolecular force, and consist of dip ole-dipole forces and dispersion forces.
Dipole-Dipole Forces
Dipole-dipole forces are the attractive forces that occur between polar mol ecules. A molecule of hydrogen chloride has a partiall y positive hydrogen
atom and a partially negative chlorine atom. In a c ollection of many hydrogen chloride molecules, the mole cules will align themselves so that the
oppositely charged regions of neighboring molecules are near each other.
Figure: Dipole-dipole forces are a result of the att raction of the positive end of one dipole to the neg ative end of a neighboring dipole. (CC
BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Dipole-dipole forces are similar in nature to ionic bonds, but much weaker.
London Dispersion Forces
Dispersion forces are also considered a type of van der W aals force and are the weakest of all intermolecular for ces. They are often called London
dispersion forces after Fritz London (1900-1954), who first p roposed their existence in 1930. London dispersion forces are the intermolecular
forces that occur between atoms, and between nonpolar m olecules as a result of the motion of electrons.
The electron cloud of a helium atom contains two elec trons, which can normally be expected to be equally distributed spatially around the nucleus.
However, at any given moment the electron distributio n may be uneven, resulting in an instantaneous dipole. This weak and temporary dipole
subsequently influences neighboring helium atoms throu gh electrostatic attraction and repulsion. It induces a dipole on nearby helium atoms (see
figure below).
Figure: A short-lived or instantaneous dipole in a he lium atom. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Zachary Wilson via CK-12 Foundation)
The instantaneous and induced dipoles are weakly att racted to one another. The strength of dispersion fo rces increases as the number of electrons in
the atoms or nonpolar molecules increases.
The halogen group consists of four elements that all t ake the form of nonpolar diatomic molecules. The tabl e below shows a comparison of the
melting and boiling points for each.

9.16.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332153Melting and Boiling Points of Halogens
Table: Melting and Boiling Points of Halogens
Molecule Total Number of Electrons Melting Point Boiling Point Physical State at Room
Temperature
18 -220 -188 gas
34 -102 -34 gas
70 -7 59 liquid
106 114 184 solid
The dispersion forces are strongest for iodine molecu les because they have the greatest number of electrons. The relatively stronger forces result in
melting and boiling points that are the highest of t he halogen group. These forces are strong enough to h old iodine molecules close together in the
solid state at room temperature. The dispersion forces are progressively weaker for bromine, chloride, and fluori ne; this is illustrated in their steadily
lower melting and boiling points. Bromine is a liqui d at room temperature, while chlorine and fluorine a re gases whose molecules are much further
apart from one another. Intermolecular forces are nearly no nexistent in the gas state, and so the dispersion for ces in chlorine and fluorine only
become measurable as the temperature decreases and the y condense into the liquid state.
0:00
Summary
Van der Waals forces are weak interactions between molecule s that involve dipoles.
Polar molecules have permanent dipole-dipole interactio ns.
Nonpolar molecules can interact by way of London dispersio n forces.
Review
1. What attractive forces develop between polar molecul es?
2. What creates London dispersion forces?
3. Are London dispersion forces permanent or temporary?
4. Are the dispersion forces for Cl stronger or weaker than the ones for Br?
This page titled 9.16: Van der Waals Forces is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
9.18: Van der Waals Forces by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.2 2

9.17.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321549.17: Hydrogen Bonding
Figure (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0; Molecule Public Domain; CK-12 Foundation - Joy She ng, using 3D molecular structure by Ben Mills
(Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Molecular structure: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nitrogen-3D-v dW.png)
Figure (Public Domain; (Left) User:Booyabazooka/Wik imedia Commons; (Right) Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah- bmm27) via (Left)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonia_lone_e lectron_pair.svg; (Right) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ammonia-3D-bal lsA.png)
What's the difference between these two molecules?
A rough rule of thumb is that higher molecular-weight m aterials have higher boiling points than their lower m olecular-weight counterparts. More
energy is needed to move the larger molecule from the liquid state to the vapor state. However, ammonia has a boiling point of and a
molecular weight of 17, while nitrogen (molecular weig ht 28) has a boiling point of. The lighter ammonia m olecule must have other
factors that influence its physical properties.
Hydrogen Bonding
The attractive force between water molecules is a dipo le interaction. The hydrogen atoms are bound to the highly electronegative oxygen atom
(which also possesses two lone pair sets of electrons, ma king for a very polar bond). The partially positive hy drogen atom of one molecule is then
attracted to the oxygen atom of a nearby water molecu le (see figure below).
Figure: A hydrogen bond in water occurs between the hydrogen atom of one water molecule and the lone p air of electrons on an oxygen atom
of a neighboring water molecule. (Public Domain; Be n Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Wikipedia)
A hydrogen bond is an intermolecular attractive force in which a hydroge n atom that is covalently bonded to a small, highly electronegative atom is
attracted to a lone pair of electrons on an atom in a neighboring molecule. Hydrogen bonds are very strong compared to other dipole interactions.
The strength of a typical hydrogen bond is about of that of a covalent bond.
Hydrogen bonding occurs only in molecules where hydrog en is covalently bonded to one of three elements: fl uorine, oxygen, or nitrogen. These
three elements are so electronegative that they withd raw the majority of the electron density in the covale nt bond with hydrogen, leaving the atom
very electron-deficient. The atom nearly acts as a b are proton, leaving it very attracted to lone pair el ectrons on a nearby atom.
The hydrogen bonding that occurs in water leads to som e unusual, but very important, properties. Most molecul ar compounds that have a mass
similar to water are gases at room temperature. Because of the strong hydrogen bonds, water molecules are able to st ay condensed in the liquid state.
The figure below shows how the bent shape, and two hydro gen atoms per molecule, allows each water molecule to be able to hydrogen bond to two
other molecules.
Figure: Multiple hydrogen bonds occur simultaneously in water because of its bent shape and the presence of two hydrogen atoms per
molecule. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Laura Guerin via CK-12 Foundation)

9.17.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332154In the liquid state, the hydrogen bonds of water can break and reform as the molecules flow from one place to another. When water is cooled, the
molecules begin to slow down. Eventually, when water is fr ozen to ice, the hydrogen bonds become permanent an d form a very specific network
(see figure below).
Figure: When water freezes to ice, the hydrogen bon ding network becomes permanent. Each oxygen atom has an approximately tetrahedral
geometry—two covalent bonds and two hydrogen bonds. (Public Domain; User:Materialscientist/Wikimedia Common s via Wikipedia)
The bent shape of the molecules leads to gaps in the h ydrogen bonding network of ice. Ice has a very unusual property—its solid state is less dense
than its liquid state. Ice floats in water. Virtually all other substances are denser in the solid state than in the liquid state. Hydrogen bonds play a very
important biological role in the physical structures of proteins and nucleic acids.
0:00
Summary
Hydrogen bonds form when a attached to a,, or atom int eracts with another,, or atom.
Review
1. How strong is a hydrogen bond?
2. What happens when H is covalently bonded to N, O, or F?
3. How does the shape of the water molecule affect the prop erties of ice?
This page titled 9.17: Hydrogen Bonding is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that
was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.
9.19: Hydrogen Bonding by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

9.17.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332154

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: Chemical Reactions
10.1: Word Equations
10.2: Chemical Equations
10.3: Balancing Equations
10.4: Combination Reactions
10.5: Decomposition Reactions
10.6: Combustion Reactions
10.7: Single Replacement Reactions
10.8: Double Replacement Reactions
10.9: Molecular and Ionic Equations
10.10: Net Ionic Equations
10.11: Predicting Precipitates Using Solubility Rules
10.12: Redox Reactions and Ionic Compounds
10.13: Identifying Reaction Types
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 10: Chemical Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

10.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216710.1: Word Equations
Figure (Public Domain; User:Daderot/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
What's for Dinner?
Various ways of recording recipes have developed over the centuries. The cookbook shown above was written b y a woman who
probably collected all her own recipes. Later, printed cookbooks became available (even guys had no excuse f or not being able to
cook). Today we can find recipes on a number of intern et sites and can quickly search for information on how to cook anything we
want. Reading a recipe sometimes requires we understand a few codes and symbols (what’s the difference between a tsp and a
Tsp?), but the information on what we start with and what we end up with is there.
Writing Chemical Equations
Chemical reactions are occurring all around us. Plants use sunlight to drive their photosynthetic process and produce ene rgy. Cars
and other vehicles burn gasoline in order to power th eir engines. Batteries use electrochemical reactions t o produce energy and
power many everyday devices. Many chemical reactions are going on within the human body as well, particularly during the
digestion of food.
In math class, you have written and solved many math ematical equations. Chemists keep track of chemical reactions by writing
equations as well. In any chemical reaction, one or mor e substances—called reactants —are converted into one or more new
substances—called products. The general form of the equation for such a process loo ks like this:
Unlike a math equation, a chemical equation does not use an equal sign. Instead, the arrow is called a yield si gn and so the equation
is described as "reactants yield products".
Word Equations
You can describe a chemical reaction by writing a word equation. When silver metal is exposed to sulfur, it reacts to form silver
sulfide. Silver sulfide is commonly known as tarnish a nd turns the surface of silver objects dark and streak y black (see figure
below). The sulfur that contributes to tarnish can co me from traces of sulfur in the air, or from foods suc h as eggs. The word
equation for the process is:
The silver and the sulfur are the reactants in the equa tion, while the silver sulfide is the product.
Figure: You can see dark spots of tarnished (silver sulfide) for ming on this ring as it reacts with sulfur compounds in the air.
(CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foundation via CK-12 Foundation)

10.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332167Another common chemical reaction is the burning of m ethane gas. Methane is the major component of natura l gas and is
commonly burned on a gas stove or in a Bunsen burner (figure below). Burning is a chemical reaction in whi ch some type of fuel is
reacted with oxygen gas. The products of the reaction in the burning of methane, as well as other fuels, are carbon dioxide and
water. The word equation for this reaction is:
Figure: A Bunsen burner is commonly used to heat substan ces in a chemistry lab. Methane is reacted with oxygen to form
carbon dioxide and water. (CK-12 Curriculum Materia ls license; CK-12 Foundation via CK-12 Foundation)
Word equations can be very useful, but do have one major drawback—they cannot be used for any quantitat ive work. A word
equation does not tell how many moles of each material are needed, or how many moles of product are formed.
Summary
Word equations are used to describe the conversion of react ants to products.
Review
1. Write the generic form of a chemical reaction.
2. What are reactants?
3. What are products?
This page titled 10.1: Word Equations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.1: Word Equations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Chemical Equations | Environmental ChChemical Equations | Environmental Ch

10.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216810.2: Chemical Equations
Figure (Public Domain; jons2 at pdphoto.org via Wikipedia)
How do you make shrimp gumbo?
Shrimp gumbo is one of many dishes that are part of t he Cajun culture in Louisiana. It's a spicy dish that needs careful control of all
the ingredients so that it has a "kick", but is not o verwhelming. Recipes convey not only what the prepara tion entails, but also
describe how much of each ingredient is needed, and t he details of how to cook the meal. Similarly, we need t his type of
information in order to carry out chemical reactions succes sfully and safely.
Chemical Equations
Word equations are time-consuming to write and do not prove to be convenient for many of the things that chemists need to do
with equations. A chemical equation is a representation of a chemical reaction that disp lays the reactants and products with
chemical formulas. The chemical equation for the reacti on of methane with oxygen is shown:
The equation above, called a skeleton equation, is an equation that shows only the formulas of the re actants and products with
nothing to indicate the relative amounts. The first s tep in writing an accurate chemical equation is to wri te the skeleton equation,
making sure that the formulas of all substances invo lved are written correctly. All reactants are written t o the left of the yield arrow,
separated from one another by a plus sign. Likewise, p roducts are written to the right of the yield arrow, also separated with a plus
sign.
It is often important to know the physical states of the reactants and products taking part in a reactio n. To do this, put the
appropriate symbol in parentheses after each formula: for solid, for liquid, for gas, and for an aqueo us (water-based)
solution. The previous reaction becomes:
The table below shows a listing of symbols used in chemi cal equations. Some, such as the double arrow which rep resents
equilibrium, and the use of a catalyst in a reaction, wil l be detailed in other concepts.
Table: Symbols Used in Chemical Equations

10.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332168Symbols Description
Used to separate multiple reactants or products.
Yield sign; separates reactants from products.
Replaces the yield sign for reversible reactions that r each
equilibrium.
Reactant or product in the solid state.
Reactant or product in the liquid state.
Reactant or product in the gaseous state.
Reactant or product in an aqueous solution (dissolved i n water).
Formula written above the arrow is used as a catalyst in the
reaction.
Triangle indicates that the reaction is being heated.
Summary
A chemical equation is representation a chemical reac tion using chemical formulas reactants and products, as well as symbols.
Symbols used in chemical equations are described and expl ained.
Review
1. What does a skeleton equation tell you?
2. Why would you want to know the physical state of materials in a chemical reaction?
3. In a chemical reaction what does symbol → mean?
4. If I see Δ over the arrow, what does this indicate?
This page titled 10.2: Chemical Equations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.2: Chemical Equations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Writing chemical equationsWriting chemical equations

10.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216910.3: Balancing Equations
Figure (Public Domain; Joseph Allen via Wikipedia)
Any leftovers?
When you cook a meal, quite often there are leftovers because you prepared more than people would eat at on e sitting. Sometimes
when you repair a piece of equipment, you end up with what are called "pocket parts"—small pieces you put in your pocket
because you're not sure where they belong. Chemistry tries to avoid leftovers and pocket parts. In normal chemical processes, we
cannot create or destroy matter (law of conservation of mass). If we start out with ten carbon atoms, we nee d to end up with ten
carbon atoms. John Dalton's atomic theory said that c hemical reactions basically involve the rearrangemen t of atoms. Chemical
equations need to follow these principles in order to be c orrect.
Balancing Chemical Equations
A balanced equation is a chemical equation in which mass is conserved and there are equal numbers of atoms of each element o n
both sides of the equation. We can write a chemical equati on for the reaction of carbon with hydrogen gas to form meth ane:
In order to write a correct equation, you must first write the correct skeleton equation with the correct ch emical formulas. Recall
that hydrogen is a diatomic molecule and so is written as.
When we count the number of atoms of both elements, sh own under the equation, we see that the equation is no t balanced. There
are only 2 atoms of hydrogen on the reactant side of the equation, while there are 4 atoms of hydrogen on the product side. We can
balance the above equation by adding a coefficient of 2 in front of the formula for hydrogen.
A coefficient is a small whole number placed in front of a formula in an equation in order to balance it. The 2 in fr ont of the
means that there are a total of atoms of hydrogen as re actants. Visually, the reaction looks like the figure bel ow.
Figure: Reaction between carbon and hydrogen to for m methane. (Public Domain; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Ben jah-bmm27
via Wikipedia and http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Methane-3D-spac e-filling.png)
In the balanced equation, there is one atom of carbo n and four atoms of hydrogen on both sides of the ar row. Below are guidelines
for writing and balancing chemical equations.
1. Determine the correct chemical formulas for each rea ctant and product.
2. Write the skeleton equation.
3. Count the number of atoms of each element that appears as a reactant and as a product. If a polyatomic ion is unchan ged on
both sides of the equation, count it as a unit.
4. Balance each element one at a time by placing coeffi cients in front of the formulas.
a. It is best to begin by balancing elements that only ap pear in one chemical formula on each side of the equation.
b. No coefficient is written for a 1.

10.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332169c. NEVER change the subscripts in a chemical formula—you can only balance equations by using coefficients.
5. Check each atom or polyatomic ion to be sure that th ey are equal on both sides of the equation.
6. Make sure that all coefficients are in the lowest possi ble ratio. If necessary, reduce to the lowest ratio.
Aqueous solutions of lead (II) nitrate and sodium chl oride are mixed. The products of the reaction are an aqueous solution of
sodium nitrate and a solid precipitate of lead (II) chlori de. Write the balanced chemical equation for this react ion.
Solution
Step 1: Plan the problem.
Follow the steps for writing and balancing a chemical equatio n listed in the text.
Step 2: Solve.
Write the skeleton equation with the correct formulas.
Count the number of each atom or polyatomic ion on both sides of the equation.
The nitrate ions and the chlorine atoms are unbalan ced. Start by placing a 2 in front of the. This incr eases the reactant
counts to 2 atoms and 2 atoms. Then place a 2 in front of the. The result is:
The new count for each atom and polyatomic ion becomes:
Step 3: Think about your result.
The equation is now balanced since there are equal numbe rs of atoms of each element on both sides of the equation.Example: Balancing Chemical Equations
Balancing Chemical EquationsBalancing Chemical Equations

10.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332169Summary
The process of balancing chemical equations is describe d.
Review
1. What is the law of conservation of mass?
2. How did Dalton describe the process of a chemical reaction?
3. Why don’t we change the subscripts in order to balance a n equation?
This page titled 10.3: Balancing Equations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.3: Balancing Equations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

10.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217010.4: Combination Reactions
Figure (Public Domain; Rim: User:Relaxatiallc/Wikime dia Commons; Wheel: Christopher Ziemnowicz via Rim:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ats_amgpenta.jp g; Wheel:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:1975_AACA_AMC_ Pacer_X_red-white_wheel.jpg)
How useful is a wheel rim?
A wheel rim is not very useful by itself. Driving on the rim can damage it and make for a very rough ride. When the rim is
combined with a tire, the product can be put on a ca r and used for a safe and comfortable ride. The two separate items combine to
make something that improves the car ride.
Combination Reactions
A combination reaction is a reaction in which two or more substances combine t o form a single new substance. Combination
reactions can also be called synthesis reactions. The gen eral form of a combination reaction is:
One combination reaction is two elements combining to form a compound. Solid sodium metal reacts with chlorin e gas to produce
solid sodium chloride.
In order to write and balance the equation correctly, it is important to remember the seven elements that exist in nature as diatomic
molecules:,,,,,, and.
One sort of combination reaction that occurs frequen tly is the reaction of an element with oxygen to for m an oxide. Metals and
nonmetals both react readily with oxygen under most co nditions. Magnesium reacts rapidly and dramatically whe n ignited,
combining with oxygen from the air to produce a fine powder of magnesium oxide.

10.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332170Sulfur reacts with oxygen to form sulfur dioxide.
When nonmetals react with one another, the product i s a molecular compound. Often, the nonmetal reactants ca n combine in
different ratios and produce different products. Sulfur c an also combine with oxygen to form sulfur trioxide.
Transition metals are capable of adopting multiple p ositive charges within their ionic compounds. Therefor e, most transition metals
are capable of forming different products in a combi nation reaction. Iron reacts with oxygen to form both iron (II) oxide and iron
(III) oxide:
Potassium is a very reactive alkali metal that must b e stored under oil in order to prevent it from reac ting with air. Write the
balanced chemical equation for the combination reacti on of potassium with oxygen.
Solution
Reaction of Magnesium and Oxy genReaction of Magnesium and Oxy gen
Sy nthesis Reactions (Combination ReacSy nthesis Reactions (Combination Reac
Example: Combination Reactions

10.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332170Step 1: Plan the problem.
Make sure formulas of all reactants and products are correct before balancing the equation. Oxygen gas is a diatomi c molecule.
Potassium oxide is an ionic compound and so its form ula is constructed by the crisscross method. Potassium a s an ion becomes
, while the oxide ion is.
Step 2: Solve.
The skeleton (unbalanced) equation:
The equation is then easily balanced with coefficients.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Formulas are correct and the resulting combination react ion is balanced.
Can you build a balanced, combination reaction for the fo rmation of aluminum oxide (Al O)?
Answer
4Al + 3O → 2Al O
Combination reactions can also take place when an elem ent reacts with a compound to form a new compound com posed of a larger
number of atoms. Carbon monoxide reacts with oxygen to fo rm carbon dioxide, according to the equation:
Two compounds may also react to form a more complex compound. A very common example is the reaction of a n oxide with
water. Calcium oxide reacts readily with water to produce an aqu eous solution of calcium hydroxide.
Sulfur trioxide gas reacts with water to form sulfuric acid. This is an unfortunately common reaction that occurs in the atmosphere
in some places where oxides of sulfur are present as pollu tants. The acid formed in the reaction falls to the ground as acid rain.
Figure: Acid rain has severe consequences on both natur al and manmade objects. Acid rain degrades marble stat ues like the
one on the left (A). The trees in the forest on the r ight (B) have been killed by acid rain. ((A; (A) Ni pik; (B) Nino Barbieri via (A)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acid_rain_wood s1.JPG; (B) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Pollution__Damaged_by_acid_rain.jpg) Public Domain; (B) CC by 2.5)
Summary
Combination reactions occur when two or more substances combine to form a new substance.
Review
1. What are combination reactions?
2. Write the product of the following reaction: Mg+H O→
3. Is CH +2O →CO +2H O a combination reaction? Explain you r answer.Exercise
2 3
2 2 3
4 2 2 2

10.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332170This page titled 10.4: Combination Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.4: Combination Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

10.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217110.5: Decomposition Reactions
Figure (Public Domain; Madame Lavoisier, modified by User: Cdang/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
How does a decomposition reaction work?
Antoine Lavoisier is widely known as the “father of mode rn chemistry.” He was one of the first to study chemica l reactions in
detail. Lavoisier reacted mercury with oxygen to for m mercuric oxide as part of his studies on the compos ition of the atmosphere.
He was then able to show that the decomposition of mer curic oxide produced mercury and oxygen. The diagra m above shows the
apparatus used by Lavoisier to study the formation and dec omposition of mercuric oxide.
Decomposition Reactions
A decomposition reaction is a reaction in which a compound breaks down into two or more simpler substances. The general form
of a decomposition reaction is:
Most decomposition reactions require an input of energy i n the form of heat, light, or electricity.
Binary compounds are compounds composed of just two e lements. The simplest kind of decomposition reaction is when a binary
compound decomposes into its elements. Mercury (II) ox ide, a red solid, decomposes when heated to produce me rcury and oxygen
gas.
Figure: Mercury (II) oxide is a red solid. When it is heated, it decomposes into mercury metal and oxygen gas. (Public
Domain; Ben Mills (User:Benjah-bmm27/Wikimedia Common s) via Wikipedia)
A reaction is also considered to be a decomposition r eaction even when one or more of the products are sti ll compounds. A metal
carbonate decomposes into a metal oxide and carbon di oxide gas. For example, calcium carbonate decomposes into calcium oxide
and carbon dioxide:
Metal hydroxides decompose on heating to yield metal oxides and water. Sodium hydroxide decomposes to pro duce sodium oxide
and water:
Some unstable acids decompose to produce nonmetal oxi des and water. Carbonic acid decomposes easily at room t emperature into
carbon dioxide and water:

10.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332171Can you build a balanced Chemical reaction for the deco mposition of Potassium chlorate (KClO)?
Answer
2KClO → 2KCl + 3O
When an electric current is passed through pure water, it decomposes into its elements. Write a balanced e quation for the
decomposition of water.
Solution
Step 1: Plan the problem.
Water is a binary compound composed of hydrogen and oxygen. The hydrogen and oxygen gases produced in t he reaction are
both diatomic molecules.
Step 2: Solve.
The skeleton (unbalanced) equation:
Note the abbreviation " " above the arrow to indicate the passage of an electric current to initiate the r eaction. Balance the
equation.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The products are elements and the equation is balanced.
Sy nthesis and Decomposition ReactionsSy nthesis and Decomposition Reactions
Exercise
3 2
Example: Decomposition Reactions

10.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332171Summary
A definition of decomposition reaction and example re actions are given.
Review
1. What is a decomposition reaction?
2. What is usually needed for a decomposition reaction to take place?
3. Are elements always the product of a decomposition reaction?
This page titled 10.5: Decomposition Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.5: Decomposition Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Decomposition ReactionsDecomposition Reactions

10.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217210.6: Combustion Reactions
Figure (CC BY 2.0; Nina Hale via Wikipedia)
How do you cook the perfect marshmallow?
Roasting marshmallows over an open fire is a favorite past-time for campers, outdoor cook-outs, and just g athering around a fire in
the back yard. The trick is to get the marshmallow a nice golden brown without catching it on fire. Too of ten we are not successful
and we see the marshmallow burning on the stick – a combus tion reaction taking place right in front of us.
Combustion Reactions
A combustion reaction is a reaction in which a substance reacts with oxygen gas, releasing energy in the form of light and heat.
Combustion reactions must involve as one reactant. T he combustion of hydrogen gas produces water vapor:
Notice that this reaction also qualifies as a combinatio n reaction.
Figure: Explosion of the Hindenberg. (Public Domain; Gus Pasquerella/US Navy via Wikipedia)
The Hindenberg was a hydrogen-filled airship that suffered an accid ent upon its attempted landing in New Jersey in 1937. The
hydrogen immediately combusted in a huge fireball, de stroying the airship and killing 36 people. The che mical reaction was a
simple one: hydrogen combining with oxygen to produce wat er.
Many combustion reactions occur with a hydrocarbon, a compound made up solely of carbon and hydrogen. The products of the
combustion of hydrocarbons are carbon dioxide and wat er. Many hydrocarbons are used as fuel because their combustion releases
very large amounts of heat energy. Propane is a gaseous hydrocarbon that is commonly used as the fuel source in gas g rills.
Ethanol can be used as a fuel source in an alcohol l amp. The formula for ethanol is. Write the balance d equation for
the combustion of ethanol.
Solution
Step 1: Plan the problem.Example: Combustion Reactions

10.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332172Ethanol and oxygen are the reactants. As with a hydro carbon, the products of the combustion of an alcohol are carbon dioxide
and water.
Step 2: Solve.
Write the skeleton equation:
Balance the equation.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Combustion reactions must have oxygen as a reactant. Note that the water produced is in the gas state, rathe r than the liquid
state, because of the high temperatures that accompany a combustion reaction.
Summary
Combustion reaction is defined and examples are given.
Review
1. What is needed for a combustion reaction to take place?
2. What is formed in any combustion reaction?
3. Mercury reacts with oxygen to form mercuric oxide. Is this a combustion reaction?
4. What are the products of any combustion reaction involv ing a hydrocarbon?
This page titled 10.6: Combustion Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.6: Combustion Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Chemistry Lesson - 37 - Combustion ReChemistry Lesson - 37 - Combustion Re

10.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217310.7: Single Replacement Reactions
Figure (Pixabay License; wisteriax via Pixabay)
Why is the silver dark?
The platter and pitcher shown above provides an exam ple of tarnish, a chemical reaction caued when silve r metal reacts with
hydrogen sulfide gas produced by some industrial process es or as a result of decaying animal or plant materials:
The tarnish can be removed using a number of polishes, b ut the process also removes a small amount of silver along with the
tarnish.
Single-Replacement Reactions
A single-replacement reaction is a reaction in which one element replaces a simil ar element in a compound. The general form of a
single-replacement (also called single-displacement) r eaction is:
In this general reaction, element is a metal and re places element (also a metal) in the compound. When the element that is
doing the replacing is a nonmetal, it must replace another nonmetal in a compound, and the general equation become s:
(Where is a nonmetal and replaces the nonmetal in the compound with.)
Metal Replacement
Magnesium is a more reactive metal than copper. When a strip of magnesium metal is placed in an aqueous solution of copper (II)
nitrate, it replaces the copper. The products of the reacti on are aqueous magnesium nitrate and solid copper metal.
This subcategory of single-replacement reactions is cal led a metal replacement reaction because it is a me tal that is being replaced
(copper).
Hydrogen Replacement
Many metals react easily with acids and when they do so, one of the products of the reaction is hydrogen ga s. Zinc reacts with
hydrochloric acid to produce aqueous zinc chloride and hydrogen (figure below).
In a hydrogen replacement reaction, the hydrogen in t he acid is replaced by an active metal.

10.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332173
Figure: Zinc metal reacts with hydrochloric acid to give off hydrogen gas in a single-displacement reaction. (Publi c Domain;
User: Chemicalinterest/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Some metals are so reactive that they are capable of replacing the hydrogen in water. The products of such a reaction are the metal
hydroxide and hydrogen gas. All group 1 metals underg o this type of reaction. Sodium reacts vigorously wit h water to produce
aqueous sodium hydroxide and hydrogen (see figure below).
Figure: Sodium metal reacts vigorously with water, giv ing off hydrogen gas. A large piece of sodium will of ten generate so
much heat that the hydrogen will ignite. (Public Do main; User:Ajhalls/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Halogen Replacement
The element chlorine reacts with an aqueous solution of sodium bromide to produce aqueous sodium chlorid e and elemental
bromine:
The reactivity of the halogen group (group 17) decr eases from top to bottom within the group. Fluorine i s the most reactive
halogen, while iodine is the least. Since chlorine is ab ove bromine, it is more reactive than bromine and ca n replace it in a halogen
replacement reaction.

10.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332173Summary
The activity series describes the relative reactivities of metals and halogens.
Review
1. What is a metal replacement reaction?
2. Will a non-metal replace a metal?
3. What is the most reactive halogen?
4. What products will I get if I add potassium metal to wate r?
This page titled 10.7: Single Replacement Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.7: Single Replacement Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Find the Products of a Single DisplacemFind the Products of a Single Displacem

10.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217410.8: Double Replacement Reactions
Figure (Public Domain; F. S. Church, published in Har per's Weekly, January 17, 1874, p. 61 via Wikipedia)
Want to trade?
The practice of barter (trading one thing for anothe r) has been in existence for a very long time. In the illustration above, items like
chickens were bartered for newspapers. You have someth ing I want, and I have something you want. So we trade a nd we each have
something new. Some chemical reactions are like that. Co mpounds swap parts and you have new materials.
Double-Replacement Reactions
A double-replacement reaction is a reaction in which the positive and negative io ns of two ionic compounds exchange places to
form two new compounds. The general form of a double-replac ement (also called double-displacement) reaction is:
In this reaction, and are positively-charged cation s, while and are negatively-charged anions. Double- replacement
reactions generally occur between substances in aqueo us solution. In order for a reaction to occur, one of the products is usually a
solid precipitate, a gas, or a molecular compound such as wat er.
Formation of a Precipitate
A precipitate forms in a double-replacement reactio n when the cations from one of the reactants combine wi th the anions from the
other reactant to form an insoluble ionic compound. When aqueous solutions of potassium iodide and lead (II) nitrate are mixed,
the following reaction occurs:
There are very strong attractive forces that occur between and ions and the result is a brilliant yel low precipitate (see figure
below). The other product of the reaction, potassium nitrate, remains soluble.
Figure: Formation of lead iodide precipitate. (CC-BY 2.0; Paige Powers - "Lead Iodide" via Flickr)
Formation of a Gas
Some double-replacement reactions produce a gaseous p roduct which then bubbles out of the solution and esca pes into the air.
When solutions of sodium sulfide and hydrochloric aci d are mixed, the products of the reaction are aqueo us sodium chloride and
hydrogen sulfide gas.
Formation of a Molecular Compound
Another kind of double-replacement reaction is one t hat produces a molecular compound as one of its produ cts. Many examples in
this category are reactions that produce water. When aqueous hydrochloric acid is reacted with aqueous sodiu m hydroxide, the

10.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332174products are aqueous sodium chloride and water:
Write a complete and balanced chemical equation for the following double-replacement reactions. One produc t is indicated as
a guide.
a. (hydrogen cyanide gas is formed)
b. (a precipitate of barium sulfate forms)
Solution
Step 1: Plan the problem.
In A, the production of a gas drives the reaction. In B, the production of a precipitate drives the reactio n. In both cases, use the
ionic charges of both reactants to construct the correct formulas of the products.
Step 2: Solve.
A. The cations of both reactants are charged ions, wh ile the anions are charged ions. After exchanging pa rtners, the
balanced equation is:
B. Ammonium ion and nitrate ion are and respectivel y, while barium and sulfate are and. This must be tak en into
account when exchanging partners and writing the new formu las. Then, the equation is balanced.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Both are double replacement reactions. All formulas are correct and the equations are balanced.
Occasionally, a reaction will produce both a gas and a molecular compound. The reaction of a sodium carbona te solution with
hydrochloric acid produces aqueous sodium chloride, c arbon dioxide gas, and water.Example: Double-Replacement Reactions
Writing and Balancing Reactions DoubleWriting and Balancing Reactions Double

10.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332174Summary
The double-replacement reaction generally takes the fo rm of AB + CD → AD + CB where A and C are positively-charged
cations, while B and D are negatively-charged anions.
In a double replacement reactions, typically one of the p roducts is a precipitate, a gas, or a molecular compound.
Review
1. In a double-replacement reaction, what type of compou nds are usually the reactants? A double-replacement r eaction occurs
between sodium sulfide and hydrogen chloride. Write the re st of the chemical equation and balance it.
2. Na S + HCl →
3. In double-replacement reaction, one of three possib le types of products usually form. What are the three ty pes?
This page titled 10.8: Double Replacement Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
11.9: Double Replacement Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.2

10.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217510.9: Molecular and Ionic Equations
One of the unfortunate byproducts of industrialized so ciety is acid rain. Sulfur dioxide from burning coal a nd nitrogen oxides from
vehicle emissions both form acids. When these acids r eact with limestone (calcium carbonate), reactions o ccur that dissolve the
limestone and release water and carbon dioxide. Over a pe riod of time, serious damage is caused to the limestone stru cture.
Molecular and Ionic Equations
When ionic compounds are dissolved into water, the pola r water molecules break apart the solid crystal lattice, resulting in the
hydrated ions being evenly distributed through the water. This process is called dissociation and is the reason that all ionic
compounds are strong electrolytes. When two different ionic compounds that have been dissolved in water are mixed, a chemical
reaction may occur between certain pairs of the hydra ted ions. Consider the double-replacement reaction that occurs when a
solution of sodium chloride is mixed with a solution of s ilver nitrate:
The driving force behind this reaction is the formation o f the silver chloride precipitate (see figure below).
Figure: The white silver chloride precipitate instant ly forms when a solution of silver nitrate is added to a solution of sodium
chloride.
This is called a molecular equation. A molecular equation is an equation in which the formulas of the compoun ds are written as
though all substances exist as molecules. However, there is a better way to show what is happening in this reaction. All of the
aqueous compounds should be written as ions, because the y are present in the water as separated ions—a result of their
dissociation.
This equation is called an ionic equation, an equation in which dissolved ionic compounds are shown as free ions.
Some other double-replacement reactions do not produ ce a precipitate as one of the products. The product ion of a gas and/or a
molecular compound such as water may also drive the r eaction. For example, consider the reaction of a soluti on of sodium
carbonate with a solution of hydrochloric acid. The products of the reaction are aqueous sodium chloride, carbon dioxide,
and water. The balanced molecular equation is:
The ionic equation is:
A single-replacement reaction is one in which an elem ent replaces another element in a compound. An element is in either the
solid, liquid, or gas state and is not an ion. The exa mple below shows the reaction of solid magnesium metal with aqueous silver
nitrate to form aqueous magnesium nitrate and silver meta l.
Balanced molecular equation:

10.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332175Ionic equation:
This type of single-replacement reaction is called a metal replacement. Other common categories of single- replacement reactions
are: hydrogen replacement and halogen replacement.
Summary
A molecular equation is an equation in which the formulas of the compounds are written as though all substances exist as
molecules.
An ionic equation is one in which dissolved ionic compounds are shown as free ions.
Examples of molecular and ionic equations are shown.
This page titled 10.9: Molecular and Ionic Equations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.17: Molecular and Ionic Equations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

10.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217610.10: Net Ionic Equations
At sports events around the world, a small number of at hletes fiercely compete on fields and in stadiums. The y get tired, dirty, and
sometimes hurt as they try to win the game. Surrounding them are thousands of spectators watching and cheerin g. Would the game
be different without the spectators? Definitely! Specta tors provide encouragement to the team and generate enthusiasm. Although
the spectators are not playing the game, they are certain ly a part of the process.
Net Ionic Equations
We can write a molecular equation for the formation of s ilver chloride precipitate:
The corresponding ionic equation is:
If you look carefully at the ionic equation, you will notice that the sodium ion and the nitrate ion app ear unchanged on both sides of
the equation. When the two solutions are mixed, neith er the nor the ions participate in the reaction. The y can be
eliminated from the reaction.
A spectator ion is an ion that does not take part in the chemical r eaction and is found in solution both before and af ter the reaction.
In the above reaction, the sodium ion and the nitrat e ion are both spectator ions. The equation can now be written without the
spectator ions:
The net ionic equation is the chemical equation that shows only those eleme nts, compounds, and ions that are directly involved in
the chemical reaction. Notice that in writing the net ionic equation, the positively-charged silver catio n was written first on the
reactant side, followed by the negatively-charged ch loride anion. This is somewhat customary because that i s the order in which the
ions must be written in the silver chloride product. Howeve r, it is not absolutely necessary to order the reactants in this way.
Net ionic equations must be balanced by both mass and charge. Balancing by mass means ensuring that there ar e equal masses of
each element on the product and reactant sides. Balan cing by charge means making sure that the overall c harge is the same on both
sides of the equation. In the above equation, the ove rall charge is zero, or neutral, on both sides of the equation. As a general rule, if
you balance the molecular equation properly, the net ion ic equation will end up being balanced by both mass and ch arge.
When aqueous solutions of copper (II) chloride and p otassium phosphate are mixed, a precipitate of coppe r (II) phosphate is
formed. Write a balanced net ionic equation for this reac tion.
Solution
Step 1: Plan the problem.
Write and balance the molecular equation first, maki ng sure that all formulas are correct. Then write the ionic equation,
showing all aqueous substances as ions. Carry through any coefficients. Finally, eliminate spectator ions a nd write the net ionic
equation.
Step 2: Solve.
Molecular equation:
Ionic equation:Example

10.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332176Notice that the balance of the equation is carried t hrough when writing the dissociated ions. For example, there are six chloride
ions on the reactant side because the coefficient o f 3 is multiplied by the subscript of 2 on the copp er (II) chloride formula. The
spectator ions, and, can be eliminated.
Net ionic equation:
Step 3: Think about your result.
For a precipitation reaction, the net ionic equation always shows the two ions that come together to form th e precipitate. The
equation is balanced by mass and charge.
Summary
A spectator ion is an ion that does not take part in the chemical reaction and is found in solution both before and after the
reaction.
The net ionic equation is the chemical equation that sho ws only those elements, compounds, and ions that are direct ly involved
in the chemical reaction.
An example of writing a net ionic equation is outlined.
This page titled 10.10: Net Ionic Equations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.18: Net Ionic Equations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

10.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217710.11: Predicting Precipitates Using Solubility Rules
Predicting the weather is tricky business. A thorough examination of a large amount of data is needed to make the daily forecast.
Wind patterns, historical data, barometric pressure—t hese and many other data are fed into computers tha t then use a set of rules to
predict what will happen based on past history.
Solubility Rules
Some combinations of aqueous reactants result in the formation of a solid precipitate as a product. Howeve r, some combinations
will not produce such a product. If solutions of sodiu m nitrate and ammonium chloride are mixed, no reacti on occurs. One could
write a molecular equation showing a double-replaceme nt reaction, but both products, sodium chloride and a mmonium nitrate, are
soluble and would remain in the solution as ions. Every ion is a spectator ion and there is no net ionic equation at all.
It is useful to be able to predict when a precipitate will occur in a reaction. To do so, you can use a se t of guidelines called the
solubility rules (shown in Table).
Table: Solubility Rules for Ionic Compounds in Water
SolubleCompounds containing the alkali metal ions
and ammonium ion.
SolubleCompounds containing the nitrate ion, acetate ion
, chlorate ion, and bicarbonate ion.
Mostly SolubleCompounds containing the chloride ion, bromide ion,
and iodide ion. Exceptions are those of silver, merc ury
(I), and lead (II).
Mostly SolubleCompounds containing the sulfate ion. Exceptions are
those of silver, calcium, strontium, barium
, mercury (I), and lead (II).
Mostly InsolubleCompounds containing the carbonate ion, phosphate io n
, chromate ion, sulfide ion, and silicate ion
. Exceptions are those of the alkali metals and ammoni um.
Mostly InsolubleCompounds containing the hydroxide ion. Exceptions a re
those of the alkali metals and the barium ion.
For practice using the solubility rules, predict if a precipitate will form when solutions of cesium bromi de and lead (II) nitrate are
mixed.
The potential precipitates from a double-replacemen t reaction are cesium nitrate and lead (II) bromide. According to the solubility
rules table, cesium nitrate is soluble because all compou nds containing the nitrate ion, as well as all compoun ds containing the
alkali metal ions, are soluble. Most compounds contain ing the bromide ion are soluble, but lead (II) is an e xception. Therefore, the
cesium and nitrate ions are spectator ions and the lead (II) bromide is a precipitate. The balanced net ionic re action is:
Summary
This page titled 10.11: Predicting Precipitates Using Solubility Rules is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.19: Predicting Precipitates Using Solubility Rules by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

10.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217810.12: Redox Reactions and Ionic Compounds
Nitric acid has many uses in the manufacture of fert ilizers and explosives. Most nitric acid is manufact ured from ammonia using a
three-step process. The ammonia is oxidized to through the formation of several nitrogen oxides, finally resulti ng in the acid.
Redox Reactions and Ionic Compounds
In the course of a chemical reaction between a metal and a nonmetal, electrons are transferred from the m etal atoms to the
nonmetal atoms. For example, when zinc metal is mixed wi th sulfur and heated, the compound zinc sulfide is pro duced. Two
valence electrons from each zinc atom are transferred t o each sulfur atom.
Figure: Reaction between zinc and sulfur.
Since the zinc is losing electrons in the reaction, i t is being oxidized. The sulfur is gaining electrons and is thus being reduced. An
oxidation-reduction reaction is a reaction that involves the full or partial tran sfer of electrons from one reactant to another.
Oxidation is the full or partial loss of electrons or the gai n of oxygen. Reduction is the full or partial gain of electrons or the lo ss
of oxygen. A redox reaction is another term for an oxidation-reduction reaction.
Each of these processes can be shown in a separate equa tion called a half-reaction. A half-reaction is an equation that shows either
the oxidation or the reduction reaction that occurs dur ing a redox reaction.
It is important to remember that the two half-reacti ons occur simultaneously. The resulting ions that are formed are then attracted to
one another in an ionic bond.
Another example of an oxidation-reduction reaction i nvolving electron transfer is the well-known combinat ion of metallic sodium
and chlorine gas to form sodium chloride:
The half reactions are as follows:
We will concern ourselves with the balancing of these equati ons at another time.
Summary
An oxidation-reduction reaction, or redox reaction, is a re action that involves the full or partial transfer of electr ons from one
reactant to another.
Oxidation is the full or partial loss of electrons or the g ain of oxygen.
Reduction is the full or partial gain of electrons or the loss of oxygen.
A half-reaction is an equation that shows either the oxi dation or the reduction reaction that occurs during a red ox reaction.
Examples of oxidation-reduction reactions are shown.
This page titled 10.12: Redox Reactions and Ionic Compounds is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.2: Redox Reactions and Ionic Compounds by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

10.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33217910.13: Identifying Reaction Types
The reaction of copper wire with nitric acid produces a colorful mix of products that include copper (II) nitrate, nitrogen dioxide,
and water. Copper salts are blue in solution, reflecting the rather unique arrangements of electrons in the orbital as the copper
ionizes from metallic copper.
Identifying Reaction Types
A redox reaction must involve a change in oxidation number for two of the elements involved in the reac tion. The oxidized element
increases in oxidation number, while the reduced eleme nt decreases in oxidation number.
Single-replacement reactions are redox reactions becau se two different elements appear as free elements (ox idation number of
zero) on one side of the equation and as part of a compoun d on the other side. Therefore, oxidation numbers must change.
is oxidized from to and the is reduced from to.
Combustion reactions are redox reactions because ele mental oxygen acts as the oxidizing agent and is itsel f reduced.
Most combination and decomposition reactions are redox reactions, since elements are usually transformed into compounds and
vice-versa. The thermite reaction involves ferric oxide and metallic aluminum:
Figure: Thermite grenade demonstration.
We see that the iron is reduced and the aluminum oxidized during the course of the reaction.
So what types of reactions are not redox reactions? Do uble-replacement reactions, such as the one below, are not redox reactions
because ions are simply recombined without any transfer o f electrons.
Note that the oxidation numbers for each element remain u nchanged in the reaction.
Acid-base reactions involve a transfer of a hydrogen ion instead of an electron. Acid-base reactions, like t he one below, are also not
redox reactions.
Again, the transfer of an ion leaves the oxidation nu mbers unaffected. In summary, redox reactions can alwa ys be recognized by
a change in oxidation number of two of the atoms in the reaction. Any reaction in which no oxidation numb ers change is not a
redox reaction.

10.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332179Summary
A redox reaction must involve a change in oxidation numb er for two of the elements involved in the reaction.
The oxidized element increases in oxidation number, wh ile the reduced element decreases in oxidation number.
Single-replacement reactions and combustion reactions are redox reactions.
Most combination and decomposition reactions are redox r eactions.
Double-replacement reactions and acid-base reactions are not redox reactions.
This page titled 10.13: Identifying Reaction Types is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
22.8: Identifying Reaction Types by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: The Mole
The mole is the unit of measurement in the Internatio nal System of Units (SI) for amount of substance. It is defined as the amount
of a chemical substance that contains as many eleme ntary entities (e.g., atoms, molecules, ions, electrons, or photons). This number
is expressed by the Avogadro constant, which has a va lue of. The mole is one of the base units of the SI,
and has the unit symbol mol.
11.1: Avogadro's Number
11.2: Conversions Between Moles and Atoms
11.3: Molar Mass
11.4: Conversions Between Moles and Mass
11.5: Conversions Between Mass and Number of Particles
11.6: Percent Composition
11.7: Percent of Water in a Hydrate
11.8: Determining Empirical Formulas
11.9: Determining Molecular Formulas
11.10: Avogadro's Hypothesis and Molar V olume
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 11: The Mole is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

11.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33215611.1: Avogadro's Number
Figure (Public Domain; User:OSX/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
Is there an easier way to load this truck?
When the weather is nice, many people begin to work on their yards and homes. For many projects, sand is neede d as a foundation
for a walk or to add to other materials. You could o rder up twenty million grains of sand and have peopl e really stare at you. You
could order by the pound, but that takes a lot of ti me weighing out. The best bet is to order by the yard, m eaning a cubic yard. The
loader can easily scoop up what you need and put it directly in your truck.
Avogadro's Number
It certainly is easy to count objects such as bananas, or something as large as elephants (as long as you stay out of their way).
However, counting grains of sugar from a sugar canister would take a long, long time. Atoms and molecules are e xtremely small—
far, far smaller than grains of sugar. Counting atoms o r molecules is not only unwise, it is absolutely imposs ible. One drop of water
contains about molecules of water. If you counted 10 molecules every second for 50 years, without stopping, you would have
counted only molecules. Put another way, at that counti ng rate, it would take you over 30 trillion years to count the water
molecules in one tiny drop.
Chemists of the past needed a name that could stand for a very large number of items. Amadeo Avogadro (1 776-1856), an Italian
scientist, provided such a number. He is responsible fo r the counting unit of measure called the mole. A mole is the amount of
a substance that contains representative particles o f that substance. The mole is the SI unit for amount of a substance.
Just like the dozen and the gross, it is a name that stands for a number. There are therefore water mol ecules in a mole of
water molecules. There also would be bananas in a mole of b ananas, if such a huge number of bananas ever existed.
Figure: Italian scientist Amadeo Avogadro, whose work led to the concept of the mole as a counting unit in chemistry.
(Public Domain; C. Sentier via Wikipedia)
The number is called Avogadro's number, the number of representative particles in a mole. It is an experimentally
determined number. A representative particle is the smallest unit in which a substance naturally e xists. For the majority of
elements, the representative particle is the atom. I ron, carbon, and helium consist of iron atoms, carbon atoms, and helium atoms,
respectively. Seven elements exist in nature as diatomi c molecules and they are,,,,,, and. The repr esentative
particle for these elements is the molecule. Likewise, all molecular compounds such as and exist as mole cules and so the
molecule is their representative particle. For ionic c ompounds such as and, the representative particle is the formula
unit. A mole of any substance contains Avogadro's number of representative particles.

11.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332156
Figure: The animal mole is very different than the c ounting unit of the mole. Chemists nonetheless have ado pted the mole as
their unofficial mascot. National Mole Day is a celeb ration of chemistry that occurs on October 23 (10/23) of each year. ((left;
Left: Michael David Hill, 2005 (Mikiwikipikidikiped ia); Right: chrisbb@prodigy.net;(left) Michael David Hill, 2005
(Mikiwikipikidikipedia); (right) chrisbb@prodigy.net via Left: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Close-up_of_mol e.jpg;
Right: http://www.flickr.com/photos/chrisbrenschmidt/43699009 7;(left) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Closeup_of_mole.jpg; (right) http://www.flickr.com/photos/chrisbrenschmidt/43699009 7) CC-BY 2.5; (right) CC-BY 2.0)
Summary
A mole of any substance contains Avogadro's number of representative particles.
Review
1. What is the SI unit for amount of a substance?
2. What is the representative particle for an element?
3. The formula unit is the representative particle for wha t?
This page titled 11.1: Avogadro's Number is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.1: Avogadro's Number by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.rd
How big is a mole? (Not the animal, the How big is a mole? (Not the animal, the

11.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33215711.2: Conversions Between Moles and Atoms
Figure (Public Domain; Diane A. Reid/National Cancer Institute via Wikipedia)
Big numbers or little numbers?
Do you hate to type subscripts and superscripts? Even with a good word-processing program, having to click o n an icon to get a
superscript and then remembering to click off after you type the number can be a real hassle. If we did not know about moles and
just knew about numbers of atoms or molecules (those b ig numbers that require lots of superscripts), life would be much more
complicated and we would make many more typing errors.
Conversions Between Moles and Atoms
Conversions Between Moles and Number of Particles
Using our unit conversion techniques, we can use the mo le label to convert back and forth between the numbe r of particles and
moles.
The element carbon exists in two primary forms: graph ite and diamond. How many moles of carbon atoms is atom s
of carbon?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
number of atoms
mole atoms
Unknown
4.72 x 10 =? mol C
One conversion factor will allow us to convert from the numbe r of atoms to moles of atoms.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The given number of carbon atoms was greater than Avo gadro's number, so the number of moles of atoms is gr eater than 1
mole. Since Avogadro's number is a measured quantity wit h three significant figures, the result of the calc ulation is rounded to
three significant figures.
Suppose that you want to know how many hydrogen atoms ar e in a mole of water molecules. First, you need to know t he chemical
formula for water, which is. There are two atoms of hy drogen in each molecule of water. How many atoms of hyd rogen are in
two water molecules? There are hydrogen atoms. How about in a dozen? In that case, a dozen is 12; so
hydrogen atoms in a dozen water molecules. To get th e answers (4 and 24), you multiply the given number of molecules by twoExample: Converting Number of Particles to Moles

11.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332157atoms of hydrogen per molecule. So, to find the numbe r of hydrogen atoms in a mole of water molecules, the problem can be
solved using conversion factors:
The first conversion factor converts from moles of p articles to the number of particles. The second conv ersion factor reflects the
number of atoms contained within each molecule.
Figure: Two water molecules contain 4 hydrogen atoms and 2 oxygen atoms. A mole of water molecules contain s 2 moles of
hydrogen atoms and 1 mole of oxygen atoms. (Public Do main; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Wikipedia)
Sulfuric acid has the chemical formula. A certain qu antity of sulfuric acid contains atoms of oxygen. How
many moles of sulfuric acid is the sample?
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
atoms
mole molecules
Unknown
mol of H SO molecules
Two conversion factors will be used. First, convert atom s of oxygen to molecules of sulfuric acid. Then, conv ert molecules of
sulfuric acid to moles of sulfuric acid.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The original number of oxygen atoms was about 80 tim es larger than Avogadro's number. Since each sulfuric acid molecule
contains 4 oxygen atoms, there are about 20 moles of sulf uric acid molecules.Example: Atoms, Molecules, and Moles
2 4
moles to atoms, atoms to molesmoles to atoms, atoms to moles

11.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332157Summary
Methods are described for conversions between moles, atoms, a nd molecules.
Review
1. What conversion factor would we need to convert moles of helium to atoms of helium?
2. I want to convert atoms to moles. My friend tells me to mult iply the number of atoms by 6.02 × 10 atoms/mole. Is my friend
correct?
3. Why do you need to know the formula for a molecule in or der to calculate the number of moles of one of the atoms?
4. How many atoms of fluorine are in 5.6×10 molecules of MgF?
This page titled 11.2: Conversions Between Moles and Atoms is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.2: Conversions Between Moles and Atoms by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.23

11.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33215811.3: Molar Mass
Figure (Public Domain; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-b mm27) via Wikipedia)
When creating a solution, how do I know how much of each substance to put in?
I want to make a solution that contains 1.8 moles of potassium dichromate. You do not have a balance cali brated in moles, but you
do have one calibrated in grams. If you know the rel ationship between moles and the number of grams in a mole, you can use your
balance to measure out the needed amount of material.
Molar Mass
Molar mass is defined as the mass of one mole of representative particles of a substance. By looking at a periodic t able, we can
conclude that the molar mass of lithium is, the mol ar mass of zinc is, and the molar mass of gold is. Each of
these quantities contains atoms of that particular elem ent. The units for molar mass are grams per mole, or.
Molar Masses of Compounds
The molecular formula of the compound carbon dioxid e is. One molecule of carbon dioxide consists of 1 ato m of carbon and 2
atoms of oxygen. We can calculate the mass of one mo lecule of carbon dioxide by adding together the mas ses of 1 atom of carbon
and 2 atoms of oxygen:
The molecular mass of a compound is the mass of one molecule of that co mpound. The molecular mass of carbon dioxide is
The molar mass of any compound is the mass in grams of one mole of that compound. One mole of carbon diox ide molecules has a
mass of, while one mole of sodium sulfide formula un its has a mass of. The molar masses are and
respectively. In both cases, that is the mass of repr esentative particles. The representative particle of is the
molecule, while for it is the formula unit.
Calcium nitrate,, is used as a component in fertilizer. Determine the molar mass of calcium nitrate.
Solution
Step 1: List the known and unknown quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Formula
Molar mass
Molar mass
Molar mass
Unknown
molar mass Ca(NO)Example: Molar Mass of a Compound
3 2

11.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332158First we need to analyze the formula. Since the lacks a subscript, there is one atom per formula unit. The 2 outside the
parentheses means that there are two nitrate ions per formula unit and each nitrate ion consists of one nit rogen atom and three
oxygen atoms per formula unit. Thus, of calcium nitrat e contains of atoms, of atoms, and of
atoms.
Step 2: Calculate
Use the molar masses of each atom together with the number of atoms in the formula and add together.
Molar mass of
Summary
Calculations are described for the determination of mol ar mass of an atom or a compound.
Review
1. What is the molar mass of Pb?
2. Where do you find the molar mass of an element?
3. How many moles of Cl are in one mole of the CaCl?
4. How many moles of H are in one mole of the compound (NH) PO?
5. Calculate the molar mass of CaCl.
This page titled 11.3: Molar Mass is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.3: Molar Mass by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
How to Calculate Molar MassHow to Calculate Molar Mass
4 3 4

11.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33215911.4: Conversions Between Moles and Mass
Figure (Public Domain; User:Estormiz/Wikimedia Commons via Wikipedia)
How can we get more product?
Chemical manufacturing plants are always seeking to improve their processes. One way that improvement com es about is through
measuring the amount of material produced in a reac tion. By knowing how much is made, the scientists and e ngineers can try
different ways of getting more product at less cost.
Conversions Between Moles and Mass
The molar mass of any substance is the mass in grams of one mole of representative particles of that sub stance. The representative
particles can be atoms, molecules, or formula units o f ionic compounds. This relationship is frequently u sed in the laboratory.
Suppose that for a certain experiment, you need 3.00 m oles of calcium chloride. Since calcium chloride is a solid, it would
be convenient to use a balance to measure the mass that is needed. The molar mass of is. The conversio n factor
that can be used is then based on the equality that. Dimensional analysis will allow you to calculate th e mass
of that you should measure.
When you measure the mass of of, you are measuring 3.00 moles of.
Figure: Calcium chloride is used as a drying agent and as a road deicer. (Public Domain; Martin Walker
(User:Walkerma/Wikimedia Commons) via Wikipedia)
Chromium metal is used for decorative electroplatin g of car bumpers and other surfaces. Find the mass of 0.560 moles of
chromium.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Molar mass of
Unknown
=? gExample: Converting Moles to Mass

11.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332159One conversion factor will allow us to convert from the moles of to mass.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Since the desired amount was slightly more than one h alf of a mole, the mass should be slightly more than one half of the
molar mass. The answer has three significant figures becau se of the.
A similar conversion factor utilizing molar mass ca n be used to convert from the mass of a substance to moles. In a laboratory
situation, you may perform a reaction and produce a certain amount of a product which can be massed. It wil l often then be
necessary to determine the number of moles of the product t hat was formed. The next problem illustrates this situa tion.
A certain reaction produces of copper (II) hydroxide,. Determine the number of moles produced in the reaction.
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
mass = 2.81g
Unknown
mol Cu(OH)
One conversion factor will allow us to convert from mass to mole s.
Step 2: Calculate.
First, it is necessary to calculate the molar mass of from the molar masses of,, and. The molar mass is
Step 3: Think about your result.
The relatively small mass of product formed results in a small number of moles.
Summary
Calculations involving conversions between moles of a ma terial and the mass of that material are described.Example: Converting Mass to Moles
Molar Conversions: Grams to Moles andMolar Conversions: Grams to Moles and

11.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332159Review
1. You have 19.7 grams of a material and wonder how many mo les were formed. Your friend tells you to multiply the mas s by
grams/mole. Is your friend correct?
2. How many grams of MgO are in 3.500 moles?
3. How many moles of H O are in 15.2 grams of pure ice?
This page titled 11.4: Conversions Between Moles and Mass is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.4: Conversions Between Moles and Mass by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.2

11.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216011.5: Conversions Between Mass and Number of Particles
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Laura Guerin via CK-12 Foundation)
How much gas is there?
Avogadro was interested in studying gases. He theorize d that equal volumes of gases under the same condition s contained the same
number of particles. Other researchers studied how many g as particles were in specific volumes of gases. Eventu ally, scientists
were able to develop the relationship between number of pa rticles and mass, using the idea of moles.
Conversions Between Mass and Number of Particles
In "Conversions Between Moles and Mass", you learned ho w to convert back and forth between moles and the numb er of
representative particles. Now you have seen how to conver t back and forth between moles and the mass of a subst ance in grams.
We can combine the two types of problems into one. Mass and number of particles are both related to grams. In order to convert
from mass to number of particles or vice-versa, a conver sion to moles is required.
Figure: Conversion from number of particles to mass, or from mass to number of particles requires two steps. (CC BY-NC
3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
How many molecules is of chlorine gas,?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Molar mass
Unknown
number of molecules of Cl
Use two conversion factors. The first converts grams of to moles. The second converts moles of to the numbe r of
molecules.
Step 2: Calculate.
The problem is done using two consecutive conversion fac tors. There is no need to explicitly calculate the moles o f.Example: Converting Mass to Particles

11.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332160Step 3: Think about your result.
Since the given mass is less than half of the molar ma ss of chlorine, the resulting number of molecules is l ess than half of
Avogadro's number.
Summary
Calculations are illustrated for conversions between mass an d number of particles.
Review
1. Why can’t we convert directly from number of particles t o grams?
2. How many atoms of chlorine are present in 1.70×10 molecu les Cl?
3. How many molecules of BH are in 14.32 grams BH?
This page titled 11.5: Conversions Between Mass and Number of Particles is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.5: Conversions Between Mass and Number of Particles by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Molar Conversions: Grams to Number oMolar Conversions: Grams to Number o
3 3

11.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216111.6: Percent Composition
Figure (CC BY-NC 3.0; Joy Sheng via CK-12 Foundation)
Is there anything healthy in this jar?
Packaged foods that you eat typically have nutrition al information provided on the label. The label on a jar of peanut butter (shown
above) reveals that one serving size is considered to be. The label also gives the masses of various types of compounds that are
present in each serving. One serving contains of prot ein, of fat, and of sugar. By calculating the fract ion of protein, fat,
or sugar in one serving size of peanut butter and c onverting to percent values, we can determine the co mposition of peanut butter
on a percent by mass basis.
Percent Composition
Chemists often need to know what elements are present in a compound and in what percentage. The percent composition is the
percent by mass of each element in a compound. It is calc ulated in a similar way to what was just indicated for the pean ut butter.
Percent Composition from Mass Data
The sample problem below shows the calculation of the perce nt composition of a compound based on mass data.
A certain newly synthesized compound is known to conta in the elements zinc and oxygen. When a sample of t he
compound is decomposed, of zinc remains. Determine the per cent composition of the compound.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass of compound
Mass of
Unknown
Percent
Percent
Subtract to find the mass of oxygen in the compound. Di vide each element's mass by the mass of the compound t o find the
percent by mass.
Step 2: Calculate.Example: Percent Composition from Mass

11.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332161Step 3: Think about your result.
The calculations make sense because the sum of the two per centages adds up to. By mass, the compound is mostly zinc.
Percent Composition from a Chemical Formula
The percent composition of a compound can also be de termined from the formula of the compound. The subsc ripts in the formula
are first used to calculate the mass of each element in one mole of the compound. That is divided by the molar mass of the
compound and multiplied by.
The percent composition of a given compound is always th e same as long as the compound is pure.
Dichlorineheptoxide is a highly reactive compound u sed in some organic synthesis reactions. Calculate t he percent
composition of dichlorineheptoxide.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass of in
Mass of in
Molar mass of
Unknown
Percent
Percent
Calculate the percent by mass of each element by div iding the mass of that element in 1 mole of the com pound by the molar
mass of the compound and multiplying by.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The percentages add up to.
Percent composition can also be used to determine the mass of a certain element that is contained in any mass of a compound. In
the previous sample problem, it was found that the pe rcent composition of dichlorine heptoxide is and. Suppose
that you need to know the masses of chlorine and oxy gen present in a sample of dichlorine heptoxide. Yo u can set up a
conversion factor based on the percent by mass of each e lement:
The sum of the two masses is, the mass of the sample size.Example: Percent Composition from Chemical Formula

11.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332161Stained glass from the Middle Ages is often hundreds of years old. Unfortunately, many of these relics are in need of cleaning
and maintenance. In this video by Science Friday, cons ervator Mary Higgins discusses the methods used to prot ect the stained
glass.
Summary
Processes are described for calculating the percent com position of a material based on mass or on chemical comp osition.
Review
1. What is the formula for calculating percent compositi on?
2. What information do you need to calculate percent compo sition by mass?
3. What do subscripts in a chemical formula tell you?
This page titled 11.6: Percent Composition is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.10: Percent Composition by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
How to Calculate Percent Composition |How to Calculate Percent Composition |
Science Friday: Stained Glass Conservation
Stained Glass ConservationStained Glass Conservation

11.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216211.7: Percent of Water in a Hydrate
Figure (Public Domain; Doug Smith (Wikimedia: Xsmith) via Wikipedia)
Why does the color change?
If you look at a typical bottle of copper sulfate, i t will be a bluish-green. If someone were to tell you that copper sulfate is white,
you likely would not believe them. However, it turns ou t that you are both right; it just depends on the c opper sulfate. Your bluegreen copper sulfate has several water molecules atta ched to it, while your friend's copper sulfate is an hydrous (no water attached).
Why the difference? The water molecules interact with some of the electrons in the copper ion and produ ce the color. When the
water is removed, the electron configuration changes and th e color disappears.
Percent of Water in a Hydrate
Many ionic compounds naturally contain water as part o f the crystal lattice structure. A hydrate is a compound that has one or
more water molecules bound to each formula unit. Ioni c compounds that contain a transition metal are often highly colored.
Interestingly, it is common for the hydrated form of a compound to be of a different color than the anhydrous form, which has no
water in its structure. A hydrate can usually be con verted to the anhydrous compound by heating. For exa mple, the anhydrous
compound cobalt (II) chloride is blue, while the hydrat e is a distinctive magenta color.
Figure: On the left is anhydrous cobalt (II) chloride,. On the right is the hydrated form of the compoun d called cobalt
(II) chloride hexahydrate,. (Public Domain; (A) Ma rtin Walker (Wikimedia: Walkerma); (B) Ben Mills (Wi kimedia:
Benjah-bmm27) via (A) http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cobalt%2528II% 2529_chloride.jpg; (B)
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cobalt%2528II% 2529-chloride-hexahydrate-sample.jpg)
The hydrated form of cobalt (II) chloride contains s ix water molecules in each formula unit. The name of the compound is cobalt
(II) chloride hexahydrate and its formula is. The formula for water is set apart at the end of the for mula with a dot,
followed by a coefficient that represents the number of wat er molecules per formula unit.
It is useful to know the percent of water contained with in a hydrate. The sample problem below demonstrates the pro cedure.
Find the percent water in cobalt (II) chloride hexahydrate,.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
The mass of water in the hydrate is the coefficient (6) multiplied by the molar mass of. The molar mass of the hydrate is
the molar mass of the plus the mass of water.
Known
Mass of in hydrateExample: Percent of Water in a Hydrate

11.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332162Mass of in hydrate Molar mass of hydrate
Unknown
percent H O =?%
Calculate the percent by mass of water by dividing th e mass of in 1 mole of the hydrate by the molar mas s of the hydrate
and multiplying by.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Nearly half of the mass of the hydrate is composed of wate r molecules within the crystal.
Summary
The process of calculating the percent water in a hydrate is d escribed.
Review
1. What is a hydrate?
2. How can you convert a hydrate to an anhydrous compound?
3. What does hexahydrate mean?
This page titled 11.7: Percent of Water in a Hydrate is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.11: Percent of Water in a Hydrate by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.2
Calculating Percent Water in a Hy drateCalculating Percent Water in a Hy drate

11.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216311.8: Determining Empirical Formulas
Figure (Public Domain; Harriet Moore via Wikipedia)
What is occuring in this picture?
In the early days of chemistry, there were few tools av ailable for the detailed study of compounds. Much of th e information
regarding the composition of compounds came from th e elemental analysis of inorganic materials. The "new" f ield of organic
chemistry (the study of carbon compounds) faced the c hallenge of not being able to characterize a compou nd completely. The
relative amounts of elements could be determined, bu t many of these materials had carbon, hydrogen, oxyge n, and possibly
nitrogen in simple ratios. Chemists had no way to dete rmine the exact amounts of these atoms that were cont ained in specific
molecules.
Determining Empirical Formulas
An empirical formula is one that shows the lowest whole-number ratio of the elements in a compound. Because the structure of
ionic compounds is an extended three-dimensional netwo rk of positive and negative ions, all formulas of io nic compounds are
empirical. However, we can also consider the empirical fo rmula of a molecular compound. Ethene is a small hyd rocarbon
compound with the formula (see figure below). While is its molecular formula and represents its true mole cular
structure, it has an empirical formula of. The simpl est ratio of carbon to hydrogen in ethene is 1:2. The re are two ways to view
that ratio. Considering one molecule of ethene, the ratio is 1 carbon atom for every 2 atoms of hydrogen. Considering one mole of
ethene, the ratio is 1 mole of carbon for every 2 mol es of hydrogen. So, the subscripts in a formula represe nt the mole ratio of the
elements in that formula.
Figure: Ball-and-stick model of ethene,. (Public Do main; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Wikipedia)
In a procedure called elemental analysis, an unknown compound can be analyzed in the laborat ory in order to determine the
percentages of each element contained within it. Thes e percentages can be transformed into the mole ratio of the elements, which
leads to the empirical formula. The steps to be taken are outlined below.
1. Assume a sample of the compound, so that the given perc entages can be directly converted into grams.
2. Use each element's molar mass to convert the grams of each element to moles.
3. In order to find a whole-number ratio, divide the mo les of each element by whichever of the moles from step 2 is the smallest.
4. If all the moles at this point are whole numbers (or very close), the empirical formula can be written with the moles a s the
subscript of each element.
5. In some cases, one or more of the moles calculated in step 3 will not be whole numbers. Multiply each of the moles by the
smallest whole number that will convert each into a whole num ber. Write the empirical formula.

11.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332163A compound of iron and oxygen is analyzed and found to contain iron and oxygen. Find the empirical formu la
of the compound.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
of
of
Unknown
Empirial formula = Fe O
Steps to follow are outlined in the text.
Step 2: Calculate.
1. Assume a sample.
2. Convert to moles.
3. Divide both moles by the smallest of the results.
4/5. Since the moles of is still not a whole number, both mo les can be multiplied by 2, while rounding to a whole numbe r.
The empirical formula of the compound is.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The subscripts are whole numbers and represent the mol e ratio of the elements in the compound. The compou nd is the ionic
compound iron (III) oxide.Example: Determining the Empirical Formula of a Compound
Empirical and Molecular Formula from PEmpirical and Molecular Formula from P

11.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332163Summary
A process is described for the calculation of the empirica l formula for a compound based on the percent compositi on of that
compound.
Review
1. What is an empirical formula?
2. What does an empirical formula tell you?
3. What does it not tell you?
This page titled 11.8: Determining Empirical Formulas is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.12: Determining Empirical Formulas by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

11.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216411.9: Determining Molecular Formulas
Figure (Left: Credit: Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-b mm27) Source: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:D-glucosechain-2D-Fischer.png; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-M W-3D-balls.png License: Public Domain) (Right:
Credit: User:glycoform/Wikimedia Commons; Ben Mills (W ikimedia: Benjah-bmm27); Source:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Sucrose_3Dprojec tion.png; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-M W3D-balls.png; License: Public Domain)
How can you determine the differences between these two molecules?
Above we see two carbohydrates: glucose and sucrose. Sucr ose is almost exactly twice the size of glucose, althoug h their empirical
formulas are very similar. Some people could distingu ish them on the basis of taste, but it's not a good idea to go around tasting
chemicals. The best way is to determine the molecular weig hts—this approach allows you to easily tell which compoun d is which.
Molecular Formulas
Molecular formulas give the kind and number of atoms of each element p resent in a molecular compound. In many cases, the
molecular formula is the same as the empirical formu la. The molecular formula of methane is and because it contains only one
carbon atom, that is also its empirical formula. Some times, however, the molecular formula is a simple whole -number multiple of
the empirical formula. Acetic acid is an organic acid that is the main component of vinegar. Its molecula r formula is.
Glucose is a simple sugar that cells use as a primary source of energy. Its molecular formula is. The stru ctures of both
molecules are shown in the figure below. They are ver y different compounds, yet both have the same empirical f ormula of.
Figure: Acetic acid (left) has a molecular formula o f, while glucose (right) has a molecular formula of.
Both have the empirical formula. (Public Domain; (left) Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27); (right) B en Mills
(Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27), User:Yikrazuul/Wikimedia Commons; Ben Mills (Wikimedia: Benjah-bmm27) via Acet ic acid:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Acetic-acid-2D -flat.png; Glucose: http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:D-glucosechain-2D-Fischer.png; http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ethylene-CRC-M W-3D-balls.png)
Empirical formulas can be determined from the perce nt composition of a compound. In order to determine its molecular formula, it
is necessary to know the molar mass of the compound. C hemists use an instrument called a mass spectrometer to determine the
molar mass of compounds. In order to go from the empirica l formula to the molecular formula, follow these steps:
1. Calculate the empirical formula mass (EFM), which is simply the molar mass represented by the empirical formula.
2. Divide the molar mass of the compound by the empirical formula mass. The result should be a whole number or ve ry
close to a whole number.
3. Multiply all the subscripts in the empirical formula by t he whole number found in step 2. The result is the molecular
formula.
The empirical formula of a compound of boron and hy drogen is. Its molar mass is. Determine the molecula r
formula of the compound.
SolutionExample: Determining the Molecular Formula of a Compound

11.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332164Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Empirical formula
Molar mass
Unknown
molecular formula =?
Steps to follow are outlined in the text.
Step 2: Calculate.
The molecular formula of the compound is.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The molar mass of the molecular formula matches the mo lar mass of the compound.
Summary
A procedure is described for the calculation of the exact molecular formula of a compound.
Review
1. What is the difference between an empirical formula an d a molecular formula?
2. In addition to the elemental analysis, what do you need to know to calculate the molecular formula?
3. What does the empirical formula mass tell you?
This page titled 11.9: Determining Molecular Formulas is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.13: Determining Molecular Formulas by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Empirical and Molecular Formula from PEmpirical and Molecular Formula from P

11.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33216511.10: Avogadro's Hypothesis and Molar Volume
Figure (Public Domain; User:Mark.murphy/Wikimedia Com mons via Wikipedia)
How do scuba divers know if they will run out of gas?
Knowing how much gas is available for a dive is crucia l to a diver's survival. The tank on the diver's back is equipped with gauges
to indicate how much gas is present and what the pressu re is. A basic knowledge of gas behavior allows the div er to assess how
long they can stay underwater without developing problems.
Avogadro's Hypothesis and Molar Volume
V olume is a third way to measure the amount of matter, after item count and mass. With liquids and solids, volume varies greatly
depending on the density of the substance. This is be cause solid and liquid particles are packed close t ogether with very little space
in between the particles. However, gases are largely compose d of empty spaces between the actual gas particles (see f igure below).
Figure: Gas particles are very small compared to the l arge amounts of empty space between them. (CC BY-NC 3.0;
Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
In 1811, Amadeo Avogadro explained that the volumes o f all gases can be easily determined. Avogadro's hypothesis states that
equal volumes of all gases at the same temperature a nd pressure contain equal numbers of particles. Since t he total volume that a
gas occupies is made up primarily of the empty spac e between the particles, the actual size of the part icles themselves is nearly
negligible. A given volume of a gas with small light p articles, such as hydrogen, contains the same number of particles as the
same volume of a heavy gas with large particles, such as s ulfur hexafluoride,.
Gases are compressible, meaning that when put under hig h pressure, the particles are forced closer to one an other. This decreases
the amount of empty space and reduces the volume of the gas. Gas volume is also affected by temperature. W hen a gas is heated,
its molecules move faster and the gas expands. Becau se of the variation in gas volume due to pressure and temperature changes, the
comparison of gas volumes must be done at standard te mperature and pressure. Standard temperature and pressure (STP) is
defined as and pressure. The molar volume of a gas is the volume of one mole of a gas at STP. At STP, one
mole (representative particles) of any gas occupies a volume of (figure below).
Figure: A mole of any gas occupies at standard temper ature and pressure (and). (CC BY-NC 3.0;
Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)

11.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332165The figure below illustrates how molar volume can be seen when comparing different gases. Samples of helium, nitrogen
, and methane are at STP. Each contains 1 mole or p articles. However, the mass of each gas is different and
corresponds to the molar mass of that gas: for, for, and for.
Figure: Avogadro's hypothesis states that equal volumes o f any gas at the same temperature and pressure contain the same
number of particles. At standard temperature and pressu re, 1 mole of any gas occupies. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher
Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Summary
Equal volumes of gases at the same conditions contain the same number of particles.
Standard temperature and pressure is abbreviated (STP).
Standard temperature is 0°C (273.15 K) and standard pressu re is 1 atm.
At STP, one mole of any gas occupies a volume of 22.4 L
Review
A container is filled with gas, what do we know about the space actually taken up by a gas?
Why do we need to do all our comparisons at the same temper ature and pressure?
At standard temperature and pressure, 1 mole of gas is always e qual to how many liters?
This page titled 11.10: Avogadro's Hypothesis and Molar V olume is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.6: Avogadro's Hypothesis and Molar Volume by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.
Avogadro ' s Law - V olume and Amount oAvogadro ' s Law - V olume and Amount o

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
12: Stoichiometry
12.1: Everyday Stoichiometry
12.2: Mole Ratios
12.3: Mass-Mole and Mole-Mass Stoichiometry
12.4: Mass-Mass Stoichiometry
12.5: Limiting Reactant
12.6: Determining the Limiting Reactant
12.7: Theoretical Yield and Percent Yield
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 12: Stoichiometry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

12.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33218112.1: Everyday Stoichiometry
Figure (Public Domain; User:Skatebiker/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
How much equipment do you need for an experiment?
You are in charge of setting out the lab equipment for a chemistry experiment. If you have twenty stude nts in the lab (and they will
be working in teams of two) and the experiment calls f or three beakers and two test tubes, how much glassware d o you need to set
out? Figuring this out involves a type of balanced equatio n and the sort of calculations that you would do for a chemic al reaction.
Everyday Stoichiometry
You have learned about chemical equations and the t echniques used in order to balance them. Chemists use balanced equations to
allow them to manipulate chemical reactions in a quan titative manner. Before we look at a chemical reacti on, let's consider an
equation for the ideal ham sandwich.
Figure: The ideal ham sandwich. (CK-12 Curriculum Ma terials license; CK-12 Foundation via CK-12 Foundation)
Our ham sandwich is composed of 2 slices of ham, a sl ice of cheese, a slice of tomato, 5 pickles, and 2 slices of
bread. The equation for our sandwich is:
Now let us suppose that you are having some friends ove r and need to make five ham sandwiches. How much of each sandwich
ingredient do you need? You take the number of each ingredient required for one sandwich (its coefficie nt in the above equation)
and multiply by five. Using ham and cheese as examples, and u sing a conversion factor, you can calculate:
The conversion factors contain the coefficient of e ach specific ingredient as the numerator and the form ula of one sandwich as the
denominator. The result is what you would expect. In ord er to make five ham sandwiches, you need 10 slices of ham and 5 slices of
cheese.

12.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332181This type of calculation demonstrates the use of stoi chiometry. Stoichiometry is the calculation of the amount of substances in a
chemical reaction from the balanced equation. The s ample problem below is another stoichiometry problem involving ingredients
of the ideal ham sandwich.
Kim looks in the refrigerator and finds that she has 8 slices of ham. In order to make as many sandwiches a s possible, how
many pickles does she need? Use the equation above.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Have 8 ham slices
(conversion factor)
Unknown
How many pickles (P) needed?
The coefficients for the two reactants (ingredients) ar e used to make a conversion factor between ham slices and pickles.
Step 2: Solve.
Since 5 pickles combine with 2 ham slices in each sandwich, 20 pickles are needed to fully combine with 8 ham slices.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The 8 ham slices will make 4 ham sandwiches. With 5 pickles p er sandwich, the 20 pickles are used in the 4 sandwiches.
Summary
An example of everyday stoichiometry is given.
Review
1. A smoothie contains 1 banana (B), 4 strawberries (St), 1 container of yogurt (Y), and 3 ice cubes (Ic). Write a bala nced equation
to describe the relationship.
2. Write a conversion factor to show the relationship betwe en the number of ice cubes and the number of smoothies prod uced.
3. How many strawberries would you need to make 12 smoothies?
This page titled 12.1: Everyday Stoichiometry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.1: Everyday Stoichiometry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.Example: Ham Sandwich Stoichiometry

12.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33218212.2: Mole Ratios
Figure (Public Domain; User:Ilemme/Wikipedia via Commons Wikimedia, File:Col 03 scup porch chairs.JPG
[commons.wikimedia.org])
What does this porch need?
You want to add some sections to the porch seen above. Before you go to the hardware store to buy lumber, y ou need to determine
the unit composition (the material between two large uprights). You count how many posts, how many boards, how many rails –
then you decide how many sections you want to add bef ore you calculate the amount of building material n eeded for your porch
expansion.
Mole Ratios
Stoichiometry problems can be characterized by two th ings: (1) the information given in the problem, and (2) the information that
is to be solved for, referred to as the unknown. The given and the unknown may both be reactants, b oth be products, or one may be
a reactant while the other is a product. The amounts o f the substances can be expressed in moles. However, i n a laboratory
situation, it is common to determine the amount of a substance by finding its mass in grams. The amount of a gaseous substance
may be expressed by its volume. In this concept, we will focus on the type of problem where both the given and the unknown
quantities are expressed in moles.
Figure: Mole ratio relationship. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
Chemical equations express the amounts of reactants an d products in a reaction. The coefficients of a bala nced equation can
represent either the number of molecules or the numbe r of moles of each substance. The production of ammo nia from
nitrogen and hydrogen gases is an important industrial r eaction called the Haber process, after German chemist Fritz Hab er.
The balanced equation can be analyzed in several ways, as shown in the figure below.
Figure: This representation of the production of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen shows several ways to interpret the
quantitative information of a chemical reaction. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)

12.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332182We see that 1 molecule of nitrogen reacts with 3 mole cules of hydrogen to form 2 molecules of ammonia. This is the smallest
possible relative amount of the reactants and produc ts. To consider larger relative amounts, each coefficie nt can be multiplied by
the same number. For example, 10 molecules of nitrogen wo uld react with 30 molecules of hydrogen to produce 2 0 molecules of
ammonia.
The most useful quantity for counting particles is t he mole. So if each coefficient is multiplied by a mo le, the balanced chemical
equation tells us that 1 mole of nitrogen reacts wit h 3 moles of hydrogen to produce 2 moles of ammonia. This is the conventional
way to interpret any balanced chemical equation.
Finally, if each mole quantity is converted to grams b y using the molar mass, we can see that the law of conse rvation of mass is
followed. of nitrogen has a mass of, while of hydro gen has a mass of, and of ammonia has a mass of
Mass and the number of atoms must be conserved in any chemical reaction. The number of molecules is not necessarily conse rved.
Figure: An apparatus for running the Haber process. (P ublic Domain; User: JGvBerkel/Wikimedia Commons via Commons
Wikimedia, Haber Ammonia [commons.wikimedia.org])
A mole ratio is a conversion factor that relates the amounts in moles of any two substances in a chemical reaction. T he numbers in
a conversion factor come from the coefficients of th e balanced chemical equation. The following six mole ratios can be written for
the ammonia forming reaction above.
In a mole ratio problem, the given substance, express ed in moles, is written first. The appropriate conversio n factor is chosen in
order to convert from moles of the given substance to moles of the unknown.
How many moles of ammonia are produced if 4.20 moles of h ydrogen are reacted with an excess of nitrogen?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
given: H = 4.20 mol
Unknown
mol of NHExample: Mole Ratio

12.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332182The conversion is from to. The problem states that there is an excess of nitrogen, so we do not need to be
concerned with any mole ratio involving. Choose the conversion factor that has the in the numerator an d the in the
denominator.
Step 2: Solve.
The reaction of of hydrogen with excess nitrogen produce s of ammonia.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The result corresponds to the 3:2 ratio of hydrogen to ammo nia from the balanced equation.
Summary
Mole ratios allow comparison of the amounts of any two materi als in a balanced equation.
Calculations can be made to predict how much product can b e obtained from a given number of moles of reactant.
Review
If a reactant is in excess, why do we not worry about the mo le ratios involving that reactant?
What is the mole ratio of H to N in the ammonia molecule?
The formula for ethanol is CH CH OH. What is the mole ratio o f H to C in this molecule?
This page titled 12.2: Mole Ratios is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.2: Mole Ratios by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.
Determining the Mole RatioDetermining the Mole Ratio
3 2

12.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33218312.3: Mass-Mole and Mole-Mass Stoichiometry
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
Need nails?
When you are doing a large construction project, yo u have a good idea of how many nails you will need (l ots!). When you go to the
hardware store, you don’t want to sit there and count o ut several hundred nails. You can buy nails by weigh t, so you determine how
many nails are in a pound, calculate how many pounds you need, and you’re on your way to begin building.
While the mole ratio is ever-present in all stoichi ometry calculations, amounts of substances in the labo ratory are most often
measured by mass. Therefore, we need to use mole-mass calculations in combination with mole ratios to solve several different
types of mass-based stoichiometry problems.
Mass to Moles Problems
In this type of problem, the mass of one substance is given, usually in grams. From this, you are to determine the amount in moles
of another substance that will either react with or be pro duced from the given substance.
The mass of the given substance is converted into mo les by use of the molar mass of that substance from the periodic table. Then,
the moles of the given substance are converted into moles of the unknown by using the mole ratio from the balanced chemical
equation.
Tin metal reacts with hydrogen fluoride to produce ti n (II) fluoride and hydrogen gas, according to the following balanced
equation.
How many moles of hydrogen fluoride are required to react c ompletely with of tin?
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Given:
Molar mass of
(mole ratio)
Unknown
mol HF
Use the molar mass of to convert the grams of to mo les. Then use the mole ratio to convert from to. Th is
will be done in a single two-step calculation.
Step 2: Solve.Example: Mass-Mole Stoichiometry

12.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332183Step 3: Think about your result.
The mass of tin is less than one mole, but the 1:2 ratio means that more than one mole of is required for the reaction. The
answer has three significant figures because the given mass has three significant figures.
Moles to Mass Problems
In this type of problem, the amount of one substance is given in moles. From this, you are to determine th e mass of another
substance that will either react with or be produced from the given substance.
The moles of the given substance are first converted into moles of the unknown by using the mole ratio fr om the balanced chemical
equation. Then, the moles of the unknown are converted into mass in grams by use of the molar mass of that substance from the
periodic table.
Hydrogen sulfide gas burns in oxygen to produce sulfur d ioxide and water vapor:
What mass of oxygen gas is consumed in a reaction that prod uces?
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Given:
(mole ratio)
Molar mass of
Unknown
mass O =? g
Use the mole ratio to convert from to. Then convert to grams. This will be done in a single two-step
calculation.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
According to the mole ratio, is produced with a mass o f. The answer has three significant figures because the
given number of moles has three significant figures.Example: Mole-Mass Stoichiometry

12.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332183Summary
Calculations involving conversions of mass to moles a nd moles to mass are described.
Review
1. In the first problem, what would happen if you multiply grams Sn by 118.69 grams/mole Sn?
2. Why is a balanced equation needed?
3. Does the physical form of the material matter for thes e calculations?
This page titled 12.3: Mass-Mole and Mole-Mass Stoichiometry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.3: Mass-Mole Stoichiometry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Converting Betw een Grams and MolesConverting Betw een Grams and Moles

12.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33218412.4: Mass-Mass Stoichiometry
Figure (CC by 2.0; Pauline Mak via Flickr)
How many walnuts are needed to equal 250 grams?
I want to send 250 grams of shelled walnuts to a frien d (don't ask why- just go with the question). How many walnuts in shells do I
need to buy? To figure this out, I need to know how mu ch the shell of a walnut weighs (about of the total we ight of the
unshelled walnut). I can then calculate the mass of wa lnuts that will yield 250 grams of shelled walnuts, and then determine how
many walnuts I need to buy.
Mass to Mass Problems
Mass-mass calculations are the most practical of all mass-based stoichiome try problems. Moles cannot be measured directly,
while the mass of any substance can generally be easi ly measured in the lab. This type of problem is three steps, and is a
combination of the two previous types.
The mass of the given substance is converted into mo les by use of the molar mass of that substance from the periodic table. Then,
the moles of the given substance are converted into moles of the unknown by using the mole ratio from the balanced chemical
equation. Finally, the moles of the unknown are converted to ma ss by use of its molar mass.
Ammonium nitrate decomposes to dinitrogen monoxide and wa ter, according to the following equation.
In a certain experiment, of ammonium nitrate is decom posed. Find the mass of each of the products formed.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Given:
Molar mass of
Molar mass of
Molar mass of
Unknown
Mass
Mass
Perform two separate three-step mass-mass calculations, as sh own below.Example: Mass-Mass Stoichiometry

12.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332184Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The total mass of the two products is equal to the mass of ammonium nitrate which decomposed, demonstrating the law of
conservation of mass. Each answer has three significant fig ures.
Summary
Mass-mass calculations involve converting the mass of a reac tant to moles of reactant, then using mole ratios to de termine
moles of product which can then be converted to mass of pro duct.
Review
1. If matter is neither created nor destroyed, why can’t we just go directly from grams of reactant to grams of pr oduct?
2. Why is it important to get the subscripts correct in the f ormulas?
3. Why do the coefficients need to be correct?
This page titled 12.4: Mass-Mass Stoichiometry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.4: Mass-Mass Stoichiometry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.
Chemistry - stoichiometry - mass mass Chemistry - stoichiometry - mass mass

12.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33218512.5: Limiting Reactant
Figure (Public Domain; Renee Comet and the National Cancer Institute; CK-12 Foundation - Christopher Auyeu ng via
Commons Wikimedia, Pancakes [commons.wikimedia.org])
Don't you hate running out of cooking ingredients?
Cooking is a great example of everyday chemistry. In order to correctly follow a recipe, a cook needs to m ake sure that he has
plenty of all the necessary ingredients in order to make his dish. Let us suppose that you are deciding to make some pancakes for a
large group of people. The recipe on the box indicates t hat the following ingredients are needed for each batch of pancakes:
cup of pancake mix
cup milk
egg
tablespoon vegetable oil
Now you check the pantry and the refrigerator and see th at you have the following ingredients available:
2 boxes of pancake mix (8 cups)
Half a gallon of milk (4 cups)
2 eggs
Full bottle of vegetable oil (about 3 cups)
The question that you must ask is: how many batches of p ancakes can I make? The answer is two. Even though yo u have enough
pancake mix, milk, and oil to make many more batches o f pancakes, you are limited by the fact that you only have two eggs. As
soon as you have made two batches of pancakes, you will be out of eggs and your "reaction" will be complete.
Limiting Reactant
For a chemist, the balanced chemical equation is the recipe that must be followed. As you have seen earlier, the Haber process is a
reaction in which nitrogen gas is combined with hydrogen gas to form ammonia. The balanced equation is shown below.
We know that the coefficients of the balanced equatio n indicate the mole ratio that is required for this reaction to occur. One mole
of will react with three moles of to form two moles of.
Now let us suppose that a chemist were to react three moles of with six moles of (see figure below).

12.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332185
Figure: Reaction in presence of limiting reagent. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
So what happened in this reaction? The chemist starte d with 3 moles of. You may think of this as being 3 ti mes as much as the
"recipe" (the balanced equation) requires since the coefficient for the is a 1. However, the 6 moles of that the chemist started
with is only two times as much as the "recipe" require s, since the coefficient for the is a 3 and. So, afte r the reaction is
complete, the hydrogen gas will be completely used up; while there will be 1 mole of nitrogen gas left over. Finally, the reaction
will produce 4 moles of because that is also two times as much as shown in the balanced equation. The overal l reaction that
occurred in words:
All the amounts are doubled from the original balanced equa tion.
The limiting reactant (or limiting reagent) is the reactant that determines the amount of prod uct that can be formed in a chemical
reaction. The reaction proceeds until the limiting r eactant is completely used up. In our example above, the is the limiting
reactant. The excess reactant (or excess reagent) is the reactant that is initially present in a gre ater amount than will eventually be
reacted. In other words, there is always excess reactant left over after the reaction is complete. In the ab ove example, the is the
excess reactant.
Limiting Reagents - Example ProblemLimiting Reagents - Example Problem

12.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332185Summary
The amount of limiting reactant determines how much produ ct will be formed in a chemical reaction.
Review
1. In the Haber reaction illustrated above, how do we know tha t hydrogen is the limiting reactant?
2. What if hydrogen were left over?
3. Which material would be limiting if no hydrogen or nit rogen were left over?
This page titled 12.5: Limiting Reactant is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.7: Limiting Reactant by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
STOICHIOMETRY - Solving Limiting ReaSTOICHIOMETRY - Solving Limiting Rea

12.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33218612.6: Determining the Limiting Reactant
Figure (Public Domain; Renee Comet and the National Cancer Institute via Wikipedia)
Who's coming for dinner?
You have ten people that show up for a dinner party. One of the guest brings twenty brownies for dessert. The de cision about serving dessert is easy:
two brownies are placed on every plate. If someone wants more brownies, they will have to wait until they go to the store. There are only enough
brownies for everyone to have two.
Determining the Limiting Reactant
In the real world, amounts of reactants and products are ty pically measured by mass or by volume. It is first neces sary to convert the given quantities
of each reactant to moles in order to identify the li miting reactant.
Silver metal reacts with sulfur to form silver sulfide accord ing to the following balanced equation:
What is the limiting reactant when is reacted with?
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Given:
Given:
Unknown
limiting reactant
Use the atomic masses of and to determine the numb er of moles of each present. Then, use the balanced equa tion to calculate the number
of moles of sulfur that would be needed to react with the number of moles of silver present. Compare this result to the actual number of moles of
sulfur present.
Step 2: Solve.
First, calculate the number of moles of and present:
Second, find the moles of that would be required to re act with all of the given:
The amount of actually present is 0.312 moles. The amount of that is required to fully react with all of t he is 0.232 moles. Since there is
more sulfur present than what is required to react, the su lfur is the excess reactant. Therefore, silver is the limi ting reactant.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The balanced equation indicates that the necessary mole ratio of to is 2:1. Since there were not twice as many moles of present in the
original amounts, that makes silver the limiting reactan t.
There is a very important point to consider about the preceding problem. Even though the mass of silver pres ent in the reaction was greater
than the mass of sulfur, silver was the limiting reac tant. This is because chemists must always convert to m olar quantities and consider theExample: Determining the Limiting Reactant

12.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332186mole ratio from the balanced chemical equation.
There is one other component to be determined in a li miting reactant problem—the quantity of the excess reactant that will be left over after the
reaction is complete. We will return to the sample proble m, above, to answer this question below.
What is the mass of excess reactant remaining when reacts with?
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Excess reactant (from Example)
Amount of excess reactant needed (from Example)
Unknown
Mass of excess reactant remaining after the reaction =? g
Subtract the amount (in moles) of the excess reactant tha t will react from the amount that is originally presen t. Convert moles to grams.
Step 2: Solve.
There are of sulfur remaining when the reaction is comple te.
Step 3: Think about your result.
There were of sulfur present before the reaction began. I f of sulfur remain after the reaction, then reacted.
This is the amount of sulfur that reacted. The probl em is internally consistent.
0:00
Example: Determining the Amount of Excess Reactant Left Over

12.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3321860:00
Summary
Determining the limiting reactant requires that all m ass quantities first be converted to moles to evaluate the equation.
Review
1. Why do all mass values need to be converted to mole s before determining the limiting reactant?
2. Silver metal reacts with sulfur to form silver sulfide according to the following balanced equation:
a. If 0.700 moles Ag is reacted with 10.0 g S, is sulfur or aluminum the limiting reactant?
b. How many grams of Ag S will be produced?
This page titled 12.6: Determining the Limiting Reactant is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.8: Determining the Limiting Reactant by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.2

12.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33218712.7: Theoretical Yield and Percent Yield
Figure (Public Domain; Linda Bartlett and the Nation al Cancer Institute via Wikipedia)
Can we save some money?
The world of pharmaceutical production is an expensi ve one. Many drugs have several steps in their synthe sis and use costly
chemicals. A great deal of research takes place to dev elop better ways to make drugs faster and more efficien tly. Studying how
much of a compound is produced in any given reaction is an important part of cost control.
Percent Yield
Chemical reactions in the real world do not always go exactly as planned on paper. In the course of an exp eriment, many things
will contribute to the formation of less product tha n would be predicted. Besides spills and other experim ental errors, there are
often losses due to an incomplete reaction, undesirabl e side reactions, etc. Chemists need a measurement tha t indicates how
successful a reaction has been. This measurement is calle d the percent yield.
To compute the percent yield, it is first necessary to determine how much of the product should be forme d based on stoichiometry.
This is called the theoretical yield, the maximum amount of product that could be forme d from the given amounts of reactants.
The actual yield is the amount of product that is actually formed whe n the reaction is carried out in the laboratory. Th e percent
yield is the ratio of the actual yield to the theoretical y ield, expressed as a percentage:
Percent yield is very important in the manufacture o f products. Much time and money is spent improving t he percent yield for
chemical production. When complex chemicals are synt hesized by many different reactions, one step with a lo w percent yield can
quickly cause a large waste of reactants and unnecessary expe nse.
Typically, percent yields are understandably less th an because of the reasons previously indicated. Howev er, percent yields
greater than are possible if the measured product o f the reaction contains impurities that cause its m ass to be greater than it
actually would be if the product was pure. When a che mist synthesizes a desired chemical, he or she is always c areful to purify the
products of the reaction.
Potassium chlorate decomposes upon slight heating in th e presence of a catalyst, according to the reaction below.
In a certain experiment, is heated until it complet ely decomposes. What is the theoretical yield of oxyge n gas?
The experiment is performed, the oxygen gas is collec ted, and its mass is found to be. What is the percent yield for the
reaction?
Solution
First, we will calculate the theoretical yield based on the st oichiometry.
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
KnownExample: Calculating the Theoretical Yield and the Percent Yield

12.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332187Given: Mass of Molar mass
Molar mass
Unknown
theoretical yield O =? g
Apply stoichiometry to convert from the mass of a reactant to the mass of a product:
Step 2: Solve.
The theoretical yield of is.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The mass of oxygen gas must be less than the of potassium chlorate that was decomposed.
Now we will use the actual yield and the theoretical yield to calculate the percent yield.
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Actual yield
Theoretical yield
Unknown
Percent yield =? %
Use the percent yield equation above.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Since the actual yield is slightly less than the theoretic al yield, the percent yield is just under.2
How T o Calculate Theoretical Yield and How T o Calculate Theoretical Yield and

12.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332187Summary
Theoretical yield is calculated based on the stoichiom etry of the chemical equation.
The actual yield is experimentally determined.
The percent yield is determined by calculating the rati o of actual yield/theoretical yield.
Review
1. What do we need in order to calculate theoretical yield?
2. If I spill some of the product before I weigh it, how will t hat affect the actual yield?
3. How will spilling some of the product affect the percent yield?
4. I make a product and weigh it before it is dry. How will tha t affect the actual yield?
This page titled 12.7: Theoretical Yield and Percent Yield is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.9: Theoretical Yield and Percent Yield by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
13: The Behavior of Gases
13.1: Compressibility
13.2: Factors Affecting Gas Pressure
13.3: Boyle's Law
13.4: Charles's Law
13.5: Gay-Lussac's Law
13.6: Combined Gas Law
13.7: Avogadro's Law
13.8: Ideal Gas Law
13.9: Calculating the Molar Mass of a Gas
13.10: Gas Stoichiometry
13.11: Real and Ideal Gases
13.12: Mole Fraction
13.13: Gas Collection by Water Displacement
13.14: Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures
13.15: Diffusion and Effusion and Graham's Law
13.16: Conversions Between Moles and Gas V olume
13.17: Gas Density
13.18: V olume-V olume Stoichiometry
13.19: Mass-V olume and V olume-Mass Stoichiometry
13.20: Mole Road Map
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 13: The Behavior of Gases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

13.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33218913.1: Compressibility
When we pack to go on vacation, there seems to always b e "one more" thing that we need to get in our suitcase. Maybe it's another
bathing suit, pair of shoes, book—whatever the item, we n eed to get it in. Fortunately, we can usually squeeze t hings together
somehow. Perhaps there is a little space between folds of clothing, or we can rearrange the shoes; somehow we can get that last
item in and close the suitcase.
Compressibility
Scuba diving is a form of underwater diving in which a diver carries his own breathing gas, usually in the f orm of a tank of
compressed air. The pressure in most commonly used scuba tanks ranges from 200 to 300 atmospheres. Gases are u nlike other
states of matter in that a gas expands to fill the shape and volume of its container. For this reason, gase s can also be compressed so
that a relatively large amount of gas can be forced into a small container. If the air in a typical scub a tank were transferred to a
container at the standard pressure of, the volume of th at container would need to be about 2500 liters.
Figure: Scuba diver. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Compressibility is the measure of how much a given volume of matter decreases when placed under pressure. If we put pressur e
on a solid or a liquid, there is essentially no cha nge in volume. The atoms, ions, or molecules that mak e up the solid or liquid are
very close together. There is no space between the indivi dual particles, so they cannot pack together.
The kinetic-molecular theory explains why gases are more compressible than either liquids or solids. Gases are compressible
because most of the volume of a gas is composed of t he large amounts of empty space between the gas partic les. At room
temperature and standard pressure, the average distanc e between gas molecules is about ten times the diame ter of the molecules
themselves. When a gas is compressed, as when the scuba tank is b eing filled, the gas particles are forced closer together.
Compressed gases are used in many situations. In hospit als, oxygen is often used for patients who have dama ged lungs to help
them breathe better. If a patient is having a major operation, the anesthesia that is administered will frequently be a compressed gas.
Welding requires very hot flames produced by compres sed acetylene and oxygen mixtures. Many summer barbequ e grills are
fueled by compressed propane.
Figure: Oxygen tank. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)

13.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332189Summary
This page titled 13.1: Compressibility is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.1: Compressibility by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

13.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219013.2: Factors Affecting Gas Pressure
The pressure of the air in a basketball has to be ad justed so that the ball bounces to the correct heigh t. Before a game, officials
check the ball by dropping it from shoulder height and seeing how far back up it bounces. What would an of ficial do if the ball did
not bounce up high enough, or if it bounced too high?
The pressure inside a container is dependent on the amount of g as inside the container. If a basketball does not bounce high en ough,
an official could remedy the situation by using a h and pump and adding more air to the ball. Conversely, if it bounces too high, the
official could let some air out of the ball.
Factors Affecting Gas Pressure
Recall from the kinetic-molecular theory that gas pa rticles move randomly and in straight lines until the y elastically collide with
either other gas particles, or with one of the walls o f the container. It is these collisions with the walls of the container that define
the pressure of the gas. Four variables are used to des cribe the condition of a gas: pressure, volume, te mperature, and
the amount of the gas as measured by the number of moles (\left(n \right)\). We will examine separately how the volume,
temperature, and amount of gas each affect the pressure o f an enclosed gas sample.
Amount of Gas
The figure below shows what happens when air is added to a rigid container. A rigid container is one that is incapable of
expanding or contracting. A steel canister is an exampl e of a rigid container.
Figure: Increase in pressure with increase in number of gas particles. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
The canister on the left contains a gas at a certain pressure. The attached air pump is then used to doub le the amount of gas in the
canister. Since the canister cannot expand, the increa sed number of air molecules will strike the inside walls of the canister twice as
frequently as they did before. The result is that the pressure inside the canister doubles. As you might im agine, if more and more air
is continually added to a rigid container, it may e ventually burst. Reducing the number of molecules i n a rigid container has the
opposite effect, and the pressure decreases.
Volume
Pressure is also affected by the volume of the contain er. If the volume of a container is decreased, the ga s molecules have less
space in which to move around. As a result, they will strik e the walls of the container more often, and the pressure i ncreases.
The figure below shows a cylinder of gas whose volume i s controlled by an adjustable piston. On the left, the piston is pulled
mostly out and the gauge reads a certain pressure. On the right, the piston has been pushed so that the volu me of the enclosed
portion of the container where the gas is located has been cut in half. The pressure of the gas doubles. Inc reasing the volume of the
container would have the opposite effect, and the pressur e of the gas would decrease.

13.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332190
Figure: Decrease in gas volume produced increase in ga s pressure. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Temperature
It would be very inadvisable to place a can of soup o ver a campfire without venting the can. As the can he ats up, it may explode.
The kinetic-molecular theory explains why. The air in side the rigid can of soup is given more kinetic ener gy by the heat coming
from the campfire. The kinetic energy causes the ai r molecules to move faster; they impact the contain er walls more frequently and
with more force. The increase in pressure inside may ev entually exceed the strength of the can and it will explode. An additional
factor is that the soup may begin boiling, which will then aid even more gas and more pressure to the inside of the ca n.
Shown in the figure below is a cylinder of gas (left) th at is at room temperature. On the right, the cylinde r has been heated
until the Kelvin temperature has doubled to. The ki netic energy of the gas molecules increases, so col lisions with the walls of
the container are now more forceful than they were be fore. As a result, the pressure of the gas doubles. Decr easing the temperature
would have the opposite effect, and the pressure of an enclo sed gas would decrease.
Figure: Increase in temperature produces increase in p ressure. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Summary
An increase in the number of gas molecules, while contain er volume stays constant, increases pressure.
A decrease in container volume increases gas pressure.
An increase in temperature of a gas in a rigid container inc reases the pressure.
This page titled 13.2: Factors Affecting Gas Pressure is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

13.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219014.2: Factors Affecting Gas Pressure by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

13.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219113.3: Boyle's Law
Each day, hundreds of weather balloons are launched. Made of a synthetic rubber and carrying a box of ins truments, each heliumfilled balloon rises up into the sky. As a balloon gai ns altitude, the atmospheric pressure becomes less and the balloon expands. At
some point the balloon bursts due to the expansion; the instruments drop (aided by a parachute) to be r etrieved and studied for
information about the weather.
Boyle's Law
Robert Boyle (1627-1691), an English chemist, is widel y considered to be one of the founders of the moder n experimental science
of chemistry. He discovered that doubling the pressure of an enclosed sample of gas, while keeping its temp erature constant, caused
the volume of the gas to be reduced by half. Boyle's law states that the volume of a given mass of gas varies i nversely with the
pressure when the temperature is kept constant. An inve rse relationship is described in this way. As one vari able increases in value,
the other variable decreases.
Physically, what is happening? The gas molecules are mo ving and are a certain distance apart from one anoth er. An increase in
pressure pushes the molecules closer together, reducing the volume. If the pressure is decreased, the gases are free to move about in
a larger volume.
Figure: Robert Boyle. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Mathematically, Boyle's law can be expressed by the equat ion:
The is a constant for a given sample of gas and depe nds only on the mass of the gas and the temperature. T he table below shows
pressure and volume data for a set amount of gas at a constant temperature. The third column represents t he value of the constant
for this data and is always equal to the pressure multip lied by the volume. As one of the variables changes, the other changes in
such a way that the product of always remains the same. In this particular case, that constant is.
Table: Pressure-V olume Data
Pressure Volume
0.5 1000 500
0.625 800 500
1.0 500 500
2.0 250 500
5.0 100 500
8.0 62.5 500
10.0 50 500
A graph of the data in the table further illustrate s the inverse relationship nature of Boyle's Law (see figure below). V olume is
plotted on the -axis, with the corresponding pressure on t he -axis.

13.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332191
Figure: The pressure of a gas decreases as the volume inc reases, making Boyle's law an inverse relationship. (CC BY-NC;
CK-12)
Boyle's Law can be used to compare changing conditions for a gas. We use and to stand for the initial pre ssure and initial
volume of a gas. After a change has been made, and s tand for the final pressure and volume. The mathemati cal relationship of
Boyle's Law becomes:
This equation can be used to calculate any one of the four quantities if the other three are known.
A sample of oxygen gas has a volume of when the pres sure is equal to. The gas is allowed to expand into a
container. Calculate the new pressure of the gas.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
Use Boyle's Law to solve for the unknown pressure. It i s important that the two volumes (and) are express ed in the
same units, so has been converted to.
Step 2: Solve.
First, rearrange the equation algebraically to solve for.
Now substitute the known quantities into the equation and s olve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The volume has increased to slightly over 4 times its original value and so the pressure is decreased by ab out one fourth. The
pressure is in and the value has three significant figures. Note that any pressure or volume units can be used as long as they
are consistent throughout the problem.Example

13.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332191Summary
This page titled 13.3: Boyle's Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.3: Boyle's Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

13.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219213.4: Charles's Law
Freshly-baked bread is light and fluffy as a result o f the action of yeast on sugar. The yeast converts t he sugar to carbon dioxide,
which at high temperatures causes the dough to expan d. The end result is an enjoyable treat, especially when covered with melted
butter.
Charles's Law
French physicist Jacques Charles (1746-1823) studied t he effect of temperature on the volume of a gas at constant pressure.
Charles's Law states that the volume of a given mass of gas varies directly with the absolute temperature of the gas whe n pressure
is kept constant. The absolute temperature is temper ature measured with the Kelvin scale. The Kelvin scale mu st be used because
zero on the Kelvin scale corresponds to a complete stoppag e of molecular motion.
Figure: As a container of confined gas is heated, its m olecules increase in kinetic energy and push the movab le piston
outward, resulting in an increase in volume. (CC BY-N C; CK-12)
Mathematically, the direct relationship of Charles's Law can be represented by the following equation:
As with Boyle's Law, is constant only for a given gas sa mple. The table below shows temperature and volume data for a set
amount of gas at a constant pressure. The third colu mn is the constant for this particular data set and is always equal to the volume
divided by the Kelvin temperature.
Table: Temperature-V olume Data
Temperature Volume
50 20 0.40
100 40 0.40
150 60 0.40
200 80 0.40
300 120 0.40
500 200 0.40
1000 400 0.40
When this data is graphed, the result is a straight line, indicative of a direct relationship, shown in the figure below.

13.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332192
Figure: The volume of a gas increases as the Kelvin temperature increas es.
Notice that the line goes exactly toward the origin, m eaning that as the absolute temperature of the gas app roaches zero, its volume
approaches zero. However, when a gas is brought to extr emely cold temperatures, its molecules would eventua lly condense into the
liquid state before reaching absolute zero. The temp erature at which this change into the liquid state o ccurs varies for different
gases.
Charles's Law can also be used to compare changing cond itions for a gas. Now we use and to stand for the initia l volume and
temperature of a gas, while and stand for the final volume and temperature. The mathematical relationsh ip of Charles's Law
becomes:
This equation can be used to calculate any one of th e four quantities if the other three are known. The d irect relationship will only
hold if the temperatures are expressed in Kelvin. Temperatu res in Celsius will not work. Recall the relationship that.
A balloon is filled to a volume of at a temperatur e of. The balloon is then heated to a temperature of. Find the
new volume of the balloon.
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
Use Charles's Law to solve for the unknown volume. The temp eratures have first been converted to Kelvin.
Step 2: Solve.
First, rearrange the equation algebraically to solve for.
Now substitute the known quantities into the equation and s olve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The volume increases as the temperature increases. The result has three significant figures.Example

13.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332192Summary
This page titled 13.4: Charles's Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.4: Charles's Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

13.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219313.5: Gay-Lussac's Law
Propane tanks are widely used with barbeque grills. Howe ver, it's not fun to find out half-way through grilli ng that you've run out
of gas. You can buy gauges that measure the pressure inside the tank to see how much is left. The gauge me asures pressure and will
register a higher pressure on a hot day than it will on a cold day. So, you need to take the air temperatur e into account when you
decide whether or not to refill the tank before your nex t cook-out.
Gay-Lussac's Law
When the temperature of a sample of gas in a rigid c ontainer is increased, the pressure of the gas increas es as well. The increase in
kinetic energy results in the molecules of gas striki ng the walls of the container with more force, resulti ng in a greater pressure. The
French chemist Joseph Gay-Lussac (1778-1850) discovered the relationship between the pressure of a gas and i ts absolute
temperature. Gay-Lussac's Law states that the pressure of a given mass of gas vari es directly with the absolute temperature of the
gas, when the volume is kept constant. Gay-Lussac's Law is very similar to Charles's Law, with the only differen ce being the type
of container. Whereas the container in a Charles's Law expe riment is flexible, it is rigid in a Gay-Lussac's Law experime nt.
Figure: Joseph Gay-Lussac. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
The mathematical expressions for Gay-Lussac's Law are lik ewise similar to those of Charles's Law:
A graph of pressure vs. temperature also illustrates a direct relationship. As a gas is cooled at constant v olume, its pressure
continually decreases until the gas condenses to a liq uid.
The gas in an aerosol can is under a pressure of at a temperature of. It is dangerous to dispose of an aer osol can
by incineration. What would the pressure in the aerosol c an be at a temperature of?
Solution
Known
Unknown
Use Gay-Lussac's Law to solve for the unknown pressure. The t emperatures have first been converted to Kelvin.
Step 2: Solve.
First, rearrange the equation algebraically to solve for.
Now substitute the known quantities into the equation and s olve.Example

13.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332193Step 3: Think about your result.
The pressure increases dramatically due to large increa se in temperature.
Summary
This page titled 13.5: Gay-Lussac's Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.5: Gay-Lussac's Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

13.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219413.6: Combined Gas Law
The modern refrigerator takes advantage of the gas la ws to remove heat from a system. Compressed gas in the coils is allowed to
expand. This expansion lowers the temperature of the gas and transfers heat energy from the material in t he refrigerator to the gas.
As the gas is pumped through the coils, the pressure o n the gas compresses it and raises the gas temperatur e. This heat is then
dissipated through the coils into the outside air. As t he compressed gas is pumped through the system again, the process repeats
itself.
Combined Gas Law
To this point, we have examined the relationships betwe en any two of the variables of,, and, while the thi rd variable is held
constant. However, situations do arise where all three va riables change. The combined gas law expresses the relationship between
the pressure, volume, and absolute temperature of a f ixed amount of gas. For a combined gas law problem, only the amount of gas
is held constant.
of a gas at and is brought to standard temperature and p ressure (STP). What will be the new gas volume?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
Use the combined gas law to solve for the unknown volum e. STP is and. The temperatures have been
converted to Kelvin.
Step 2: Solve.
First, rearrange the equation algebraically to solve for.
Now substitute the known quantities into the equation and s olve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Both the increase in pressure and the decrease in t emperature cause the volume of the gas sample to dec rease. Since both
changes are relatively small, the volume does not decrea se dramatically.
It may seem challenging to remember all the differe nt gas laws introduced so far. Fortunately, Boyle's, Cha rles's, and Gay-Lussac's
laws can all be easily derived from the combined gas law. For example, consider a situation where a change occurs in the volume
and pressure of a gas while the temperature is being h eld constant. In that case, it can be said that. Loo k at the combined
gas law and cancel the variable out from both sides of the equation. What is left over is Boyle's Law:.
Likewise, if the pressure is constant, then and cancell ing out of the equation leaves Charles's Law. If th e volume is
constant, then and cancelling out of the equation le aves Gay-Lussac's Law.Example

13.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332194Summary
This page titled 13.6: Combined Gas Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.6: Combined Gas Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

13.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219513.7: Avogadro's Law
A flat tire is not very useful. It does not cushion th e rim of the wheel and creates a very uncomfortable ride. When air is added to
the tire, the pressure increases as more molecules of gas are forced into the rigid tire. The amount of ai r that should be put into a
tire depends on the pressure rating for that tire. T oo little pressure and the tire will not hold its shape. Too much pressure and the
tire could burst.
Avogadro's Law
You have learned about Avogadro's hypothesis: equal vo lumes of any gas at the same temperature and pressure contain the same
number of molecules. It follows that the volume of a ga s is directly proportional to the number of moles of gas present in the
sample. Avogadro's Law states that the volume of a gas is directly propor tional to the number of moles of gas, when the
temperature and pressure are held constant. The mathema tical expression of Avogadro's Law is:
(Where is the number of moles of gas and is a con stant). Avogadro's Law is in evidence whenever you bl ow up a balloon. The
volume of the balloon increases as you add moles of gas to the balloon by blowing it up.
If the container holding the gas is rigid rather th an flexible, pressure can be substituted for volume i n Avogadro's Law. Adding gas
to a rigid container makes the pressure increase.
A balloon has been filled to a volume of with of h elium gas. If of additional helium is added to the
balloon while the temperature and pressure are held constant, what is the new volume of the balloon?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
Note that the final number of moles has to be calcul ated by adding the original number of moles to the m oles of added helium.
Use Avogadro's Law to solve for the final volume.
Step 2: Solve.
First, rearrange the equation algebraically to solve for.
Now substitute the known quantities into the equation and s olve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Since a relatively small amount of additional helium wa s added to the balloon, its volume increases slightly.
Summary
Avogadro's Law states that the volume of a gas is directl y proportional to the number of moles of gas, when the t emperature and
pressure are held constant.
Calculations are shown for relationships between volume a nd number of moles of a gas.Example

13.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332195This page titled 13.7: Avogadro's Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.7: Avogadro's Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

13.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219613.8: Ideal Gas Law
There are a number of chemical reactions that requir e ammonia. In order to carry out a reaction efficien tly, we need to know how
much ammonia we have for stoichiometric purposes. Using gas laws, we can determine the number of moles presen t in the tank if
we know the volume, temperature, and pressure of the system.
Ideal Gas Law
The combined gas law shows that the pressure of a gas is inversely proportional to volume and directly pro portional to temperature.
Avogadro's Law shows that volume or pressure is direct ly proportional to the number of moles of gas. Puttin g these laws together
gives us the following equation:
As with the other gas laws, we can also say that is equa l to a constant. The constant can be evaluated provid ed that the gas
being described is considered to be ideal.
The ideal gas law is a single equation which relates the pressure, volu me, temperature, and number of moles of an ideal gas. If we
substitute in the variable for the constant, the equatio n becomes:
The ideal gas law is conveniently rearranged to look thi s way, with the multiplication signs omitted:
The variable in the equation is called the ideal gas constant.
Evaluating the Ideal Gas Constant
The value of, the ideal gas constant, depends on t he units chosen for pressure, temperature, and volum e in the ideal gas equation.
It is necessary to use Kelvin for the temperature and it is conventional to use the SI unit of liters for the volume. However, pressure
is commonly measured in one of three units:,, or. Ther efore, can have three different values.
We will demonstrate how is calculated when the pressu re is measured in. Recall that the volume of of an y gas at
STP is measured to be. We can substitute for pressu re, for volume, and for temperature into
the ideal gas equation and solve for.
This is the value of that is to be used in the ideal gas equation when the pressure is given in. The ta ble below shows a
summary of this and the other possible values of. It is impo rtant to choose the correct value of to use for a given problem.
Table: Values of the Ideal Gas Constant
Unit of Unit of Unit of Unit of Value and Unit of
Notice that the unit for when the pressure is in has been changed to. A kilopascal multiplied by a lite r is equal to
the SI unit for energy, a joule.

13.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332196What volume is occupied by of oxygen gas at a press ure of and a temperature of? Assume the oxygen is
an ideal gas.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
Unknown
In order to use the ideal gas law, the number of mo les of must be found from the given mass and the mol ar mass. Then,
use to solve for the volume of oxygen.
Step 2: Solve.
Rearrange the ideal gas law and solve for.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The number of moles of oxygen is far less than one mole, so the volume should be fairly small compared to molar volume
since the pressure and temperature are reasonably c lose to standard. The result has three significant fi gures
because of the values for and. Since a joule, the uni ts cancel out correctly, leaving a volume in liters.
Summary
The ideal gas constant is calculated.
An example of calculations using the ideal gas law is shown.
This page titled 13.8: Ideal Gas Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.8: Ideal Gas Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.Example

13.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219713.9: Calculating the Molar Mass of a Gas
Helium has long been used in balloons and blimps. Since it is much less dense than air, it will float above t he ground. Small
balloons filled with helium are often affordable and available at stores, but large ones are much more e xpensive (and require a lot
more helium).
Calculating Molar Mass and Density of a Gas
A chemical reaction, which produces a gas, is perform ed. The produced gas is then collected and its mass a nd volume are
determined. The molar mass and volume are determined. The molar mass of the unknown gas can be found using the ideal gas law,
provided the temperature and pressure of the gas are al so known.
A certain reaction occurs, producing an oxide of ni trogen as a gas. The gas has a mass of and occupies a volume of
. The temperature in the laboratory is and the air pressure is. Calculate the molar mass of the gas an d deduce
its formula. Assume the gas is ideal.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
Unknown
Molar Mass
First the ideal gas law will be used to solve for the moles of unknown gas. Then the mass of the gas divid ed by the moles
will give the molar mass.
Step 2: Solve.
Now divide by to get the molar mass.
Since has a molar mass of and has a molar mass of, the formula would produce the correct molar
mass.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The value that corresponds to a pressure in was cho sen for this problem. The calculated molar mass gives a reasonable
formula for dinitrogen monoxide.
Calculating Density of a Gas
The ideal gas law can be used to find the density of a gas at conditions that are not standard. For examp le, we will determine the
density of ammonia gas at and, assuming the ammoni a is ideal. First, the molar mass of ammonia is
calculated to be. Next, assume exactly of ammonia and calculate the volume that such an amount would
occupy at the given temperature and pressure.Example

13.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332197Now the density can be calculated by dividing the mass of o ne mole of ammonia by the volume above.
As a point of comparison, this density is slightly less than the density of ammonia at STP, which is equal to.
It makes sense that the density should be lower compa red to that at STP since both the increase in temper ature (from to)
and the decrease in pressure (from to) would cause the molecules to spread out a bit further from one another.
Summary
This page titled 13.9: Calculating the Molar Mass of a Gas is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.9: Calculating the Molar Mass of a Gas by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

13.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219813.10: Gas Stoichiometry
The Haber cycle reaction of gaseous nitrogen and hydrog en to form ammonia is a critical step in the producti on of fertilizer from ammonia. It is important to have a n excess
of the starting materials so that a maximum yield of am monia can be achieved. By knowing how much ammonia is needed for the manufacture of a batch of fertilizer, t he
proper amounts of nitrogen and hydrogen gases can be incorporate d into the process.
Gas Stoichiometry
You have learned how to use molar volume to solve stoi chiometry problems for chemical reactions involving on e or more gases at STP. Now, we can use the ideal gas law
to expand our treatment of chemical reactions to solve stoichi ometry problems for reactions that occur at any temperature and press ure.
What volume of carbon dioxide is produced by the combustion of of e thanol at and?
Solution
Before using the ideal gas law, it is necessary to write and balance the chemical equation. Recall that in m ost combustion reactions, the given substance reacts with
to form and. Here is the balanced equation for the combustio n of ethanol:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
Molar mass
Unknown
The number of moles of carbon dioxide gas is first calculated by stoic hiometry. Then, the ideal gas law is used to calculate the volume of produced.
Step 2: Solve.
The moles of carbon dioxide is now substituted into to sol ve for the volume.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The mass of ethanol is slightly more than one half mole, meaning that the mole ratio results in slightly more tha n one mole of carbon dioxide being produced. Because
of the elevated temperature and reduced pressure compared to STP, th e resulting volume is larger than.
Summary
This page titled 13.10: Gas Stoichiometry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and
standards of the LibreTexts platform.
14.10: Gas Stoichiometry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.Example

13.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33219913.11: Real and Ideal Gases
The behavior of a molecule depends a lot on its str ucture. Two compounds with the same number of atoms can act very differently.
Ethanol is a clear liquid that has a boiling point of about. Dimethylether has the same number of
carbons, hydrogens, and oxygens, but boils at a much lo wer temperature. The difference lies in the amount o f
intermolecular interaction (strong -bonds for ethanol, we ak van der Waals force for the ether).
Real and Ideal Gases
An ideal gas is one that follows the gas laws at all con ditions of temperature and pressure. To do so, the ga s needs to completely
abide by the kinetic-molecular theory. The gas partic les need to occupy zero volume and they need to exhi bit no attractive forces
whatsoever toward each other. Since neither of those co nditions can be true, there is no such thing as an ide al gas. A real gas is a
gas that does not behave according to the assumptio ns of the kinetic-molecular theory. Fortunately, at th e conditions of temperature
and pressure that are normally encountered in a labor atory, real gases tend to behave very much like ideal gas es.
Under what conditions then, do gases behave least idea lly? When a gas is put under high pressure, its molec ules are forced closer
together as the empty space between the particles is diminished. A decrease in the empty space means that the assumption that the
volume of the particles themselves is negligible is less valid. When a gas is cooled, the decrease in kine tic energy of the particles
causes them to slow down. If the particles are moving at slower speeds, the attractive forces between them are mo re prominent.
Another way to view it is that continued cooling of th e gas will eventually turn it into a liquid and a li quid is certainly not an ideal
gas anymore (see liquid nitrogen in the figure below). In summary, a real gas deviates most from an ideal gas at low temperatures
and high pressures. Gases are most ideal at high temperature and low pressure.
Figure: Nitrogen gas that has been cooled to has turn ed to a liquid and must be stored in a vacuum insulate d container
to prevent it from rapidly vaporizing. (CC BY-NC; C K-12)
The figure below shows a graph of plotted against pre ssure for of a gas at three different temperatures—,, and
1000 \: \text{K}\). An ideal gas would have a value of 1 for that ratio at all temperatures and pressures, and the graph would simply
be a horizontal line. As can be seen, deviations from an ideal gas occur. As the pressure begins to rise, the att ractive forces cause
the volume of the gas to be less than expected and th e value of drops under 1. Continued pressure increase results in the volume
of the particles to become significant and the valu e of rises to greater than 1. Notice that the magni tude of the deviations from
ideality is greatest for the gas at and least for the ga s at.

13.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332199
Figure: Real gases deviate from ideal gases at high pre ssures and low temperatures. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
The ideality of a gas also depends on the strength an d type of intermolecular attractive forces that exi st between the particles. Gases
whose attractive forces are weak are more ideal than t hose with strong attractive forces. At the same temperat ure and pressure, neon
is more ideal than water vapor because neon's atoms ar e only attracted by weak dispersion forces, while water va por's molecules
are attracted by relatively strong hydrogen bonds. He lium is a more ideal gas than neon because its smalle r number of electrons
means that helium's dispersion forces are even weaker th an those of neon.
Summary
A real gas is a gas that does not behave according to the a ssumptions of the kinetic-molecular theory.
The properties of real gases and their deviations from ide ality are described.
This page titled 13.11: Real and Ideal Gases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.11: Real and Ideal Gases by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

13.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220013.12: Mole Fraction
Sulfur dioxide is a by-product of many processes, both natural and human-made. Massive amounts of this gas a re released during
volcanic eruptions. Humans produce sulfur dioxide by b urning coal. When in the atmosphere, the gas has a co oling effect by
reflecting sunlight away from the earth. However, sulfu r dioxide is also a component of smog and acid rain, both of which are
harmful to the environment. Many efforts have been ma de to reduce levels to lower acid rain production. Ho wever,
reduction efforts have an unforeseen complication: a s we lower the concentration of this gas in the atmosp here, we lower its ability
to cool, and consequently have global warming concerns.
Mole Fraction
One way to express relative amounts of substances in a mixture is with the mole fraction. Mole fraction is the ratio of moles of
one substance in a mixture to the total number of mo les of all substances. For a mixture of two substances, a nd, the mole
fractions of each would be written as follows:
If a mixture consists of and, then the mole fracti on of would be. Similarly, the mole
fraction of would be. Mole fraction is a useful quant ity for analyzing gas mixtures in conjunction with Da lton's
law of partial pressures. Consider the following situat ion... A 20.0 liter vessel contains of hydrogen gas a t a pressure of
. Another 20.0 liter vessels contains of helium at a pressure of. These two gases are mixed together in an
identical 20.0 liter vessel. Because each will exert i ts own pressure according to Dalton's law, we can express the partial pressures
as follows:
The partial pressure of a gas in a mixture is equal to its mole fraction multiplied by the total press ure. For our mixture of hydrogen
and helium:
The total pressure according to Dalton's law is. So, each partial pressure will be:
The partial pressures of each gas in the mixture do n ot change, since they were mixed into the same size v essel and the temperature
was not changed.
A flask contains a mixture of 1.24 moles of hydrogen gas and 2.91 moles of oxygen gas. If the total pressu re is, what is
the partial pressure of each gas?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
UnknownExample

13.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332200First, the mole fraction of each gas can be determine d. Then, the partial pressure can be calculated by mu ltiplying the mole
fraction by the total pressure.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The hydrogen is slightly less than one third of the mixture, so it exerts slightly less than one third of the total pres sure.
Summary
This page titled 13.12: Mole Fraction is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.12: Mole Fraction by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

13.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220113.13: Gas Collection by Water Displacement
Imagine that you need to do a lab experiment where h ydrogen gas is generated. In order to calculate the yield of gas, you have to
know the pressure inside the tube where the gas is co llected. But how can you get a barometer in there? V ery simple—you don't.
All you need is the atmospheric pressure in the room. As the gas pushes out the water, it is pushing against the atmosphere, so the
pressure inside is equal to the pressure outside.
Gas Collection by Water Displacement
Gases that are produced in laboratory experiments ar e often collected by a technique called water displacement (see figure
below). A bottle is filled with water and placed upside-d own in a pan of water. The reaction flask is fitted wit h rubber tubing which
is then fed under the bottle of water. As the gas is produced in the reaction flask, it exits through the r ubber tubing and displaces the
water in the bottle. When the bottle is full of the gas, it can be sealed with a lid.
Figure: A gas produced in a chemical reaction can be collected by water displacement. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Because the gas is collected over water, it is not pur e, but is mixed with vapor from the evaporation of th e water. Dalton's law can
be used to calculate the amount of the desired gas by subt racting the contribution of the water vapor:
In order to solve a problem, it is necessary to know th e vapor pressure of water at the temperature of the r eaction (see table below).
The sample problem illustrates the use of Dalton's law when a gas is collected over water.
Vapor Pressure of Water at Selected Temperatures
Table: Vapor Pressure of Water at Selected Temperatures
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
4.58 6.54 9.21 12.79 17.54 23.76 31.82 42.18 55.32 71.88 92.5 1 118.04 149.38
A certain experiment generates of hydrogen gas, whic h is collected over water. The temperature is and th e
atmospheric pressure is. Find the volume that the dry hydr ogen would occupy at STP.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
The atmospheric pressure is converted from to in or der to match units with the table. The sum of the pr essures of
the hydrogen and the water vapor is equal to the atmo spheric pressure. The pressure of the hydrogen is foun d by subtraction.
Then, the volume of the gas at STP can be calculated by us ing the combined gas law.Example

13.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332201Step 2: Solve.
Now the combined gas law is used, solving for, the volume of hydrogen at STP.
Step 3: Think about your result.
If the hydrogen gas were to be collected at STP and wit hout the presence of the water vapor, its volume would be. This
is less than the actual collected volume because some of that is water vapor. The conversion using STP is use ful for
stoichiometry purposes.
Summary
Gases that are produced in laboratory experiments are o ften collected by a technique called water displacement.
The vapor pressure due to water in a sample can be corre cted for in order to get the true value of the pressure o f the gas.
This page titled 13.13: Gas Collection by Water Displacement is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.13: Gas Collection by Water Displacement by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

13.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220213.14: Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures
The atmosphere of Venus is markedly different from t hat of Earth. The gases in the Venusian atmosphere ar e carbon dioxide
and nitrogen. The atmospheric pressure on Venus is roug hly 92 times that of Earth, so the amount of nitroge n on Venus
contributes pressure well over. And there is no oxyge n present, so humans could not breathe there. Not tha t anyone
would want to go to Venus—the surface temperature is usually over.
Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures
Gas pressure results from collisions between gas particl es and the inside walls of their container. If more ga s is added to a rigid
container, the gas pressure increases. The identitie s of the two gases do not matter. John Dalton, the English chemist who proposed
the atomic theory, also studied mixtures of gases. He fou nd that each gas in a mixture exerts a pressure indep endently of every
other gas in the mixture. For example, our atmosphere i s composed of about nitrogen and oxygen, with smalle r amounts
of several other gases making up the rest. Since nitr ogen makes up of the gas particles in a given sample of air, it exerts of
the pressure. If the overall atmospheric pressure is, then the pressure of just the nitrogen in the air is. The pressure
of the oxygen in the air is.
The partial pressure of a gas is the contribution that gas makes to the total pressure when the gas is part of a mixture. The p artial
pressure of nitrogen is represented by. Dalton's law of partial pressures states that the total pressure of a mixture of gases is
equal to the sum of all of the partial pressures of the co mponent gases. Dalton's law can be expressed with the following eq uation:
The figure below shows two gases that are in separate, equa l-sized containers at the same temperature and press ure. Each exerts a
different pressure, and, reflective of the number of particles in the container. On the right, the two gases are combined into
the same container, with no volume change. The total pressure of the gas mixture is equal to the sum of t he individual pressures. If
and, then.
Figure: Dalton's law says that the pressure of a gas mixt ure is equal to the partial pressures of the combining gases. (CC BYNC; CK-12)
Summary
The partial pressure of a gas is the contribution that ga s makes to the total pressure when the gas is part of a mixture.
The total pressure in a system is equal to the sums of t he partial pressures of the gases present, according to Dalton's Law of
Partial Pressures.
This page titled 13.14: Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.14: Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

13.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332202

13.15.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220313.15: Diffusion and Effusion and Graham's Law
We usually cannot see gases, so we need methods to d etect their movements indirectly. The relative rate s of diffusion of ammonia
to hydrogen chloride can be observed in a simple expe riment. Cotton balls are soaked with solutions of ammo nia and hydrogen
chloride (hydrochloric acid) and attached to two dif ferent rubber stoppers. These are simultaneously pl ugged into either end of a
long glass tube. The vapors of each travel down the tu be at different rates. Where the vapors meet, they reac t to form ammonium
chloride, a white solid that appears in the glass tube as a ring.
Graham's Law
When a person opens a bottle of perfume in one corner of a large room, it doesn't take very long for the scent to spread throughout
the entire room. Molecules of the perfume evaporate and the vapor spreads out to fill the entire space. Diffusion is the tendency of
molecules to move from an area of high concentratio n to an area of low concentration until the concentr ation is uniform. While
gases diffuse rather quickly, liquids diffuse much more slowly. Solids essentially do not diffuse.
A related process to diffusion is effusion. Effusion is the process of a confined gas escaping through a tiny hole in its container.
Effusion can be observed by the fact that a helium- filled balloon will stop floating and sink to the fl oor after a day or so. This is
because the helium gas effuses through tiny pores in the balloon. Both diffusion and effusion are relate d to the speed at which
various gas molecules move. Gases that have a lower molar mass effuse and diffuse at a faster rate than gases t hat have a higher
molar mass.
Scottish chemist Thomas Graham (1805-1869) studied the rates of effusion and diffusion of gases. Graham's law states that the
rate of effusion or diffusion of a gas is inversely p roportional to the square root of the molar mass of the gas. Graham's law can be
understood by comparing two gases (and) at the sam e temperature, meaning the gases have the same kinet ic energy. The
kinetic energy of a moving object is given by the e quation where is mass and is velocity. Setting the ki netic
energies of the two gases equal to one another gives:
The equation can be rearranged to solve for the ratio of the velocity of gas to the velocity of gas.
For the purposes of comparing the rates of effusion or diffusion of two gases at the same temperature, the molar masses of each gas
can be used in the equation for.
Calculate the ratio of diffusion rates of ammonia gas to hydrogen chloride at the same temperature and pres sure.
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Molar mass
Molar mass
Unknown
Substitute the molar masses of the gases into Graham's law an d solve for the ratio.
Step 2: Solve.
The rate of diffusion of ammonia is 1.46 times faster than the rate of diffusion of hydrogen chloride.Example

13.15.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332203Step 3: Think about your result.
Since ammonia has a smaller molar mass than hydrogen c hloride, the velocity of its molecules is greater a nd the velocity ratio
is larger than 1.
Summary
Diffusion is the tendency of molecules to move from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration unti l the
concentration is uniform.
Effusion is the process of a confined gas escaping throu gh a tiny hole in its container.
Graham's law states that the rate of effusion or diffusion of a g as is inversely proportional to the square root of the mola r mass
of the gas.
This page titled 13.15: Diffusion and Effusion and Graham's Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
14.15: Diffusion and Effusion and Graham's Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

13.16.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220413.16: Conversions Between Moles and Gas Volume
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
How can you tell how much gas is in these containers?
Small gas tanks are often used to supply gases for chemi stry reactions. A gas gauge will give some informatio n about how much is
in the tank, but quantitative estimates are needed so that the reaction will be able to proceed to comple tion. Knowing how to
calculate the necessary parameters for gases is very he lpful to avoid running out earlier than desired.
Conversions Between Moles and Gas Volume
Molar volume at STP can be used to convert from moles to gas volume and from gas volume to moles. The equal ity of
is the basis for the conversion factor.
Many metals react with acids to produce hydrogen gas. A certain reaction produces of hydrogen gas at STP. How many
moles of hydrogen were produced?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
moles of H
Apply a conversion factor to convert from liters to mole s.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The volume of gas produced is nearly four times lar ger than the molar volume. The fact that the gas is hydrogen plays no role
in the calculation.
What volume does of occupy at STP?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
KnownExample: Converting Gas Volume to Moles
Example: Convertig Moles to Gas Volume

13.16.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332204Unknown
volume of O
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The volume seems correct given the number of moles.
If we know the volume of a gas sample at STP, we can det ermine how much mass is present. Assume we have of at
STP. What is the mass of the nitrogen gas?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Molar mass
Unknown
mass of N
Step 2: Calculate.
We start by determining the number of moles of gas presen t. We know that 22.4 liters of a gas at STP equals one mole, so:
We also know the molecular weight of, so we can then ca lculate the weight of nitrogen gas in 867 liters:
Step 3: Think about your result.
In a multi-step problem, be sure that the units check out.2
Example: Converting Volume to Mass
1.4.4 Apply Avogadro ' s law to calculate 1.4.4 Apply Avogadro ' s law to calculate

13.16.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332204Summary
Conversions between moles and volume of a gas are shown.
Review
1. In the problems above, why was the gas always at standard tem perature and pressure?
2. A container contains 45.2 L of N gas at STP. How many moles of N gas are in the container?
3. If the gas in the previous problem was CH gas at STP in stead of N gas, then how many moles of CH gas would there be?
This page titled 13.16: Conversions Between Moles and Gas V olume is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.7: Conversions Between Moles and Gas Volume by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.2 2
4 2 4

13.17.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220513.17: Gas Density
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
Why does carbon dioxide sink in air?
When we run a reaction to produce a gas, we expect it t o rise into the air. Many students have done experim ents where gases such
as hydrogen are formed. The gas can be trapped in a test tube held upside-down over the reaction. Carbo n dioxide, on the other
hand, sinks when it is released. Carbon dioxide has a dens ity greater than air, so it will not rise like the hydr ogen gas.
Gas Density
As you know, density is defined as the mass per unit vo lume of a substance. Since gases all occupy the same volume on a per mole
basis, the density of a particular gas is dependent o n its molar mass. A gas with a small molar mass will hav e a lower density than a
gas with a large molar mass. Gas densities are typical ly reported in. Gas density can be calculated from m olar mass and molar
volume.
Figure: Balloons filled with helium gas float in air because the density of helium is less than the density of air. (Public
Domain; Photographer: Warren Denning, courtesy of th e Pioneer Balloon Company via Wikipedia)
What is the density of nitrogen gas at STP?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
density =? g/L
Molar mass divided by molar volume yields the gas density at ST P.
Step 2: Calculate.
When set up with a conversion factor, the unit cancels, leaving as the unit in the result.Example: Gas Density

13.17.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332205Step 3: Think about your result.
The molar mass of nitrogen is slightly larger than mola r volume, so the density is slightly greater than.
Alternatively, the molar mass of a gas can be determined if the density of the gas at STP is known.
What is the molar mass of a gas whose density is at STP?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
molar mass =? g/mol
Molar mass is equal to density multiplied by molar volume.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Because the density of the gas is less than, the molar mas s is less than 22.4.
Summary
Calculations are described showing conversions between mo lar mass and density for gases.
Review
1. How is density calculated?
2. How is molar mass calculated?
3. What would be the volume of 3.5 moles of a gas?
This page titled 13.17: Gas Density is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.8: Gas Density by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.Example: Molar Mass from Gas Density

13.18.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220613.18: Volume-Volume Stoichiometry
Figure (Public Domain; User:Fluffball70/Wikipedia via Wikipedia)
How much propane is left in the tank?
As the weather gets warmer, more and more people want to c ook out on the back deck or back yard. Many folks s till use charcoal
for grilling because of the added flavor. But increas ing numbers of back yard cooks like to use a propane grill. The gas burns clean,
the grill is ready to go as soon as the flame is lit – but how do you know how much propane is left in the tank? You can buy gauges
at hardware stores that measure gas pressure and tell you h ow much is left in the tank.
Volume-Volume Stoichiometry
Avogadro's hypothesis states that equal volumes of all gases at the same temperature and pressure contai n the same number of gas
particles. Further, one mole of any gas at standard t emperature and pressure (and) occupies a volume of. These
characteristics make stoichiometry problems involvin g gases at STP very straightforward. Consider the reaction of nit rogen and
oxygen gases to form nitrogen dioxide:
Because of Avogadro's work, we know that the mole ratio s between substances in a gas-phase reaction are also volume ratios. The
six possible volume ratios for the above equation are:
The volume ratios above can easily be used when the vo lume of one gas in a reaction is known, and you need t o determine the
volume of another gas that will either react with or be produced from the first gas. The pressure and te mperature conditions of both
gases need to be the same.
The combustion of propane gas produces carbon dioxide and water vapor.
What volume of oxygen is required to completely comb ust of propane? What volume of carbon dioxide is pr oduced in
the reaction?
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
KnownExample: Volume-Volume Stoichiometry

13.18.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332206Given: 1 volume volumes
1 volume volumes
Unknown
V olume
V olume
Two separate calculations can be done using the volume ra tios.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Because the coefficients of the and the are larger than that of the, the volumes for those two gases a re greater.
Note that total volume is not necessarily conserved i n a reaction because moles are not necessarily cons erved. In this reaction,
6 total volumes of reactants become 7 total volumes of p roducts.
Summary
Calculations of volume-volume ratios are based on Avogad ro's hypothesis.
Pressures and temperatures of the gases involved need to b e the same.
Review
1. What is Avogadro’s hypothesis?
2. How much volume is occupied by one mole of a gas at STP?
3. In the sample problem above, assume we combust 1.3 L of pro pane. How much CO will be produced?
This page titled 13.18: V olume-V olume Stoichiometry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.5: Volume-Volume Stoichiometry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.2

13.19.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220713.19: Mass-Volume and Volume-Mass Stoichiometry
Figure (CK-12 Curriculum Materials license; CK-12 Foun dation via CK-12 Foundation)
How much azide is needed to fill an air bag?
Cars and many other vehicles have air bags in them. In case of a collision, a reaction is triggered so th at the rapid decomposition of
sodium azide produces nitrogen gas, filling the air b ag. If too little sodium azide is used, the air bag wi ll not fill completely and will
not protect the person in the vehicle. Too much sodi um azide could cause the formation of more gas that the bag can safely handle.
If the bag breaks from the excess gas pressure, all protect ion is lost.
Mass to Volume and Volume to Mass Problems
Chemical reactions frequently involve both solid sub stances whose masses can be measured, as well as gases, f or which volume
measurements are more appropriate. Stoichiometry proble ms of this type are called either mass-volume or volume-m ass problems.
Because both types of problems involve a conversion f rom either moles of gas to volume or vice-versa, we ca n use the molar
volume of, provided that the conditions for the reactio n are at STP.
Aluminum metal reacts rapidly with aqueous sulfuric acid to p roduce aqueous aluminum sulfate and hydrogen gas:
Determine the volume of hydrogen gas produced at STP when a piece of aluminum completely reacts.
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Given:
Molar mass
Unknown
volume H =?
The grams of aluminum will first be converted to mol es. Then the mole ratio will be applied to convert t o moles of hydrogen
gas. Finally, the molar volume of a gas will be used to conv ert to liters of hydrogen.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.Example: Mass-Volume Stoichiometry

13.19.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332207The volume result is in liters. For much smaller amoun ts, it may be convenient to convert to milliliters. The answer here has
three significant figures. Because the molar volume is a measured quantity of, three is the maximum number of
significant figures for this type of problem.
Calcium oxide is used to remove sulfur dioxide generate d in coal-burning power plants, according to the followin g reaction.
What mass of calcium oxide is required to react complet ely with of sulfur dioxide?
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Given:
Molar mass
Unknown
mass CaO =? g
The volume of will be converted to moles, followed by the mole ratio, and finally a conversion of moles of to g rams.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The resultant mass could be reported as, with two signi ficant figures. Even though the 2:2 mole ratio does not
mathematically affect the problem, it is still necessary for unit conversion.
Summary
Calculations are described for determining the amount of gas formed in a reaction.
Calculations are described for determining amounts of a m aterial needed to react with a gas.Example: Volume-Mass Stoichiometry
Mass volume conversion problemMass volume conversion problem

13.19.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332207Review
1. What are the conditions for all gases in these calculati ons?
2. How can you tell if all the ratios were set up correctly?
3. Why was 2 mol CaO/2mol SO included in the second exampl e if it did not affect the final number?
This page titled 13.19: Mass-V olume and V olume-Mass Stoichiometry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
12.6: Mass-Volume Stoichiometry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.2

13.20.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33220813.20: Mole Road Map
Figure \ (Public Domain; Doug Smith (Wikimedia: Xsmit h) via Commons Wikimedia, Currituck Sound Map
[commons.wikimedia.org])
How do I get from here to there?
If I want to visit the town of Manteo, North Carolina, ou t on the coast, I will need a map of how to get there. I may have a printed
map or I may download directions from the internet, b ut I need something to get me going in the right di rection. Chemistry road
maps serve the same purpose. How do I handle a certain type of calculation? There is a process and a set of directions t o help.
Mole Road Map
Previously, we saw how the conversions between mass and num ber of particles required two steps, with moles as the intermediate.
This concept can now be extended to also include gas volume at STP. The resulting diagram is referred to as a mole ro ad map (see
figure below).
Figure: The mole road map shows the conversion factors needed to interconvert mass, number of particles, and volume of a
gas. (CC BY-NC 3.0; Christopher Auyeung via CK-12 Foundation)
The mole is at the center of any calculation involvi ng amount of a substance. The sample problem below is one of many different
problems that can be solved using the mole road map.
What is the volume of of neon gas at STP?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
KnownExample: Mole Road Map

13.20.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332208Unknown
volume =? L
The conversion factors will be grams moles gas volume.
Step 2: Calculate.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The given mass of neon is equal to about 4 moles, resulti ng in a volume that is about 4 times larger than molar vo lume.
Summary
An overall process is given for calculations involving mo les, grams, and gas volume.
Review
1. In the problem above, what is the formula weight of neon?
2. What value is at the center of all the calculations?
3. If we had 79.3 grams of Xe, would we expect a volume that is g reater than or less than that obtained with neon?
This page titled 13.20: Mole Road Map is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
10.8: Mole Road Map by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.
Molar Conversion: Grams of Gas to V oluMolar Conversion: Grams of Gas to V olu

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
14: Thermochemistry
14.1: Chemical Potential Energy
14.2: Heat
14.3: Exothermic and Endothermic Processes
14.4: Heat Capacity and Specific Heat
14.5: Specific Heat Calculations
14.6: Enthalpy
14.7: Calorimetry
14.8: Thermochemical Equations
14.9: Stoichiometric Calculations and Enthalpy Change s
14.10: Heats of Fusion and Solidification
14.11: Heats of Vaporization and Condensation
14.12: Multi-Step Problems with Changes of State
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 14: Thermochemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

14.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221014.1: Chemical Potential Energy
Gunpowder was originally developed by the Chinese in th e ninth century AD, primarily for rockets. This material is composed of
charcoal, sulfur, and saltpeter (potassium nitrate). The explosive reaction that occurs involves the con version of the charcoal to
carbon dioxide, with the potassium nitrate providing the extra oxygen needed for a rapid reaction. Althou gh sulfur was included to
stabilize the product, gunpowder is still highly explosiv e.
Types of Energy
Two basic types of energy exist: potential energy an d kinetic energy. Potential energy is stored energy. It has not yet been released,
but is ready to go. Kinetic energy is the energy of motion. It causes work to be done through m ovement.
Chemical Potential Energy
Energy is the capacity for doing work or supplying h eat. When you fill your car with gasoline, you are pro viding it with potential
energy. Chemical potential energy is the energy stored in the chemical bonds of a subs tance. The various chemicals that make up
gasoline contain a large amount of chemical potenti al energy that is released when the gasoline is burn ed in a controlled way in the
engine of the car. The release of that energy does two things: some of the potential energy is transforme d into work, which is used
to move the car; at the same time, some of the poten tial energy is converted to heat and makes the car's engine very hot. The energy
changes of a system occur as either heat or work, or some combination of both.
Figure: A dragster is able to accelerate because of th e chemical potential energy of its fuel. The burning of the fuel also
produces large amounts of heat. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Dynamite is another example of chemical potential en ergy. The major component of dynamite is nitroglycer in, a very unstable
material. By mixing it with diatomaceous earth, the s tability is increased and it is less likely to explode if it receives a physical
shock. When ignited, the nitroglycerin explodes rapi dly, releasing large amounts of nitrogen and other g ases along with a massive
amount of heat.
Figure: Dynamite explosion. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Summary
Potential energy is stored energy.
Kinetic energy is the energy of motion.
Chemical potential energy is energy available in the ch emical bonds of a compound.

14.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332210This page titled 14.1: Chemical Potential Energy is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.1: Chemical Potential Energy by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

14.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221114.2: Heat
Blacksmiths heat solid iron in order to shape it into a variety of different objects. Iron is a rigid, solid metal. At room temperature, it
is extremely difficult to bend iron. However, when heat ed to a high enough temperature, iron can be easily worked. The heat energy
in the forge is transferred to the metal, making the iro n atoms vibrate more and move around more readily.
Heat is energy that is transferred from one object or s ubstance to another because of a difference in temp erature between the two.
Heat always flows from an object at a higher temperatur e to an object at a lower temperature (see figure be low). The flow of heat
will continue until the two objects are at the same temperat ure.
Figure: Object A starts with a higher temperature than object B. No h eat flows when the objects are isolated from each
other. When brought into contact, heat flows from A to B until the temperatures of the two objects are the same.
Thermochemistry is the study of energy changes that occur during che mical reactions and during changes of state. When ch emical
reactions occur, some chemical bonds are broken, while ne w chemical bonds form. As a result of the rearrangemen t of atoms, the
total chemical potential energy of the system either i ncreases or decreases.
Summary
Heat is transferred energy from a site of higher energy to a site of lower energy.
Thermochemistry is the study of energy changes that occur during chemical reactions and during changes of state.
This page titled 14.2: Heat is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.
17.2: Heat by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

14.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221214.3: Exothermic and Endothermic Processes
A campfire is an example of basic thermochemistry. The reaction is initiated by the application of heat f rom a match. The reaction
converting wood to carbon dioxide and water (among ot her things) continues, releasing heat energy in the process. This heat energy
can then be used to cook food, roast marshmallows, or si mply to keep warm when it's cold outside.
Exothermic and Endothermic Processes
When physical or chemical changes occur, they are g enerally accompanied by a transfer of energy. The law of conservation of
energy states that in any physical or chemical process, en ergy is neither created nor destroyed. In other words, the entire energy in
the universe is conserved. In order to better under stand the energy changes taking place during a react ion, we need to define two
parts of the universe: the system and the surroundings. The system is the specific portion of matter in a given space t hat is being
studied during an experiment or an observation. The surroundings is everything in the universe that is not part of the system. In
practical terms for a laboratory chemist, the system i s the particular chemicals being reacted, while the s urroundings is the
immediate vicinity within the room. During most proce sses, energy is exchanged between the system and the surr oundings. If the
system loses a certain amount of energy, that same amou nt of energy is gained by the surroundings. If the system gains a certain
amount of energy, that energy is supplied by the surrou ndings.
A chemical reaction or physical change is endothermic if heat is absorbed by the system from the surround ings. In the course of an
endothermic process, the system gains heat from the surroundings, and so the temperature of the surroundi ngs decreases. The
quantity of heat for a process is represented by the letter. The sign of for an endothermic process i s positive because the system
is gaining heat. A chemical reaction or physical chang e is exothermic if heat is released by the system into the surroundin gs.
Because the surroundings are gaining heat from the sy stem, the temperature of the surroundings increases. The sign of for an
exothermic process is negative because the system is losing heat.
Figure: (A) Endothermic reaction. (B) Exothermic re action. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Units of Heat
Heat flow is measured in one of two common units: the calorie and the joule. The joule is the SI unit of energy. The calorie is
familiar because it is commonly used when referring t o the amount of energy contained within food. A calorie is the quantity
of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of water by. For example, raising the temperature of of water from
to would require.
Calories contained within food are actually kilocalo ries. In other words, if a certain snack contains 85 food calories, it
actually contains or. In order to make the distinctio n, the dietary calorie is written with a capital C.
To say that the snack "contains" 85 Calories means tha t of energy are released when that snack is processe d by the human
body.
Heat changes in chemical reactions are typically mea sured in joules rather than calories. The conversio n between a joule and a
calorie is shown below.
We can calculate the amount of heat released in kilojou les when a 400 Calorie hamburger is digested:

14.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332212Summary
The law of conservation of energy states that in any phy sical or chemical process, energy is neither created nor d estroyed.
A specific portion of matter in a given space that is be ing studied during an experiment or an observation is t he system.
The surroundings is everything in the universe that is not part of the syst em.
A chemical reaction or physical change is endothermic if heat is absorbed by the system from the surroundings.
A reaction or change is exothermic if heat is released by the system into the surroundings.
This page titled 14.3: Exothermic and Endothermic Processes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.3: Exothermic and Endothermic Processes by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

14.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221314.4: Heat Capacity and Specific Heat
If a swimming pool and wading pool, both full of water at the same temperature, were subjected to the same input of heat energy,
the wading pool would certainly rise in temperature m ore quickly than the swimming pool. The heat capacit y of an object depends
both on its mass and its chemical composition. Because of its much larger mass, the swimming pool of water has a larger heat
capacity than the wading pool.
Heat Capacity and Specific Heat
Different substances respond to heat in different way s. If a metal chair sits in the bright sun on a hot d ay, it may become quite hot
to the touch. An equal mass of water under the same sun exposure will not become nearly as hot. This means t hat water has a high
heat capacity (the amount of heat required to raise the temperatu re of an object by). Water is very resistant to chan ges in
temperature, while metals generally are not. The specific heat of a substance is the amount of energy required to raise the
temperature of 1 gram of the substance by. The tabl e below lists the specific heats of some common substan ces. The symbol
for specific heat is, with the subscript referring t o the fact that specific heats are measured at const ant pressure. The units for
specific heat can either be joules per gram per deg ree or calories per gram per degree. This text wil l use for
specific heat.
Table: Specific Heats of Some Common Substances
Substance Specific Heat
Water (l) 4.18
Water (s) 2.06
Water (g) 1.87
Ammonia (g) 2.09
Ethanol (l) 2.44
Aluminum (s) 0.897
Carbon, graphite (s) 0.709
Copper (s) 0.385
Gold (s) 0.129
Iron (s) 0.449
Lead (s) 0.129
Mercury (l) 0.140
Silver (s) 0.233
Notice that water has a very high specific heat compa red to most other substances. Water is commonly used as a coolant for
machinery because it is able to absorb large quanti ties of heat (see table above). Coastal climates are much more moderate than
inland climates because of the presence of the ocea n. Water in lakes or oceans absorbs heat from the ai r on hot days and releases it
back into the air on cool days.

14.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332213
Figure: This power plant in West Virginia, like many others, is located next to a large lake so that the wa ter from the lake can
be used as a coolant. Cool water from the lake is pump ed into the plant, while warmer water is pumped out of the plant and back
into the lake. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Summary
Heat capacity is the amount of heat required to raise the t emperature of an object by.
The specific heat of a substance is the amount of energy required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of the substanc e by.
This page titled 14.4: Heat Capacity and Specific Heat is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.4: Heat Capacity and Specific Heat by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

14.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221414.5: Specific Heat Calculations
Water has a high capacity for absorbing heat. In a c ar radiator, it serves to keep the engine cooler than it would otherwise run. As
the water circulates through the engine, it absorbs h eat from the engine block. When it passes through th e radiator, the cooling fan
and the exposure to the outside environment allow the water to cool somewhat before it makes another passage through the engine.
Specific Heat Calculations
The specific heat of a substance can be used to calcu late the temperature change that a given substance will undergo when it is
either heated or cooled. The equation that relates h eat to specific heat, mass, and temperature chang e is shown
below.
The heat that is either absorbed or released is mea sured in joules. The mass is measured in grams. The change in temperature is
given by, where is the final temperature and is the initial temperature.
A piece of cadmium metal absorbs of heat while risi ng from to. Calculate the specific heat of
cadmium.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Heat
Mass
Unknown
The specific heat equation can be rearranged to solve fo r the specific heat.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The specific heat of cadmium, a metal, is fairly clos e to the specific heats of other metals. The result has three significant
figures.
Since most specific heats are known, they can be used t o determine the final temperature attained by a sub stance when it is either
heated or cooled. Suppose that of water at was cooled by the removal of of heat. The change in temperatur e can
be calculated using the specific heat equation:
Since the water was being cooled, the temperature decreases. The final temperature is:
Summary
The specific heat of a substance can be used to calcula te the temperature change of the substance when it is h eated or cooled.
Specific heat calculations are illustrated.
This page titled 14.5: Specific Heat Calculations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.Example

14.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221417.5: Specific Heat Calculations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

14.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221514.6: Enthalpy
The factors influencing a reaction are complicated and varied. Since a catalyst affects activation ener gy, we might assume it would
have some sort of impact on the amount of heat that is absorbed or released by the reaction—but it does not. The change in heat
content of a reaction depends solely on the chemical compositions of the reactants and products, not on th e path taken to get from
one to the other.
Enthalpy
Heat changes in chemical reactions are often measured in the laboratory under conditions in which the rea cting system is open to
the atmosphere. In these cases, the system is at a cons tant pressure. Enthalpy is the heat content of a system at constant
pressure. Chemists routinely measure changes in enth alpy of chemical systems as reactants are converted into products. The heat
that is absorbed or released by a reaction at constan t pressure is the same as the enthalpy change, and is given the symbol.
Unless otherwise specified, all reactions in this mate rial are assumed to take place at constant pressure.
The change in enthalpy of a reaction is a measure o f the differences in enthalpy of the reactants and p roducts. The enthalpy of a
system is determined by the energies needed to break c hemical bonds and the energies needed to form chemic al bonds. Energy
needs to be put into the system in order to break che mical bonds—they do not come apart spontaneously in most cases. Bond
formation to produce products will involve release of energy. The change in enthalpy shows the trade-offs m ade in these two
processes. Does it take more energy to break bonds than that needed to form bonds? If so, the reaction is endothermic and the
enthalpy change is positive. If more energy is produc ed in bond formation than that needed for bond brea king, the reaction is
exothermic and the enthalpy is negative.
Several factors influence the enthalpy of a system. En thalpy is an extensive property, determined in part b y the amount of material
being dealt with. The state of reactants and products (solid, liquid, or gas) influences the enthalpy value for a system. The direction
of the reaction affects the enthalpy value. A react ion that takes place in the opposite direction has the same numerical enthalpy
value, but the opposite sign.
Summary
Enthalpy, the heat content of a system at constant pres sure, is related to the heat of reaction.
The enthalpy of a system is determined by the energies ne eded to break chemical bonds and the energies needed to form
chemical bonds.
Factors that influencing enthalpy include: amount of mater ials, the state of reactants and products, and direction of the reaction.
This page titled 14.6: Enthalpy is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.6: Enthalpy by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

14.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221614.7: Calorimetry
At one time, calories in foods were measured with a bo mb calorimeter. A weighed amount of the food would be placed in the
calorimeter and the system was then sealed and filled with oxygen. An electric spark ignited the food-oxyge n mixture. The amount
of heat released when the food burned gave an idea o f the calories present within the food. Today, calori es are calculated from the
protein, carbohydrate, and fat content of food (all deter mined by chemical analysis).
Calorimetry
Calorimetry is the measurement of the transfer of heat into or out of a system during a chemical reaction or physi cal process. A
calorimeter is an insulated container that is used to measure he at changes. The majority of reactions that can be a nalyzed in a
calorimetry experiment are either liquids or aqueous solutions. A frequently used and inexpensive calori meter is a set of nested
foam cups fitted with a lid to limit the heat exchan ge between the liquid in the cup and the air in the surroundings (see figure
below). In a typical calorimetry experiment, specific volumes of the reactants are dispensed into separat e containers and the
temperature of each is measured. They are then mixed into the calorimeter, which starts the reaction. The reactant mixture is stirred
until the reaction is complete, while the temperature of the reaction is continuously monitored.
Figure: A simple constant-pressure calorimeter. (CC BY- NC; CK-12)
The key to all calorimetry experiments is the assump tion that there is no heat exchange between the insu lated calorimeter and the
room. Consider the case of a reaction taking place be tween aqueous reactants: the water in which the solids h ave been dissolved is
the surroundings, while the dissolved substances are t he system. The temperature change that is measured is the temperature
change that is occurring in the surroundings. If th e temperature of the water increases as the reaction o ccurs, the reaction is
exothermic. Heat was released by the system into the sur rounding water. An endothermic reaction absorbs heat fr om the
surroundings, so the temperature of the water decreases as heat leaves the surroundings to enter the system.
The temperature change of the water is measured in th e experiment and the specific heat of water can be u sed to calculate the heat
absorbed by the surroundings.
In the equation, is the mass of the water, is the spec ific heat of the water, and is. The heat absorbed by the
surroundings is equal, but opposite in sign, to the he at released by the system. Because the heat change is determined at constant
pressure, the heat released by the system is equal to the enthalpy change.
The sign of is positive for an endothermic reaction and negative for an exothermic reaction.
In an experiment, of at is added to of at in a foam cup calorimeter. A
reaction occurs and the temperature rises to. Calc ulate the enthalpy change in for this reaction. Assu me the
densities of the solutions are and that their specif ic heat is the same as that of water.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
KnownExample

14.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332216Density
Unknown
The volume and density can be used to find the mass of the solution after mixing. Then calculate the chan ge in enthalpy by
using.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about the result.
The enthalpy change is negative because the reactio n releases heat to the surroundings, resulting in an in crease in the
temperature of the water.
Summary
Calorimetry is the measurement of the transfer of heat i nto or out of a system during a chemical reaction or physic al process.
A calorimeter is an insulated container that is used to m easure heat changes.
Calculations involving enthalpy changes are illustrat ed.
This page titled 14.7: Calorimetry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.7: Calorimetry by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

14.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221714.8: Thermochemical Equations
Heating a home is becoming more and more expensive. T he decision to use gas, oil, electricity, or wood can b e multi-faceted. Part
of the decision is based on which fuel will provide th e highest amount of energy release when burned. Studi es of thermochemistry
can be very useful in getting reliable information for m aking these important choices.
Thermochemical Equation
When methane gas is combusted, heat is released, maki ng the reaction exothermic. Specifically, the combusti on of of
methane releases 890.4 kilojoules of heat energy. This inf ormation can be shown as part of a balanced equation:
The equation tells us that of methane combines with of oxygen to produce of carbon dioxide and of wa ter.
In the process, is released and so it is written as a product of the reaction. A thermochemical equation is a chemical
equation that includes the enthalpy change of the r eaction. The process in the above thermochemical equa tion can be shown
visually in the figure below.
Figure: (A) As reactants are converted to products in an exoth ermic reaction, enthalpy is released into the surroundin gs. The
enthalpy change of the reaction is negative. (B) As r eactants are converted to products in an endothermic re action, enthalpy is
absorbed from the surroundings. The enthalpy change of th e reaction is positive. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
In the combustion of methane example, the enthalpy c hange is negative because heat is being released by the system. Therefore,
the overall enthalpy of the system decreases. The heat of reaction is the enthalpy change for a chemical reaction. In the case
above, the heat of reaction is. The thermochemical rea ction can also be written in this way:
Heats of reaction are typically measured in kilojoule s. It is important to include the physical states of th e reactants and products in a
thermochemical equation, as the value of the depends on those states.
Endothermic reactions absorb energy from the surroun dings as the reaction occurs. When of calcium carb onate decomposes
into of calcium oxide and of carbon dioxide, of heat is absorbed. The process is shown visually in th e figure
above (B). The thermochemical reaction is shown below.
Because the heat is absorbed by the system, the is wri tten as a reactant. The heat of reaction is positive for an endothermic
reaction.
The way in which a reaction is written influences the value of the enthalpy change for the reaction. Many reactions are reversible,
meaning that the product(s) of the reaction are cap able of combining and reforming the reactant(s). If a reaction is written in the
reverse direction, the sign of the changes. For exam ple, we can write an equation for the reaction of calc ium oxide with carbon
dioxide to form calcium carbonate:
The reaction is exothermic and thus the sign of the entha lpy change is negative.

14.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332217Summary
A thermochemical equation is a chemical equation tha t includes the enthalpy change of the reaction.
The heat of reaction is the enthalpy change for a che mical reaction.
This page titled 14.8: Thermochemical Equations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.8: Thermochemical Equations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

14.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221814.9: Stoichiometric Calculations and Enthalpy Changes
There is a growing concern about damage to the enviro nment done by emissions from manufacturing plants. Ma ny companies are
taking steps to reduce these harmful emissions by a dding equipment that will trap the pollutants. In or der to know what equipment
(and the quantity) to order, studies are done to measu re the amount of product currently produced. Since po llution is often both
particulate and thermal, energy changes need to be de termined in addition to the amounts of products released.
Stoichiometric Calculations and Enthalpy Changes
Chemistry problems that involve enthalpy changes can be solved by techniques similar to stoichiometry probl ems. Refer again to
the combustion reaction of methane. Since the reaction of of methane released, the reaction of of meth ane
would release. The reaction of of methane would rele ase. As with other
stoichiometry problems, the moles of a reactant or product can be linked to mass or volume.
Sulfur dioxide gas reacts with oxygen to form sulfur trioxide in an exothermic reaction, according to th e following
thermochemical equation.
Calculate the enthalpy change that occurs when of sulf ur dioxide is reacted with excess oxygen.
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Mass
Molar mass
for the reaction of
Unknown
The calculation requires two steps. The mass of is con verted to moles. Then the moles of is multiplied by the
conversion factor of.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The mass of sulfur dioxide is slightly less than. Si nce is released for every of that reacts, the heat
released when about reacts is one half of 198. The is slightly less than half of 198. The sign of is n egative
because the reaction is exothermic.
Summary
Chemistry problems that involve enthalpy changes can be so lved by techniques similar to stoichiometry problems.
Calculations of energy changes in enthalpy equations ar e described.
This page titled 14.9: Stoichiometric Calculations and Enthalpy Chang es is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.9: Stoichiometric Calculations and Enthalpy Changes by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.Example

14.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33221914.10: Heats of Fusion and Solidification
Suppose that you are holding an ice cube in your hand. It feels cold because heat energy leaves your hand a nd enters the ice cube.
What happens to the ice cube? It melts. However, the tem perature during a phase change remains constant. So the heat that is being
lost by your hand does not raise the temperature of the ice above its melting temperature of. Rather, all the heat goes into the
change of state. Energy is absorbed during the proce ss of changing ice into water. The water that is produce d also remains at
until all of the ice is melted.
Heats of Fusion and Solidification
All solids absorb heat as they melt to become liquids. The gain of heat in this endothermic process goes in to changing the state,
rather than changing the temperature. The molar heat of fusion of a substance is the heat absorbed by one mole of that
substance as it is converted from a solid to a liquid. Since the melting of any substance absorbs heat, it fo llows that the freezing of
any substance releases heat. The molar heat of solidification of a substance is the heat released by one mole of t hat
substance as it is converted from a liquid to a solid. Since fusion and solidification of a given substan ce are the exact opposite
processes, the numerical value of the molar heat of f usion is the same as the numerical value of the molar heat of solidification, but
opposite in sign. In other words,. The figure below sho ws all of the possible changes of state along with the
direction of heat flow during each process.
Figure: From left to right, heat is absorbed from the surroundings during melting, evaporation, and sublimat ion. From right
to left, heat is released to the surroundings during fr eezing, condensation, and deposition. (CC BY-NC; CK-1 2)
Every substance has a unique value for its molar heat of fusion, depending on the amount of energy require d to disrupt the
intermolecular forces present in the solid. When of ice at is converted to of liquid water at, of he at are
absorbed from the surroundings. When of water at freeze s to ice at, of heat is released into the surroundings.
The molar heats of fusion and solidification of a gi ven substance can be used to calculate the heat absorbe d or released when
various amounts are melted or frozen.
Calculate the heat absorbed when of ice at is completel y melted.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass ice
Molar mass
Molar heat of fusion Example

14.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332219Unknown
The mass of ice is first converted to moles. This is th en multiplied by the conversion factor of in order to find the of
heat absorbed.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The given quantity is a bit less than 2 moles of ice, and so j ust less than of heat is absorbed by the melting process.
Summary
The molar heat of fusion of a substance is the heat absorbe d by one mole of that substance as it is converted from a
solid to a liquid.
The molar heat of solidification of a substance is the hea t released by one mole of that substance as it is conve rted
from a liquid to a solid.
Calculations of heat changes during fusion and solidifica tion are described.
This page titled 14.10: Heats of Fusion and Solidification is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.10: Heats of Fusion and Solidification by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

14.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222014.11: Heats of Vaporization and Condensation
Natural resources for electric power generation have t raditionally been waterfalls, oil, coal, or nuclear powe r. Research is being
carried out to look for other renewable sources to ru n the generators. Geothermal sites (such as geysers) are being considered
because of the steam they produce. Capabilities can be estimated by knowing how much steam is released in a given time at a
particular site.
Heat of Vaporization and Condensation
Energy is absorbed in the process of converting a li quid at its boiling point into a gas. As with the melt ing point of a solid, the
temperature of a boiling liquid remains constant an d the input of energy goes into changing the state. The molar heat of
vaporization of a substance is the heat absorbed by one mole of that substance as it is converted from a liquid to a gas. As
a gas condenses to a liquid, heat is released. The molar heat of condensation of a substance is the heat released by one
mole of that substance as it is converted from a gas t o a liquid. Since vaporization and condensation of a given substance are the
exact opposite processes, the numerical value of the mo lar heat of vaporization is the same as the numeric al value of the molar heat
of condensation, but opposite in sign. In other words,.
When of water at and pressure is converted to of water vapor at, of heat is absorbed from the
surroundings. When of water vapor at condenses to li quid water at, of heat is released into the
surroundings.
Other substances have different values for their mol ar heats of fusion and vaporization; these substances are summarized in the
table below.
Table: Molar Heats of Fusion and Vaporization
Substance
Ammonia 5.65 23.4
Ethanol 4.60 43.5
Methanol 3.16 35.3
Oxygen 0.44 6.82
Water 6.01 40.7
Notice that for all substances, the heat of vaporizatio n is substantially higher than the heat of fusion. Mu ch more energy is required
to change the state from a liquid to a gas than from a solid to a liquid. This is because of the large se paration of the particles in the
gas state. The values of the heats of fusion and vap orization are related to the strength of the intermo lecular forces. All of the
substances in the table above, with the exception of ox ygen, are capable of hydrogen bonding. Consequently, the heats of fusion
and vaporization of oxygen are far lower than the others.
What mass of methanol vapor condenses to a liquid as of h eat is released?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Molar mass Example

14.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332220Unknown
First the of heat released in the condensation is mu ltiplied by the conversion factor to find the moles of methanol
that condensed. Then, moles are converted to grams.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Condensation is an exothermic process, so the enthal py change is negative. Slightly more than one-half mo le of methanol is
condensed.
Summary
The molar heat of vaporization is the heat absorbed by one mole of a substance as it is converted from a liquid to a gas.
The molar heat of condensation is the heat released by one mole of a substance as it is converted from a gas to a
liquid.
Examples of calculations involving the molar heat of vap orization and condensation are illustrated.
This page titled 14.11: Heats of Vaporization and Condensation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.11: Heats of Vaporization and Condensation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

14.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222114.12: Multi-Step Problems with Changes of State
If you have a cube of ice, which process will take mor e energy—the melting of that ice cube or the conver sion of the water to
steam? The short answer is that more energy is needed to convert the water to steam. The long answer is real ly a series of
questions: How do you get from one point to the other? What is the temperature of the ice? What is the ma ss of that ice cube? A
long process is involved to take the material from the st arting point to the end point.
Multi-Step Problems with Changes of State
Heating curves show the phase changes that a substance un dergoes as heat is continuously absorbed.
Figure: Heating curve of water. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
The specific heat of a substance allows us to calculat e the heat absorbed or released as the temperature of the substance changes. It
is possible to combine that type of problem with a ch ange of state to solve a problem involving multiple steps. The figure above
shows ice at being converted in a five-step process t o gaseous water (steam) at. It is now possible to ca lculate the heat
absorbed during that entire process. The process and the required calculations are summarized below.
1. Ice is heated from to. The heat absorbed is ca lculated by using the specific heat of ice and the equation
2. Ice is melted at. The heat absorbed is calculated by m ultiplying the moles of ice by the molar heat of fusion.
3. Water at is heated to. The heat absorbed is ca lculated by using the specific heat of water and the equation
4. Water is vaporized to steam at. The heat absorbed is calculated by multiplying the moles of water by the molar heat
of vaporization.
5. Steam is heated from to. The heat absorbed is calc ulated by using the specific heat of steam and the eq uation
Calculate the total amount of heat absorbed (in) wh en of ice at is converted to steam at. The require d
specific heats can be found in the table in "Heat Capacity and Specific Heat".
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
ice ice
(ice)
(water)
(steam) Example

14.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332221Unknown
Follow the steps previously described. Note that the ma ss of the water is needed for the calculations that i nvolve the specific
heat, while the moles of water is needed for the calcul ations that involve changes of state. All heat quantit ies must be in
kilojoules so that they can be added together to get a tota l for the five-step process.
Step 2: Solve.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The total heat absorbed as the ice at is heated to steam at is. The largest absorption of heat comes during
the vaporization of the liquid water.
Summary
This page titled 14.12: Multi-Step Problems with Changes of State is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
17.12: Multi-Step Problems with Changes of State by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
15: Water
15.1: Structure of Water
15.2: Structure of Ice
15.3: Physical Properties of Water
15.4: Solute and Solvent
15.5: Dissolving Process
15.6: Liquid-Liquid Solutions
15.7: Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes
15.8: Dissociation
15.9: Strong and Weak Electrolytes
15.10: Suspensions
15.11: Colloids
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 15: Water is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

15.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222315.1: Structure of Water
In his well-known poem "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner ", Samuel Coleridge wrote "water, water everywhere, nor any drop to
drink." Coleridge was talking about being out on the o cean, but not having any water because he had killed an albatross (apparently
bringing bad luck to everyone on the ship). About of the Earth's surface is water. The major constituent o f the human body
(over) is water. This simple molecule plays important rol es in all kinds of processes.
Structure of Water
Water is a simple molecule consisting of one oxygen atom bonded to two different hydrogen atoms. Because of the higher
electronegativity of the oxygen atom, the bonds are polar covalent (polar bonds). The oxygen atom attracts the shared electrons of
the covalent bonds to a significantly greater extent than the hydrogen atoms. As a result, the oxygen atom a cquires a partial
negative charge, while the hydrogen atoms each acqu ire a partial positive charge. The molecule adopts a bent structure
because of the two lone pairs of electrons on the oxyg en atom. The bond angle is about, slightly smaller than the ideal
of an hybridized atomic orbital.
Figure: The water molecule, visualized three differe nt ways: ball-and-stick model, space-filling model, an d structural formula
with partial charges.
The bent shape of the water molecule is critical beca use the polar bonds do not cancel one another and th e molecule as a
whole is polar. The figure below illustrates the net po larity of the water molecule. The oxygen is the negat ive end of the molecule,
while the area between the hydrogen atoms is the positive end of the molecule.
Figure: Water is a polar molecule, as greater electro n density is found around the more electronegative ox ygen atom.
Polar molecules attract one another by dipole-dipole forces, as the positive end of one molecule is att racted to the negative end of
the nearby molecule. In the case of water, the highly polar bonds results in very little electron densit y around the hydrogen
atoms. Each hydrogen atom is strongly attracted to t he lone-pair electrons on an adjacent oxygen atom. T hese are called hydrogen
bonds and are stronger than conventional dipole-dipo le forces.
Figure: A hydrogen bond is the attraction between a lone pair of electrons on the oxygen atom of one mol ecule and the
electron-deficient hydrogen atom of a nearby molecu le.
Because each oxygen atom has two lone pairs, it can ma ke hydrogen bonds to the hydrogen atoms of two separat e other molecules.
The figure below shows the result—an approximately tet rahedral geometry around each oxygen atom, consisting of two covalent
bonds and two hydrogen bonds.

15.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332223
Figure: As a result of two covalent bonds and two hydr ogen bonds, the geometry around each oxygen atom is a pproximately
tetrahedral.
Summary
Water is a molecular compound consisting of polar mole cules that have a bent shape.
The oxygen atom acquires a partial negative charge, whi le the hydrogen atom acquires a partial positive charge.
This page titled 15.1: Structure of Water is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.1: Structure of Water by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

15.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222415.2: Structure of Ice
Ice is an interesting and useful material. It can b e used to cool food and keep it fresh. Ice can provi de recreation, such as in the case
of ice-skating. It can do great damage when it freez es—roads can buckle, houses can be damaged, water pipe s can burst. All of this
happens because of a unique property of water: when water fr eezes, it expands in volume as ice is formed.
Structure of Ice
Liquid water is a fluid. The hydrogen bonds in liqui d water constantly break and reform as the water molecu les tumble past one
another. As water cools, its molecular motion slows and the molecules move gradually closer to one another. The density of any
liquid increases as its temperature decreases. For mo st liquids, this continues as the liquid freezes; t he solid state is denser than the
liquid state. However, water behaves differently. It actually reaches its highest density at about.
Table: Density of Water and Ice
Temperature Density
100 (liquid) 0.9584
50 0.9881
25 0.9971
10 0.9997
4 1.0000
0 (liquid) 0.9998
0 (solid) 0.9168
Between and, the density gradually decreases as the hy drogen bonds begin to form a network characterized b y a generally
hexagonal structure with open spaces in the middle of the hexagons (s ee figure below).
Figure: The structure of liquid water (left) consists o f molecules connected by short-lived hydrogen bonds be cause water is a
fluid. In ice (right), the hydrogen bonds become per manent, resulting in an interconnected hexagonally-sh aped framework of
molecules.
Ice is less dense than liquid water and so it floats. Ponds or lakes begin to freeze at the surface, close r to the cold air. A layer of ice
forms, but does not sink as it would if water did not ha ve this unique structure dictated by its shape, polar ity, and hydrogen
bonding. If the ice were to sink as it froze, entire la kes would freeze solid. Since the ice does not sink, l iquid water remains under
the ice all winter long. This is important, as fish and other organisms are capable of surviving through wint er. Ice is one of few
solids that is less dense than its liquid form.
Summary
The density of any liquid increases as its temperature dec reases. As an exception, ice is less dense than liquid water.
The intermolecular structure of ice has spaces that are not present in liquid water.

15.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332224This page titled 15.2: Structure of Ice is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.2: Structure of Ice by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

15.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222515.3: Physical Properties of Water
Water loss to the atmosphere is a significant proble m in many parts of the world. When water supplies are lo w, anything that can be
done to decrease water loss is important for farmers. An evaporation pan can be used to measure how fast wate r evaporates in a
given location. This information can be used as par t of project development to cut down on evaporation, and increase the amount of
usable water in a region.
Properties of Water
Compared to other molecular compounds of relatively low molar mass, ice melts at a very high temperature. A great deal of energy
is required to break apart the hydrogen-bonded netwo rk of ice and return it to the liquid state. Likewise, the boiling point of water
is very high. Most molecular compounds of similar molar m ass are gases at room temperature.
Surface Tension
Water has a high surface tension (attraction between molecules at the surface of a liq uid) because of its hydrogen bonding. Liquids
that cannot hydrogen bond do not exhibit nearly as m uch surface tension. Surface tension can be seen by the curved meniscus that
forms when water is in a thin column, such as in a graduated cyli nder or a buret.
Figure: The meniscus of water in a graduated cylinder forms because of water's hydrogen bonding.
Vapor Pressure
The vapor pressure of a liquid is the pressure of the vapor produced b y evaporation of a liquid or solid above the liquid or solid in
a closed container. The hydrogen bonding between liqu id water molecules explains why water has an unusually low vapor pressure.
Relatively few molecules of water are capable of escapi ng the surface of the liquid and entering the vapor phase. Evaporation is
slow, and thus the vapor exerts a low pressure in a cl osed container. Low vapor pressure is an important phy sical property of water,
since lakes, oceans, and other large bodies of water would otherwise evaporate much more quickly.
Vapor pressure is influenced by temperature. As the te mperature increases, more molecules are released fr om the surface of the
liquid. This increases movement above the liquid surfa ce, increasing the pressure in the vapor stage. The image below illustrates
the effect of temperature on vapor pressure.
Figure: Vapor pressure of water at different temperat ures.
Summary
Water has high surface tension because of extensive hydro gen bonding.
The vapor pressure of water is low due to hydrogen bondin g.
Vapor pressure increases as temperature increases.
This page titled 15.3: Physical Properties of Water is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

15.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222515.3: Physical Properties of Water by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

15.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222615.4: Solute and Solvent
In the winter, the temperature often gets well below th e freezing point of water. This condition can create problems in car radiators.
If the water freezes, water hoses will break, the engine bloc k can crack, and significant damage can be done to the car.
Solute and Solvent
When one substance dissolves into another, a solution is formed. A solution is a homogeneous mixture consi sting of a solute
dissolved into a solvent. The solute is the substance that is being dissolved, while the solvent is the dissolving medium. Solutions
can be formed with many different types and forms of s olutes and solvents.
We know of many types of solutions. Check out a few example s in the table below.
Table: Types of Solutions
Type Solvent Solute Example
gas/gas nitrogen oxygen air
gas/liquid water carbon dioxide soda pop
liquid/liquid water ethylene glycol antifreeze
solid/liquid water salts seawater
This section's focus is on solutions where the solvent is water. An aqueous solution is water that contains one o r more dissolved
substances. The dissolved substances in an aqueous soluti on many be solids, gases, or other liquids. Some examp les are listed in
the table above. Other examples include vinegar (ace tic acid in water), alcoholic beverages (ethanol in water), and liquid cough
medicines (various drugs in water).
Figure: Typical solution: clear and stable.
In order to be a true solution, a mixture must be sta ble. When sugar is fully dissolved into water, it can stand for an indefinite
amount of time and the sugar will not settle out of t he solution. Further, if the sugar-water solution is pa ssed through a filter, it will
be unchanged. The dissolved sugar particles will pass through the filter along with the water. This is becau se the dissolved particles
in a solution are very small, usually less than in di ameter. Solute particles can be atoms, ions, or molecule s, depending on the
type of substance that has been dissolved.
Summary
A solution is a homogeneous mixture of a solute in a solv ent.
A solute is the material present in the smaller amoun t in the solution.
A solvent is the material present in the larger amount in the solution.
This page titled 15.4: Solute and Solvent is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.4: Solute and Solvent by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

15.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222715.5: Dissolving Process
Many people start their day with a cup of coffee (oth ers drink coffee all day long). The coffee typically consumed is a type of
solution—sometimes a very complex one. The coffee it self has been brewed so that material from the coffee bean will dissolve in
hot water. Some people add sugar, while others add mil k or cream. In some areas of the country, lattés are popular; one or more
special flavors might be added along with the milk. Whate ver the situation, the end result is an enjoyable soluti on to drink.
The Process of Dissolution
Water typically dissolves many ionic compounds and p olar molecules. Nonpolar molecules such as those found in grease or oil do
not dissolve in water. We will first examine the process that occurs when an ionic compound such as table salt (sodium chloride)
dissolves in water.
Water molecules move about continuously due to their kinetic energy. When a crystal of sodium chloride is placed into water, the
water's molecules collide with the crystal lattice. Reca ll that the crystal lattice is composed of alternat ing positive and negative
ions. Water is attracted to the sodium chloride crys tal because water is polar and has both a positive a nd a negative end. The
positively charged sodium ions in the crystal attrac t the oxygen end of the water molecules because they are partially negative. The
negatively charged chloride ions in the crystal attra ct the hydrogen end of the water molecules because th ey are partially positive.
The action of the polar water molecules takes the crystal la ttice apart (see image below).
Figure: The dissolving of sodium chloride in water.
After coming apart from the crystal, the individual i ons are then surrounded by solvent particles in a pr ocess called solvation. Note
that the individual ions are surrounded by water mo lecules with the oxygen atom oriented near the positiv e ion. Likewise, the
chloride ions are surrounded by water molecules with t he opposite orientation. Hydration is the process of solute particles being
surrounded by water molecules arranged in a specific manner. Hydration helps to stabilize aqueous solutions by preventing the
positive and negative ions from coming back together and forming a precipitate.
Table sugar is sucrose, and is an example of a mol ecular compound. Solid sugar consists of individual su gar molecules
held together by intermolecular attractive forces. W hen water dissolves sugar, it separates the individual sugar molecules by
disrupting the attractive forces, but does not break the covalent bonds between the carbon, hydrogen, and ox ygen atoms. Dissolved
sugar molecules are also hydrated, but without as disti nct an orientation to the water molecules as in the c ase of the ions. The sugar
molecules contain many groups that can form hydroge n bonds with the water molecules, helping to form the sucro se solution.
Summary
Motion of water molecules helps break up interactions between solid ions or molecules.
Solvation involves surrounding ions with solvent particles.
Ionic solute molecules are hydrated (surrounded by water molecules in a specific orientation).
This page titled 15.5: Dissolving Process is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.5: Dissolving Process by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

15.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222815.6: Liquid-Liquid Solutions
In 2010, a major oil spill occurred when an explosion on a drilling rig in the Gulf of Mexico released mill ions of gallons of crude
oil into the Gulf. Oil is primarily a mixture of hydr ocarbons (organic compounds composed of only carbon and hydrogen atoms).
Because of its composition, oil does not dissolve in water. As a result, much of the Gulf of Mexico was contami nated, as was a
great deal of shoreline in the affected area.
Liquid-Liquid Solutions
Nonpolar compounds do not dissolve in water. The attra ctive forces that operate between the particles in a nonpolar compound are
weak dispersion forces. However, the nonpolar molecules a re more attracted to themselves than they are to the polar water
molecules. When a nonpolar liquid such as oil is mix ed with water, two separate layers form because the li quids will not dissolve
into each other (figure below). When another polar l iquid such as ethanol is mixed with water, they compl etely blend and dissolve
into one another. Liquids that dissolve in one anoth er in all proportions are said to be miscible. Liquids that do not dissolve in one
another are deemed immiscible. The general rule for deciding if one substance is c apable of dissolving another is "like dissolves
like". A nonpolar solid such as iodine will dissolve in nonp olar lighter fluid, but will not dissolve in polar water.
Figure: Water and oil form separate layers when they are mixed because the nonpolar oil will not dissolve i nto the polar
water. The oil forms the top layer because it is less de nse than the water.
For molecular compounds, the major factor that contr ibutes to the material dissolving in water is the abi lity to form hydrogen
bonds with the water solvent. Small compounds such as methanol, ethanol, acetic acid, and acetone have pola r groups that can
interact with the polar of water. However, as the nonpol ar portion of the molecule gets larger, solubility wi th water drops off. The
nonpolar portion of the molecule increasingly repels the water and eventually overrides the interaction o f the polar component with
water.
Summary
Liquids that dissolve in one another in all proportions a re miscible; liquids that do not dissolve in one anot her are immiscible.
The general rule for deciding if one substance is capab le of dissolving another is "like dissolves like".
Nonpolar molecules are usually insoluble in water.
A non-ionized molecule must be relatively polar to int eract with water molecules.
This page titled 15.6: Liquid-Liquid Solutions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.6: Liquid-Liquid Solutions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

15.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33222915.7: Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes
People around the world jog for exercise. For the most p art, jogging can be a healthy way to stay fit. However, p roblems can
develop for those who jog in the heat. Excessive sweatin g can lead to electrolyte loss, which can be life-thr eatening. Early
symptoms of electrolyte deficiency can include nause a, fatigue, and dizziness. If not treated, individual s can experience muscle
weakness and increased heart rate (which could lead to a heart attack). Sports drinks can be consumed to re store electrolytes
quickly in the body.
Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes
An electrolyte is a compound that conducts an electric current when it is in an aqueous solution or melted. In order to conduct a
current, a substance must contain mobile ions that can move from one electrode to the other. All ionic comp ounds are electrolytes.
When ionic compounds dissolve, they break apart into ions which are then able to conduct a current (conductivity). Even insoluble
ionic compounds such as are electrolytes because they c an conduct a current in the molten (melted) state.
A nonelectrolyte is a compound that does not conduct an electric curr ent in either aqueous solution or in the molten state. Many
molecular compounds, such as sugar or ethanol, are n onelectrolytes. When these compounds dissolve in water, they do not produce
ions. The figure below illustrates the difference betwee n an electrolyte and a nonelectrolyte.
Figure: Conductivity apparatus.
Roles of Electrolytes in the Body
Several electrolytes play important roles in the body. Here are a few significant electrolytes:
1. Calcium - in bones and teeth. Also important for muscle co ntraction, blood clotting, and nerve function.
2. Sodium - found outside the cell. Mainly involved in wat er balance and nerve signaling.
3. Potassium - major cation inside the cell. Important for proper functioning of heart, muscles, kidneys, and nerves.
4. Magnesium - in bone and cells. Involved in muscle, bone, n ervous system, and takes part in many biochemical reactio ns.
Summary
Electrolytes conduct electric current when in solution or melted.
Nonelectrolytes do not conduct electric current when in so lution or melted.
Some electrolytes play important roles in the body.
This page titled 15.7: Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.7: Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

15.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223015.8: Dissociation
In many areas, winter ice on the streets and sidewalks r epresents a serious walking and driving hazard. One co mmon approach to
melting the ice is to put some form of deicing salt o n the surface. Materials such as sodium chloride or ca lcium chloride are
frequently employed for this purpose. In order to be effective, the solid material must first dissolve an d break up into the ions that
make up the compound.
Dissociation
An ionic crystal lattice breaks apart when it is disso lved in water. Dissociation is the separation of ions that occurs when a solid
ionic compound dissolves. It is important to be able to write dissociation equations. Simply undo the cri sscross method that you
learned when writing chemical formulas of ionic compou nds. The subscripts for the ions in the chemical for mulas become the
coefficients of the respective ions on the product side of the equation. Shown below are dissociation equ ations for,,
and.
The formula unit of sodium chloride dissociates into one sodium ion and one chloride ion. The calcium ni trate formula unit
dissociates into one calcium ion and two nitrate ion s. This is because of the charge of the calcium io n. Two nitrate ions, each
with a charge are required to make the equation bal ance electrically. The ammonium phosphate formula un it dissociates into
three ammonium ions and one phosphate ion. Note that th e polyatomic ions themselves do not dissociate further, b ut remain intact.
Do not confuse the subscripts of the atoms within the polyatomic ion for the subscripts that result from th e crisscrossing of the
charges that make up the original compound neutral. The 3 subscript of the nitrate ion and the 4 subsc ript of the ammonium ion are
part of the polyatomic ion and simply remain as part of its formula after the compound dissociates. Notice that the compounds are
solids which then become ions in aqueous solution.
Figure: Calcium nitrate is a typical ionic compound. In an aqueous solution, it dissociates into calcium ion s and nitrate ions.
Nonelectrolytes do not dissociate when forming an aqu eous solution. An equation can still be written that si mply shows the solid
going into solution. For the dissolution of sucrose:
Summary
Dissociation is the separation of ions that occurs when a s olid ionic compound dissolves.
Nonionic compounds do not dissociate in water.
This page titled 15.8: Dissociation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.8: Dissociation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

15.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223115.9: Strong and Weak Electrolytes
Car batteries are used around the world to provide the power to start car engines. One essential component o f car batteries is the
strong electrolyte sulfuric acid. In the battery, th is material ionizes into hydrogen ions and sulfate io ns. As the battery is used, the
concentrations of these ions decreases. Older batteri es had openings in the top where new sulfuric acid cou ld be added to replenish
the supply. Today, batteries are sealed to prevent leak age of hazardous sulfuric acid.
Strong and Weak Electrolytes
Some polar molecular compounds are nonelectrolytes wh en they are in their pure state, but become electrol ytes when they are
dissolved in water. Hydrogen chloride is a gas in its pure molecular state and is a nonelectrolyte. However, when is
dissolved in water, it conducts a current well because the mo lecule ionizes into hydrogen and chloride ions.
dissolved into water is called hydrochloric acid. A strong electrolyte is a solution in which a large fraction of the diss olved
solute exists as ions. Ionic compounds, and some pola r compounds, are completely broken apart into ions and thus conduct a
current very well—this makes them strong electrolytes.
Some other polar molecular compounds become electrol ytes upon being dissolved into water, but do not ion ize to very great extent.
Gaseous nitrous acid ionizes in solution to hydrogen i ons and nitrite ions, but does so very weakly. Aqueous nitrous acid is
composed of only about ions and intact nitrous acid molecules. A weak electrolyte is a solution in which only a small
fraction of the dissolved solute exists as ions. The equation showing the ionization of a weak electrolyte utilizes a double arrow
indicating an equilibrium between the reactants and prod ucts.
Summary
A strong electrolyte exists mainly as ions in solution.
A weak electrolyte has only a small amount of ionization in solution.
This page titled 15.9: Strong and Weak Electrolytes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.9: Strong and Weak Electrolytes by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

15.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223215.10: Suspensions
On a calm day, the Caribbean Sea is clear and smooth. You can see deep into the water—deep enough to see f ish and underwater
plant life without obstruction. The situation changes markedly when a storm blows up. The sand on the bottom of the sea is stirred
up, the water becomes turbid, and you can't see anyt hing below the surface. The sand forms a suspension i n the water that slowly
clears up again after the storm blows over.
Suspensions
Take a glass of water and throw in a handful of sand or dirt. Stir it and stir it and stir it. The water may b ecome turbid, or unclear.
Have you made a solution? Sand and dirt do not dissolve in water and though it may look homogenous for a fe w moments, the sand
or dirt gradually sinks to the bottom of the glass.
Figure: A suspension of dirt in water.
A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture in which some of the part icles settle out of the mixture upon standing. The particles in a
suspension are far larger than those of a solution an d thus gravity is able to pull them down out of the dispersion medium (water).
The typical diameter for the dispersed particles (t he sand) of a suspension is about 1000 times greater th an those of a solution (less
than approximately two nanometers for particles in so lution, compared to greater than 1000 nanometers fo r particles in
suspension). Unlike in a solution, the dispersed partic les can be separated from the dispersion medium by f iltering. Suspensions are
heterogeneous because at least two different substances in the mixture can be identified.
Some Typical Aqueous Suspensions
Milk
Milk is a complex mixture of water, proteins, fats, carboh ydrates, and minerals. While the minerals and carboh ydrates are watersoluble, the fats and some of the proteins do not dissolve, bu t are held in suspension.
Paint
Paint can either be water-based or use an organic solv ent. We will limit this discussion to water-based paints. The materials will
contain binders (organic polymers that help hold the paint to the surface of the material being painted). In addition, pigments are
included to provide the desired color. Both the binde rs and the pigments are not water-soluble, so the pai nt must be stirred every
time it is used. Paint that is allowed to sit for a l ong period of time will slowly begin to separate as t he suspension of binders and
pigments settles out.
Summary
Suspensions are heterogeneous mixtures.
Some of the material in a suspension will settle out on stan ding.
Solid material in a suspension can be removed by filtration.
This page titled 15.10: Suspensions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.10: Suspensions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

15.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223315.11: Colloids
Imagine that you are sailing on a yacht. The engine suddenly breaks down and you are stranded in the mid dle of the ocean. You call
the Coast Guard on your radio, but cannot give them a n exact location, because your GPS isn't working. Fortunately, you have a
smoke flare, which you fire off. The dense colored smo ke shows the Coast Guard where you are so that they can rescue you. In
using the flare, you are taking advantage of a mixture c alled a colloid.
Colloids
A colloid is a heterogeneous mixture whose particle size is in termediate between those of a solution and a suspensi on. The
dispersed particles are spread evenly throughout th e dispersion medium, which can be a solid, liquid, or gas. Because the
dispersed particles of a colloid are not as large a s those of a suspension, they do not settle out upon s tanding. The table below
summarizes the properties and distinctions between solutio ns, colloids, and suspensions.
Properties of Solutions, Colloids, and Suspensions
Table: Properties of Solutions, Colloids, and Suspensions
Solutions Colloids Suspensions
Homogeneous. Heterogeneous. Heterogeneous.
Particle size: -; atoms, ions, or
molecules.Particle size: -, dispersed; large
molecules or aggregates.Particle size: over, suspended;
large particles or aggregates.
Do not separate on standing. Do not separate on standing. Particles settle out.
Cannot be separated by filtration. Cannot be separated by filtration. Can be separated by filtration.
Do not scatter light. Scatter light (Tyndall effect). M ay either scatter light or be opaque.
Colloids are unlike solutions because their dispers ed particles are much larger than those of a solutio n. The dispersed particles of a
colloid cannot be separated by filtration, but they scat ter light—a phenomenon called the Tyndall effect.
The Tyndall Effect
When light is passed through a true solution, the disso lved particles are too small to deflect the light. Howe ver, the dispersed
particles of a colloid, being larger, do deflect li ght. The Tyndall effect is the scattering of visible light by colloidal particles. You
have undoubtedly "seen" a light beam as it passes t hrough fog, smoke, or a scattering of dust particles suspended in air. All three
are examples of colloids. Suspensions may scatter lig ht, but if the number of suspended particles is suff iciently large, the
suspension may simply be opaque, and the light scattering will not occur.
Figure: The Tyndall effect allows sunlight to be seen as it passes through a fine mist.

15.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332233Examples of Colloids
The table below lists examples of colloidal systems, m ost of which are very familiar. The dispersed phase descr ibes the particles,
while the dispersion medium is the material in which the parti cles are distributed.
Classes of Colloids
Table: Classes of Colloids
Class of Colloid Dispersed Phase Dispersion Medium Examples
Solid gel solid liquidpaint, jellies, blood, gelatin,
mud
Solid aerosol solid gas smoke, dust in air
Solid emulsion liquid solid cheese, butter
Liquid emulsion liquid liquid milk, mayonnaise
Liquid aerosol liquid gas fog, mist, clouds, aerosol spray
Foam gas solid marshmallow
Foam gas liquid whipped cream, shaving cream
Another property of a colloidal system is observed wh en the colloids are studied under a light microscope. The colloids scintillate,
reflecting brief flashes of light because the collo idal particles move in a rapid and random fashion. T his phenomenon, called
Brownian motion, is caused by collisions between the small co lloidal particles and the molecules of the dispersion med ium.
Emulsions
Butter and mayonnaise are examples of a class of col loids called emulsions. An emulsion is a colloidal dispersion of a liquid in
either a liquid or a solid. A stable emulsion requir es an emulsifying agent to be present. Mayonnaise is m ade in part of oil and
vinegar. Since oil is nonpolar and vinegar is an aqueo us solution and polar, the two do not mix, and quickly separate into layers.
However, the addition of egg yolk causes the mixture t o become stable and not separate. Egg yolk is capab le of interacting with
both the polar vinegar and the nonpolar oil. The eg g yolk is called the emulsifying agent. Soap acts as an emulsifying agent
between grease and water. Grease cannot be simply rinsed off your hands, or another surface, because it is i nsoluble. However, the
soap stabilizes a grease-water mixture because one e nd of a soap molecule is polar, and the other end is nonpolar. This allows the
grease to be removed from your hands or your clothing b y washing with soapy water.
Summary
A colloid is a heterogeneous mixture whose particle s ize is intermediate between those of a solution and a susp ension.
The Tyndall effect is the scattering of visible light by colloidal particles.
An emulsion is a colloidal dispersion of a liquid in eit her a liquid or a solid.
This page titled 15.11: Colloids is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
15.11: Colloids by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
16: Solutions
16.1: Solute-Solvent Combinations
16.2: Rate of Dissolution
16.3: Saturated and Unsaturated Solutions
16.4: How Temperature Influences Solubility
16.5: Supersaturated Solutions
16.6: Henry's Law
16.7: Percent Solutions
16.8: Molarity
16.9: Solution Stoichiometry
16.10: Preparing Solutions
16.11: Dilution
16.12: Molality
16.13: The Lowering of Vapor Pressure
16.14: Freezing Point Depression
16.15: Boiling Point Elevation
16.16: Electrolytes and Colligative Properties
16.17: Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure
16.18: Calculating Molar Mass
16.19: Stoichiometry Map
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 16: Solutions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content
that was edited to the style and standards of the Libre Texts platform.

16.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223516.1: Solute-Solvent Combinations
Solute-Solvent Combinations
The focus of "Chapter 15: Water" was water's role in t he formation of aqueous solutions. We examined the pr imary characteristics
of a solution and how water is able to dissolve solid solutes; we differentiated between a solution, a suspe nsion, and a colloid.
There are many examples of solutions that do not inv olve water at all, or that involve solutes that are no t solids. The table below
summarizes the possible combinations of solute-solvent st ates, along with examples of each.
Table: Solute-Solvent Combinations
Solute State Solvent State Example
liquid gas water in air
gas gas oxygen in nitrogen (gas mixture)
solid liquid salt in water
liquid liquid alcohol in water
gas liquid carbon dioxide in water
solid solid zinc in copper (brass alloy)
liquid solid mercury in silver and tin (dental amalgam)
Gas-Gas Solutions
Our air is a homogenous mixture of many different gas es and therefore qualifies as a solution. Approximatel y of the
atmosphere is nitrogen, making it the solvent for th is solution. The next major constituent is oxygen (a bout), followed by the
inert gas argon, carbon dioxide, and trace amounts of ne on, methane, helium, and other gases.
Solid-Solid Solutions
Solid-solid solutions such as brass, bronze, and sterling silver are called alloys. Bronze (composed mainly of co pper with added
tin) was widely used in making weapons in times past, d ating back to at least 2400 B.C. This metal alloy was hard and tough, but
was eventually replaced by iron.
Liquid-Liquid Solutions
Perhaps the most familiar liquid-solid solution is den tal amalgam, used to fill teeth when there is a cavit y. Approximately of
the amalgam material is liquid mercury to which a powd ered alloy of silver, tin, and copper is added. Mercury is used because it
binds well with the solid metal alloy. However, the use of mercury-based dental amalgam has gone under ques tion in recent years,
because of concerns regarding the toxicity of mercury.
Summary
This page titled 16.1: Solute-Solvent Combinations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.1: Solute-Solvent Combinations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

16.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223616.2: Rate of Dissolution
Many people enjoy a cold glass of iced tea on a hot su mmer day. Some like it unsweetened, while others like to put sugar in it.
How sugar dissolves in the tea depends on two factors: how much sugar was put into the tea, and how cold it is. Tea usually has to
be stirred for a while to get all the sugar dissolved.
Rate of Dissolution
Dissolution is the process by which a solute dissolves into a solve nt and forms a solution. We know that the dissolutio n of a solid
by water depends upon the collisions that occur between the solvent molecules and the particles in the soli d crystal. Anything that
can be done to increase the frequency of those colli sions and/or to give those collisions more energy will increase the rate of
dissolution. Imagine that you were trying to dissolve some sugar in a glassful of tea. A packet of granulated sugar would dissolve
faster than a cube of sugar. The rate of dissolution would be increased by stirring, or agitating the solu tion. Finally, the sugar would
dissolve faster in hot tea than it would in cold tea.
Surface Area
The rate at which a solute dissolves depends upon the size of the solute particles. Dissolution is a surfa ce phenomenon, since it
depends on solvent molecules colliding with the outer surface of the solute. A given quantity of solute diss olves faster when it is
ground into small particles, rather than in the form o f large pieces, because more surface area is exposed. A packet of granulated
sugar exposes far more surface area to the solvent and d issolves more quickly than a sugar cube.
Agitation of the Solution
Dissolving sugar in water will occur more quickly if the water is stirred. The stirring allows fresh solvent mo lecules to continually
be in contact with the solute. If it is not stirred, the n the water right at the surface of the solute become s saturated with dissolved
sugar molecules, meaning that it is more difficult fo r additional solute to dissolve. The sugar cube would eventually dissolve
because random motions of the water molecules would br ing enough fresh solvent into contact with the sugar, but the process
would take much longer. It is important to realize th at neither stirring nor breaking up a solute affect the overall amount of solute
that dissolves—these actions only affect the rate of di ssolution.
Temperature
Heating up a solvent gives the molecules more kineti c energy. The increased rapid motion means that the solvent molecules collide
with the solute with greater frequency, and that the co llisions occur with more force. Both factors increase the rate at which the
solute dissolves. As we will see in the next section, a temperature change not only affects the rate of dis solution, but also affects the
amount of solute that dissolves.
Summary
This page titled 16.2: Rate of Dissolution is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.2: Rate of Dissolution by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

16.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223716.3: Saturated and Unsaturated Solutions
When compounds are synthesized, contaminating mater ials are often mixed in with them. The process of rec rystallization can be
used to remove these impurities. The crystals are disso lved in a hot solvent, forming a solution. When the solv ent is cooled, the
compound is no longer as soluble and will precipitate out of solution, leaving contaminating materials still dissol ved.
Saturated and Unsaturated Solutions
Table salt readily dissolves in water. Suppose that y ou have a beaker of water to which you add some salt, stirring until it
dissolves. You add more and that dissolves. You keep ad ding more and more salt, eventually reaching a poin t at which no more of
the salt will dissolve—no matter how long or how vigorou sly you stir it. Why? On the molecular level, we know th at action of the
water causes the individual ions to break apart from the salt crystal and enter the solution, where they rema in hydrated by water
molecules. What also happens is that some of the disso lved ions collide back again with the crystal and re main there.
Recrystallization is the process of dissolved solute returning to the solid state. At some point, the rate at which the soli d salt is
dissolving becomes equal to the rate at which the di ssolved solute is recrystallizing. When that point is reached, the total amount of
dissolved salt remains unchanged. Solution equilibrium is the physical state described by the opposing proce sses of dissolution
and recrystallization occurring at the same rate. Th e solution equilibrium for the dissolution of sodiu m chloride can be represented
by one of two equations:
While the above equation shows the change of state ba ck and forth between solid and aqueous solution, the p referred equation also
shows the dissociation that occurs as an ionic solid dissol ves:
When the solution equilibrium point is reached and no more solute will dissolve, the solution is said to be saturated. A saturated
solution is a solution that contains the maximum amount of so lute that is capable of dissolving. At, the maximum a mount of
that will dissolve in \100. \: \text{g}\) of water i s. If any more is added past this point, it will not dissolve, because
the solution is saturated. What if more water is add ed to the solution instead? In that case, more would be capable of
dissolving in the additional solvent. An unsaturated solution is a solution that contains less than the maximum am ount of solute
that is capable of being dissolved. The figure below il lustrates the above process and shows the distinction be tween unsaturated and
saturated.
Figure: When of is added to, it all dissolves, formi ng an unsaturated solution. When is added,
dissolves and remains undissolved, forming a saturated sol ution.
How can you tell if a solution is saturated or unsatur ated? If more solute is added and it does not dissol ve, then the original solution
was saturated. If the added solute dissolves, then the original solution was unsaturated. A solution that h as been allowed to reach
equilibrium, but which has extra undissolved solute at the bottom of the container, must be saturated.

16.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332237Summary
Recrystallization is the process of dissolved solute retur ning to the solid state.
A saturated solution is a solution that contains the max imum amount of solute that is capable of dissolving.
An unsaturated solution is a solution that contains less th an the maximum amount of solute that is capable of being d issolved.
Solution equilibrium exists when the rate of dissolution equ als the rate of recrystallization.
This page titled 16.3: Saturated and Unsaturated Solutions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.3: Saturated and Unsaturated Solutions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

16.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223816.4: How Temperature Influences Solubility
Nuclear power plants require large amounts of water to generate steam for turbines and to cool equipment. They are usually
situated near bodies of water to use that water as a coo lant, returning the warmer water back to the lake or r iver. This increases the
overall temperature of the water, which lowers the quantity of dissolved oxygen, affecting the survival of fish and o ther organisms.
How Temperature Influences Solubility
The solubility of a substance is the amount of that substance that is required to form a saturated solution in a given amount of
solvent at a specified temperature. Solubility is oft en measured as the grams of solute per of solvent. The solubility of sodium
chloride in water is per water at. The temperature must be specified because solubility varies with temp erature.
For gases, the pressure must also be specified. Solubility is specific for a particular solvent. In this section, we will consider
solubility of material in water as solvent.
The solubility of the majority of solid substances i ncreases as the temperature increases. However, the ef fect is difficult to predict
and varies widely from one solute to another. The tem perature dependence of solubility can be visualized with the help of a
solubility curve, a graph of the solubility vs. temperature (see figure be low).
Figure: Solubility curves for several compounds.
Notice how the temperature dependence of is fairly f lat, meaning that an increase in temperature has rela tively little effect on
the solubility of. The curve for, on the other han d, is very steep, and so an increase in temperature d ramatically
increases the solubility of.
Several substances—,, and —have solubility that decre ases as temperature increases. They are all gases at sta ndard
pressure. When a solvent with a gas dissolved in it is heated, the kinetic energy of both the solvent and so lute increase. As the
kinetic energy of the gaseous solute increases, its mole cules have a greater tendency to escape the attract ion of the solvent
molecules and return to the gas phase. Therefore, the so lubility of a gas decreases as the temperature increases.
Solubility curves can be used to determine if a give n solution is saturated or unsaturated. Suppose that o f is added to
of water at. According to the solubility curve, appro ximately of will dissolve at. This means that the
solution will be saturated since is less than. We c an also determine that there will be of undissolved
remaining at the bottom of the container. In a second scenario, suppose that this saturated solution is hea ted to. According to
the curve, the solubility of at is about. The so lution, in this case, is unsaturated since it contains only the original
of dissolved solute. Suppose in a third case, that t he solution is cooled all the way down to. The solubil ity at is about
, meaning that of the will recrystallize.

16.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332238Summary
The solubility of a substance is the amount of that su bstance that is required to form a saturated solution in a gi ven amount of
solvent at a specified temperature.
A solubility curve is a graph of the solubility vs. temp erature
The solubility of a solid in water increases with an inc rease in temperature.
Gas solubility decreases as the temperature increases.
This page titled 16.4: How Temperature Influences Solubility is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.4: How Temperature Influences Solubility by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

16.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33223916.5: Supersaturated Solutions
In the picture below, a thermal pack is applied to t he back. Small packs can be used either for heating or cooling, depending on the
material used. A heat pack contains a supersaturate d solution of material such as sodium acetate. The so lution is clear until a small
metal trigger is activated. The sodium acetate then crys tallizes out of solution and generates heat in the process.
Figure: A thermal pack is applied to heat or cool mu scles.
Supersaturated Solutions
Some solutes, such as sodium acetate, do not recrystal lize easily. Suppose an exactly saturated solution of sodium acetate is
prepared at. As it cools back to room temperature, no crystals appear in the solution, even though the solub ility of sodium
acetate is lower at room temperature. A supersaturated solution is a solution that contains more than the maximum a mount of
solute that is capable of being dissolved at a given temperature. The recrystallization of the excess di ssolved solute in a
supersaturated solution can be initiated by the addi tion of a tiny crystal of solute, called a seed crys tal. The seed crystal provides a
nucleation site on which the excess dissolved crystals can begin to grow. Recrystallization from a supersa turated solution is
typically very fast.
Summary
A supersaturated solution is a solution that contains mor e than the maximum amount of solute that is capable of be ing dissolved
at a given temperature.
When a seed crystal is added to the solution, a supersa turated solution can recrystallize.
This page titled 16.5: Supersaturated Solutions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.5: Supersaturated Solutions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

16.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224016.6: Henry's Law
Having a soft drink in outer space poses some special problems. Under microgravity, the carbonation can quic kly dissipate if not
kept under pressure. You can't open the can, or you will lose carbonation. So, a special pressurized contain er has been developed to
get around the problem of gas loss at low gravity.
Henry's Law
Pressure has very little effect on the solubility of s olids or liquids, but has a significant effect on the solubility of gases. Gas
solubility increases as the partial pressure of a ga s above the liquid increases. Suppose a certain volum e of water is in a closed
container with the space above it occupied by carbon dioxide gas at standard pressure. Some of the molecul es come into
contact with the surface of the water and dissolve int o the liquid. Now suppose that more is added to the s pace above the
container, causing a pressure increase. In this case, more molecules are in contact with the water and so more of them dissolve.
Thus, the solubility increases as the pressure increase s. As with a solid, the that is undissolved reaches an eq uilibrium with the
dissolved, represented by the equation:
At equilibrium, the rate of gaseous dissolution is equal t o the rate of dissolved coming out of the solution.
When carbonated beverages are packaged, they are do ne so under high pressure so that a large amount of carbon dioxide
dissolves in the liquid. When the bottle is open, th e equilibrium is disrupted because the pressure abo ve the liquid decreases.
Immediately, bubbles of rapidly exit the solution a nd escape out of the top of the open bottle. The amou nt of dissolved
decreases. If the bottle is left open for an extende d period of time, the beverage becomes "flat" as mo re and more comes out of
the liquid.
The relationship of gas solubility to pressure is desc ribed by Henry's law, named after English chemist Will iam Henry (1774-1836).
Henry's Law states that the solubility of a gas in a liquid is directly proportional to the partial pressure of the gas above the liquid.
Henry's law can be written as follows:
and are the solubility and the pressure at an initi al set of conditions; and are the solubility and pr essure at another
changed set of conditions. The solubility of a gas is ty pically reported in.
The solubility of a certain gas in water is at stand ard pressure. What is its solubility when the pressur e above the
solution is raised to? The temperature is constant at.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
Substitute into Henry's law and solve for.
Step 2: Solve.Example

16.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332240Step 3: Think about your result.
The solubility is increased to 4.5 times its original val ue, according to the direct relationship.
Summary
This page titled 16.6: Henry's Law is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.6: Henry's Law by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

16.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224116.7: Percent Solutions
There are human cultures that do not recognize numb ers above three. Anything greater than that is simply referred to as "much" or
"many". Although this form of calculation may seem v ery limited, American culture does the same thing to a certain degree. For
example, there are several ways to express the amount of solute in a solution in a quantitative manner. Th e concentration of a
solution is a measure of the amount of solute that h as been dissolved in a given amount of solvent or so lution. A concentrated
solution is one that has a relatively large amount o f dissolved solute. A dilute solution is one that has a relatively small amount o f
dissolved solute. However, those terms are vague, and it is of ten necessary to express concentration with numbers.
Percent Solutions
One way to describe the concentration of a solution i s by the percent of a solute in the solvent. The pe rcent can further be
determined in one of two ways: (1) the ratio of the m ass of the solute divided by the mass of the solution or (2) the ratio of the
volume of the solute divided by the volume of the soluti on.
Mass Percent
When the solute in a solution is a solid, a convenie nt way to express the concentration is by mass percent, which is the
grams of solute per of solution.
Suppose that a solution was prepared by dissolving of sugar into of water. The percent by mass would be calculated by:
Sometimes you may want to make up a particular mass of solution of a given percent by mass, and need to ca lculate what mass of
the solvent to use. For example, you need to make of a solution of sodium chloride. You can rearrange an d solve for the
mass of solute:
You would need to weigh out of and add it to of wat er. Notice that it was necessary to subtract the mass o f the
from the mass of solution to calculate the mass of the wa ter that would need to be added.
Volume Percent
The percentage of solute in a solution can more eas ily be determined by volume when the solute and solve nt are both liquids. The
volume of the solute divided by the volume of the s olution, expressed as a percent, yields the percent by volume of the
solution. If a solution is made by adding of ethanol to of water, the percent by volume is:
Frequently, ingredient labels on food products and medicine s have amounts listed as percentages (see figure below).

16.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332241
Figure: Hydrogen peroxide is commonly labeled as a b y volume solution for use as a disinfectant.
Summary
The concentration of a solution is a measure of the am ount of solute that has been dissolved in a given amount of so lvent or
solution.
A concentrated solution has a relatively large amount of dissolved solute.
A dilute solution has a relatively small amount of dissolv ed solute.
Techniques for calculation of percent mass and percent vo lume solution concentrations are described.
This page titled 16.7: Percent Solutions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.7: Percent Solutions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

16.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224216.8: Molarity
Chemists deal with amounts of molecules every day. Chem ical reactions are described as so many molecules of compound A
reacting with so many molecules of compound B to form so many molecules of compound C. When we determine h ow much
reagent to use, we need to know the number of molecule s in a given volume of the reagent. Percent solutions only tell us the
number of grams, not molecules. A solution of will ha ve a very different number of molecules than a sol ution
of. So, we need another way to talk about numbers of molecu les.
Molarity
Chemists primarily need the concentration of soluti ons to be expressed in a way that accounts for the num ber of particles that react
according to a particular chemical equation. Since p ercentage measurements are based on either mass or vo lume, they are generally
not useful for chemical reactions. A concentration un it based on moles is preferable. The molarity of a solution is the number
of moles of solute dissolved in one liter of solution. To calculate the molarity of a solution, divide the moles of solute by the
volume of the solution expressed in liters:
Note that the volume is in liters of solution and not liters of solvent. When a molarity is reported, the unit is the symbol and is
read as "molar". For example a solution labeled as is r ead as "1.5 molar ammonia solution".
A solution is prepared by dissolving of into enough wate r to make of solution. Calculate its molarity.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
Molar mass
V olume solution
Unknown
The mass of the ammonium chloride is first converted to moles. Then the molarity is calculated by dividin g by liters. Note that
the given volume has been converted to liters.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The molarity is, meaning that a liter of the soluti on would contain. Four significant figures are
appropriate.
In a laboratory situation, a chemist must frequently pr epare a given volume of solutions of a known molarity. The task is to
calculate the mass of the solute that is necessary. Th e molarity equation can be rearranged to solve for m oles, which can then be
converted to grams.
A chemist needs to prepare of a solution of potassi um permanganate. What mass of does she
need to make the solution?Example
Example

16.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332242Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Molarity
V olume
Molar mass
Unknown
Moles of solute is calculated by multiplying molarity by liters. Then, moles is converted to grams.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
When of potassium permanganate is dissolved into water to m ake of solution, the molarity is.
Summary
The molarity of a solution is the number of moles of solu te dissolved in one liter of solution.
Calculations using the concept of molarity are described.
This page titled 16.8: Molarity is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.8: Molarity by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

16.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33235516.9: Solution Stoichiometry
Determine amounts of reactants or products in aqueous so lutions.
As we learned previously, double replacement reactions i nvolve the reaction between ionic compounds in soluti on and, in the
course of the reaction, the ions in the two reacting compounds are “switched” (they replace each other). Because these reactions
occur in aqueous solution, we can use the concept of m olarity to directly calculate the number of moles of reactants or products that
will be formed, and therefore their amounts (i.e. volume of solutions or mass of precipitates).
As an example, lead (II) nitrate and sodium chloride react t o form sodium nitrate and the insoluble compound, lead (II) chloride.
In the reaction shown above, if we mixed 0.123 L of a 1.00 M solution of with 1.50 M solution of, we could
calculate the volume of solution needed to complete ly precipitate the ions.
The molar concentration can also be expressed as the follo wing:
and
First, we must examine the reaction stoichiometry in th e balanced reaction (Equation). In this reaction, o ne mole of
reacts with two moles of to give one mole of precipitate. Thus, the concept map utilizing the stoichiometric rati os is:
so the volume of lead (II) nitrate that reacted is calc ulated as:
This volume makes intuitive sense for two reasons: (1) t he number of moles of required is half of the numb er of moles of
, based off of the stoichiometry in the balanced rea ction (Equation); (2) the concentration of solution is 50%
greater than the solution, so less volume is needed.Learning Objectives

16.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332355What volume (in L) of 0.500 M sodium sulfate will reac t with 275 mL of 0.250 M barium chloride to completely precipitate all
in the solution?
Solution
Solutions to Example 13.8.1
Steps for Problem Solving Example
Identify the "given" information and what the
problem is asking you to "find."Given: 275 mL BaCl
0.250 M or
0.500 M or
Find: V olume solution.
Set up and balance the chemical equation.An insoluble product is formed after the reaction.
List other known quantities.1 mol of Na SO to 1 mol BaCl
1000 mL = 1 L
Prepare a concept map and use the proper
conversion factor.
Cancel units and calculate.
= 0.1375 L sodium sulfate
Think about your result.The lesser amount (almost half) of sodium sulfate
is to be expected as it is more concentrated than
barium chloride. Also, the units are correct.
What volume of 0.250 M lithium hydroxide will completely react with 0.500 L of 0.250 M of sulfuric acid solution?
Answer
0.250 L solution
16.9: Solution Stoichiometry is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
13.8: Solution Stoichiometry by Henry Agnew, Marisa Alviar-Agnew, Paul Young is li censed CC BY-SA 4.0.Example
2 4 2
Exercise

16.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224316.10: Preparing Solutions
Back in the "good ol' days" (a variable time frame, dependent on who you ask), many cooks did not bother with careful
measurements. They simply "knew" how much flour to use, or how much water to add. Most of us need somewhat more precise
ways to measure when we cook. Chemists are very careful when they prepare solutions, because the results of t heir experiments
need to be quantitative. Simply "knowing" is not accurate e nough for scientific purposes.
Preparing Solutions
If you are attempting to prepare of a solution of, you would obtain of sodium chloride. However, you
cannot simply add the sodium chloride to of water. Afte r the solute dissolves, the volume of the solution will b e slightly
greater than one liter, because the hydrated sodium and chloride ions take up space in the solution. In stead, a volumetric flask
needs to be used. V olumetric flasks come in a variety of sizes (see image below) and are designed to allow a chemist to prepare a
solution of only one specific volume.
Figure: V olumetric flasks.
In other words, you cannot use a 1-liter volumetric flask to make of a solution. It can only be used to pr epare 1 liter of a
solution. The steps to follow when preparing a solution with a 1-liter volumetric flask are outlined below, and shown in the figure
below.
1. The appropriate mass of solute is weighed out and added to a volumetric flask that has been about ha lf-filled with distilled
water.
2. The solution is swirled until all of the solute dissolve s.
3. More distilled water is carefully added up to the line e tched on the neck of the flask.
4. The flask is capped and inverted several times to co mpletely mix.
Figure: Steps to follow in preparing a solution of kn own molarity: (A) weigh out correct mass of solute, (B) dissolve into
solvent in a volumetric flask, and (C) add solvent to the fill line on the flask and mix.
Summary
This page titled 16.10: Preparing Solutions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

16.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224316.9: Preparing Solutions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

16.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224416.11: Dilution
Muriatic acid (another name for) is widely used for cleaning concrete and masonry surfaces. The acid must be diluted before
use to get it down to a safer strength. Commercially available at concentrations of about, muriatic ac id can be used to remove
scales and deposits (usually composed of basic mater ials).
Dilutions
When additional water is added to an aqueous solutio n, the concentration of that solution decreases. Thi s is because the number of
moles of the solute does not change, while the volume of the solution increases. We can set up an equality b etween the moles of the
solute before the dilution (1) and the moles of the solu te after the dilution (2).
Since the moles of solute in a solution is equal to the molarity multiplied by the liters, we can set those equal.
Finally, because the two sides of the equation are set e qual to one another, the volume can be described in any unit that we choose,
as long as that unit is the same on both sides. Our equatio n for calculating the molarity of a diluted solution beco mes:
Suppose that you have of a solution of. You dilute the solution by adding enough water to make the sol ution
volume. The new molarity can easily be calculated by usi ng the above equation and solving for:
The solution has been diluted by one-fifth since th e new volume is five times as great as the original vo lume. Consequently, the
molarity is one-fifth of its original value.
Another common dilution problem involves deciding ho w much of a highly concentrated solution is required to make a desired
quantity of solution of lesser concentration. The highly concentrated solution is typically referred to as the s tock solution.
Nitric acid is a powerful and corrosive acid. When orde red from a chemical supply company, its molarity is. How
much of the stock solution of nitric acid needs to be used to m ake of a solution?
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Stock
Unknown
The unknown in the equation is, the volume of the conc entrated stock solution.
Step 2: Solve
Using Equation we can solve for:
Step 3: Think about your result
of the stock needs to be diluted with water to a fi nal volume of. The dilution is by a factor of 32 t o go from
to.Example

16.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332244Dilutions can be performed in the laboratory with var ious tools, depending on the volumes required and t he desired accuracy. The
images below illustrate the use of two different type s of pipettes. In the first figure, a glass pipette is being used to transfer a
portion of a solution to a graduated cylinder. Use of a pipette rather than a graduated cylinder for the transfer improves accuracy.
The second figure shows a micropipette, which is designed to quickly and accurately dispense small volumes. Micropipettes are
adjustable and come in a variety of sizes.
Figure: V olumetric pipette and micropipette.
Summary
A process is described to calculate dilutions.
Pipettes and micropipettes are used to transfer and disp ense solution.
This page titled 16.11: Dilution is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.10: Dilution by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

16.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224516.12: Molality
For many purposes, the use of molarity is very conve nient. However, when we want to know the concentration of solute present in
situations where there are temperature changes, mola rity will not work. The volume of the solution will ch ange somewhat with
temperature, enough to affect the accuracy of data o bservations and calculations. Another parameter is ne eded, one not affected by
the temperature of the material we are studying.
Molality
A final way to express the concentration of a solution is by its molality. The molality of a solution is the moles of solute
divided by the kilograms of solvent. A solution that contains of dissolved into of water is a "one-mol al" solution
of sodium chloride. The symbol for molality is a lower- case written in italics.
Molality differs from molarity only in the denominat or. While molarity is based on the liters of solution, molality is based on the
kilograms of solvent. Concentrations expressed in mo lality are used when studying properties of solutions related to vapor pressure
and temperature changes. Molality is used because its value does not change with changes in temperature. The volume of a
solution, on the other hand, is slightly dependent upon temperature.
Determine the molality of a solution prepared by dissolv ing of glucose into of water.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass solute
Mass solvent
Molar mass
Unknown
Convert grams of glucose to moles and divide by the mass of th e water in kilograms.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The answer represents the moles of glucose per kilogram o f water and has three significant figures.
Molality and molarity are closely related in value f or dilute aqueous solutions because the density of those solutions is relatively
close to. This means that of solution has nearly a mass of. As the solution becomes more concentrated, i ts
density will not be as close to and the molality va lue will be different than the molarity. For solutions with solvents other
than water, the molality will be very different than t he molarity. Make sure that you are paying attention to which quantity is being
used in a given problem.
Summary
The molality of a solution is the moles of solute divided by the kilograms of solvent.
The value of molality does not change with temperature.Example

16.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332245This page titled 16.12: Molality is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.11: Molality by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

16.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224616.13: The Lowering of Vapor Pressure
A knowledge of Latin can help us to better understand the English language—specifically, scientific termi nology. Consider the
word "colligative". Where did that come from? If you k now a little Latin, you know that it comes from two Lat in words meaning
"to tie together".
Lowering Vapor Pressure
A colligative property is a property of a solution that depends only on th e number of solute particles dissolved in the solutio n, and
not on their identity. Recall that the vapor pressu re of a liquid is determined by how easily its molecu les are able to escape the
surface of the liquid and enter the gaseous phase. When a liquid evaporates easily, it will have a relati vely large number of its
molecules in the gas phase and thus will have a high vapor pressure. Liquids that do not evaporate easily have a lower vapor
pressure. The figure below shows the surface of a pure solvent compared to a solution. In the picture on t he left, the surface is
entirely occupied by liquid molecules, some of which will evaporate and form a vapor pressure. On the right, a nonvolatile solute
has been dissolved into the solvent. Nonvolatile means that the solute itself has little tendency to e vaporate. Because some of the
surface is now occupied by solute particles, there i s less room for solvent molecules. This results in l ess solvent being able to
evaporate. The addition of a nonvolatile solute results i n a lowering of the vapor pressure of the solvent.
Figure: The solution on the right has had some of its so lvent particles replaced by solute particles. Since th e solute particles
do not evaporate, the vapor pressure of the solution i s lower than that of the pure solvent.
The lowering of the vapor pressure depends on the numb er of solute particles that have been dissolved. The ch emical nature of the
solute is not important because the vapor pressure is merely a physical property of the solvent. The only requirement is that the
solute was only dissolved and that it did not undergo a chemical reactio n with the solvent.
While the chemical nature of the solute is not a fact or, it is necessary to take into account whether the solute is an electrolyte or a
nonelectrolyte. Recall that ionic compounds are stro ng electrolytes, and thus dissociate into ions when t hey dissolve. This results in
a larger number of dissolved particles. For example, co nsider two different solutions of equal concentration: one is made from the
ionic compound sodium chloride, while the other is mad e from the molecular compound glucose. The following equations show
what happens when these solutions dissolve.
The sodium chloride dissociates into two ions, while the glucose does not dissociate. Therefore, equal conce ntrations of each
solution will result in twice as many dissolved particl es in the case of the sodium chloride. The vapor pre ssure of the sodium
chloride solution will be lowered twice the amount of the glucose solution.
Summary
A colligative property is a property of a solution that depends only on the number of solute particles dissolved in the solution,
and not on their identity.
Nonvolatile means that the solute itself has little t endency to evaporate.
Addition of a nonvolatile solute to a solution lowers the vapor pressure of the solution.
This page titled 16.13: The Lowering of Vapor Pressure is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.12: The Lowering of Vapor Pressure by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

16.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224716.14: Freezing Point Depression
Colligative properties have practical applications, such as the salting of roads in cold-weather climates. By applying salt to an icy
road, the melting point of the ice is decreased, and t he ice will melt more quickly, making driving safer. Sodium chloride,
and either calcium chloride or magnesium chloride are used most frequently, either alone or in a mixtu re. Sodium
chloride is the least expensive option, but is less effecti ve because it only dissociates into two ions, instead of th ree.
Freezing Point Depression
The figure below shows the phase diagram for a pure s olvent and how it changes when a solute is added to i t. The solute lowers the
vapor pressure of the solvent, resulting in a lowerin g of the freezing point of the solution compared to the solvent. The freezing
point depression is the difference in temperature between the freezin g point of the pure solvent and that of the solution. On the
graph, the freezing point depression is represented by.
Figure: The vapor pressure of a solution (blue) is lowe r than the vapor pressure of a pure solvent (pink). As a result, the
freezing point of a solvent is lower when any solute i s dissolved into it.
When a pure solvent freezes, its particles become mor e ordered as the intermolecular forces that operate between the molecules
become permanent. In the case of water, the hydrogen bo nds make the hexagonally-shaped network of molecules t hat characterizes
the structure of ice. By dissolving a solute into the liquid solvent, this ordering process is disrupted. As a result, more energy must
be removed from the solution in order to freeze it, and the freezing point of the solution is lower than that of the pure solvent.
The magnitude of the freezing point depression is direc tly proportional to the molality of the solution. The eq uation is:
The proportionality constant,, is called the molal freezing-point depression constant. It is a constant that is equal to the
change in the freezing point for a 1-molal solution of a nonvolatile molecular solute. For water, the value of is. So,
the freezing temperature of a 1-molal aqueous solut ion of any nonvolatile molecular solute is. Every so lvent has a unique
molal freezing-point depression constant. These are shown in the table below, along with a related value for the boiling point called
Molal Freezing-Point and Boiling-Point Constants

16.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332247Table: Molal Freezing-Point and Boiling-Point Constants
SolventNormal Freezing PointMolal Freezing-Point
Depression Constant,
Normal Boiling PointMolal Boiling-Point
Elevation Constant,
Acetic acid 16.6 -3.90 117.9 3.07
Camphor 178.8 -39.7 207.4 5.61
Naphthalene 80.2 -6.94 217.7 5.80
Phenol 40.9 -7.40 181.8 3.60
Water 0.00 -1.86 100.00 0.512
Ethylene glycol is a molecular compound that is us ed in many commercial antifreezes. A water solution o f ethylene
glycol is used in vehicle radiators to lower its free zing point, and thus prevent the water in the radiato r from freezing. Calculate
the freezing point of a solution of of ethylene glycol i n of water.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
Molar mass
Mass
Unknown
This is a three-step problem. First, calculate the mole s of ethylene glycol. Then, calculate the molality of the solution. Finally,
calculate the freezing point depression.
Step 2: Solve.
The normal freezing point of water is. Therefore, s ince the freezing point decreases by, the freezing point of the
solution is.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The freezing point of the water decreases by a large amount, protecting the radiator from damage due to t he expansion of water
when it freezes. There are three significant figures in the result.
Summary
The freezing point depression is the difference in temp erature between the freezing point of the pure solvent and that of the
solution.
The molal freezing-point depression constant is equal to the change in the freezing point for a 1-molal soluti on of a nonvolatile
molecular solute.
Calculations involving freezing point depression are described.Example

16.14.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332247This page titled 16.14: Freezing Point Depression is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.13: Freezing Point Depression by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

16.15.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224816.15: Boiling Point Elevation
Salt is often added to boiling water when preparing spa ghetti or other pasta. One reason is to add flavor to the food. Some people
believe that the addition of salt increases the boi ling point of the water. Technically, they are correc t, but the increase is rather
small. You would need to add over 100 grams of to a liter of water to increase the boiling point by a cou ple of degrees, which
is likely unhealthy.
Boiling Point Elevation
The figure below shows the phase diagram of a solution and the effect that the lowered vapor pressure has on the boiling point of
the solution compared to the solvent. In this case, the solution has a higher boiling point than the pu re solvent. Since the vapor
pressure of the solution is lower, more heat must be s upplied to the solution to bring its vapor pressure up to the pressure of the
external atmosphere. The boiling point elevation is the difference in temperature between the boiling point of the pure solvent and
that of the solution. On the graph, the boiling point ele vation is represented by.
Figure: The lowering of the vapor pressure in a solutio n causes the boiling point of the solution to be highe r than that of the
pure solvent.
The magnitude of the boiling point elevation is also dir ectly proportional to the molality of the solution. Th e equation is:
The proportionality constant,, is called the molal boiling-point elevation constant. It is a constant that is equal to the change in
the boiling point for a 1-molal solution of a nonvol atile molecular solute. For water, the value of is. So, the boiling
temperature of a 1-molal aqueous solution of any nonvo latile molecular solute is.
Summary
Boiling point elevation is the difference in temperatur e between the boiling point of the pure solvent and tha t of the solution.
The molal boiling-point elevation constant is equal to the change in the boiling point for a 1-molal so lution of a nonvolatile
molecular solute.
Calculations involving the molal boiling point elevat ion constant are outlined.
This page titled 16.15: Boiling Point Elevation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.14: Boiling Point Elevation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

16.16.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33224916.16: Electrolytes and Colligative Properties
The addition of ions creates significant changes in properties of solutions. Water molecules surround th e ions and are somewhat
tightly bound to them. Colligative properties are af fected because the solvent properties are no longer t he same as those in the pure
solvent.
Electrolytes and Colligative Properties
Ionic compounds are electrolytes and dissociate into two or more ions as they dissolve. This must be taken into account when
calculating the freezing and boiling points of elec trolyte solutions. The sample problem below demonstr ates how to calculate the
freezing point and boiling point of a solution of c alcium chloride. Calcium chloride dissociates into th ree ions according to the
equation:
The values of the freezing point depression and the boiling point elevation for a solution of will be t hree times greater than
they would be for an equal molality of a nonelectrolyte.
Determine the freezing point and boiling point of a solution prepared by dissolving of calcium chlorid e into of
water.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
Molar mass
Mass
dissociates into 3 ions
Unknown
The moles of is first calculated, followed by the m olality of the solution. The freezing and boiling po ints are then
determined, including multiplying by 3 for the three ion s.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
Since the normal boiling point of water is, the calc ulated result for must be added to 100.00 to find t he new
boiling point.Example

16.16.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332249Summary
Ionic compounds are electrolytes and dissociate int o two or more ions as they dissolve.
The effect of ionization on colligative properties is d escribed.
This page titled 16.16: Electrolytes and Colligative Properties is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.15: Electrolytes and Colligative Properties by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

16.17.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33236316.17: Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure
Describe osmosis and how it relates to osmotic pressure.
Osmotic Pressure
The last colligative property of solutions we will con sider is a very important one for biological systems. It involves osmosis, the
process by which solvent molecules can pass through ce rtain membranes but solute particles cannot. When two solutions of
different concentration are present on either side o f these membranes (called semipermeable membranes), there is a tendency for
solvent molecules to move from the more dilute soluti on to the more concentrated solution until the conc entrations of the two
solutions are equal. This tendency is called osmotic pressure. External pressure can be exerted on a solution to counter the flow of
solvent; the pressure required to halt the osmosis of a sol vent is equal to the osmotic pressure of the solution.
Consider the apparatus illustrated in Figure, in whic h samples of pure solvent and a solution are separate d by a membrane
that only solvent molecules may permeate. Solvent mole cules will diffuse across the membrane in both directi ons. Since the
concentration of solvent is greater in the pure solvent than the solution, t hese molecules will diffuse from the solvent side of t he
membrane to the solution side at a faster rate than t hey will in the reverse direction. The result is a ne t transfer of solvent molecules
from the pure solvent to the solution. Diffusion-dri ven transfer of solvent molecules through a semiper meable membrane is a
process known as osmosis.
Figure: Osmosis results in the transfer of solvent molecul es from a sample of low (or zero) solute concentration to a sample
of higher solute concentration.
When osmosis is carried out in an apparatus like th at shown in Figure, the volume of the solution increa ses as it becomes
diluted by accumulation of solvent. This causes the l evel of the solution to rise, increasing its hydrost atic pressure (due to the
weight of the column of solution in the tube) and res ulting in a faster transfer of solvent molecules bac k to the pure solvent side.
When the pressure reaches a value that yields a rever se solvent transfer rate equal to the osmosis rate, bul k transfer of solvent
ceases. This pressure is called the osmotic pressure () of the solution. The osmotic pressure of a dilute solution can be determined
in a similar way the pressure of an ideal gas is calculated u sing the ideal gas law:
where is the number of moles of particles in solution, is the volume, and is the universal gas constant.
Osmolarity (osmol) is a way of reporting the total number of pa rticles in a solution to determine osmotic pressure. It is defined as
the molarity of a solute times the number of particles a for mula unit of the solute makes when it dissolves (represent ed by):Learning Objectives

16.17.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332363If more than one solute is present in a solution, the individual osmolarities are additive to get the total osmolarity of the solution.
Solutions that have the same osmolarity have the same osmotic pressure. If solutions of differing osmolariti es are present on
opposite sides of a semipermeable membrane, solvent wi ll transfer from the lower-osmolarity solution to th e higher-osmolarity
solution. Counterpressure exerted on the high-osmolari ty solution will reduce or halt the solvent transfer. An even higher pressure
can be exerted to force solvent from the high-osmola rity solution to the low-osmolarity solution, a proces s called reverse osmosis.
Reverse osmosis is used to make potable water from saltwater where sources of fresh water are scarce.
A 0.50 M NaCl aqueous solution and a 0.30 M Ca(NO) aqueo us solution are placed on opposite sides of a semipe rmeable
membrane. Determine the osmolarity of each solution an d predict the direction of solvent flow.
Solution
The solvent will flow into the solution of higher osmo larity. The NaCl solute separates into two ions—Na and C l —when it
dissolves, so its osmolarity is as follows:
osmol (NaCl) = 0.50 M × 2 = 1.0 osmol
The Ca(NO) solute separates into three ions—one Ca and t wo NO —when it dissolves, so its osmolarity is as follows:
osmol [Ca(NO)] = 0.30 M × 3 = 0.90 osmol
The osmolarity of the Ca(NO) solution is lower than t hat of the NaCl solution, so water will transfer through the membrane
from the Ca(NO) solution to the NaCl solution.
A 1.5 M C H O aqueous solution and a 0.40 M Al(NO) aqueous solution are placed on opposite sides of a semiperm eable
membrane. Determine the osmolarity of each solution an d predict the direction of solvent flow.
Answer
osmol C H O = 1.5; osmol Al(NO) = 1.6
The solvent flows from C H O solution (lower osmolarity) to solution (higher osmolarity).
Examples of osmosis are evident in many biological s ystems because cells are surrounded by semipermeable membranes. Carrots
and celery that have become limp because they have lost water can be made crisp again by placing them in water. Water moves into
the carrot or celery cells by osmosis. A cucumber place d in a concentrated salt solution loses water by osmosi s and absorbs some
salt to become a pickle. Osmosis can also affect anim al cells. Solute concentrations are particularly impo rtant when solutions are
injected into the body. Solutes in body cell fluids and blood serum give these solutions an osmotic pressure of approximately 7.7
atm. Solutions injected into the body must have the sa me osmotic pressure as blood serum; that is, they sho uld be isotonic with
blood serum. If a less concentrated solution, a hypotonic solution, is injected in sufficient quantity to dilu te the blood serum, water
from the diluted serum passes into the blood cells b y osmosis, causing the cells to expand and rupture (Figure). This
process is called hemolysis. When a more concentrated solution, a hypertonic solution, is injected, the cells lose water to the mor e
concentrated solution, shrivel, and possibly die in a process called crenation (Figure). Only if red blood cells are placed in
isotonic solutions that have the same osmolarity as exists ins ide the cells are they unaffected by negative effec ts of osmotic
pressure (Figure). Glucose solutions of about 0.31 M, or sodium chloride (NaCl) solutions of about 0.16 M, a re isotonic
with blood plasma.Example
3 2
3 22+3−
3 2
3 2
3 2
Exercise
6 12 6 3 3
6 12 6 3 3
6 12 6

16.17.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332363
Figure: Red blood cell membranes are water permeable and will (a) swell and possibly rupture in a hypotonic solution; (b)
maintain normal volume and shape in an isotonic solution; and (c) shrivel and possibly die in a hypertonic solution. (credit a/b/c:
modifications of work by “LadyofHats”/Wikimedia commo ns)
The concentration of an red blood cell isotonic solu tion made with sodium chloride (NaCl) is half that of an isotonic solution
made with glucose (0.16 M and 0.31 M respectively). Th is is because NaCl produces two ions when a formula unit dissolves,
while molecular glucose produces only one particle when a formula unit dissolves. The osmolarities are t herefore the same
even though the concentrations of the two solutions are d ifferent.
isotonic NaCl solution:
isotonic glucose solution:
Osmotic pressure explains why you should not drink seawat er if you are abandoned in a life raft in the middl e of the ocean. Its
osmolarity is about three times higher than most bodi ly fluids. You would actually become thirstier as water from your cells was
drawn out to dilute the salty ocean water you ingested. Our bodies do a better job coping with hypotonic sol utions than with
hypertonic ones. The excess water is collected by our kid neys and excreted.
Osmotic pressure effects are used in the food industry to make pickles from cucumbers and other vegetables and in brining meat to
make corned beef. It is also a factor in the mechanism of get ting water from the roots to the tops of trees!
16.17: Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
9.4: Properties of Solutions by Anonymous is licensed CC BY-NC-SA 3.0. Original source:
https://2012books.lardbucket.org/books/introduction-to -chemistry-general-organic-and-biological.
11.5: Colligative Properties by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0. Original source: https://openstax.org/details/books/chemistry-2e.Note: Isotonic Solutions for Red Blood Cells

16.18.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225016.18: Calculating Molar Mass
Putting antifreeze into a radiator will keep an engin e from freezing. By knowing how cold the weather will g et and how much
water is in the radiator, one can determine how much antifreeze to add to achieve a specific desired freezi ng point depression. This
is made possible by knowing what antifreeze is. Can th ings be switched around, so as to get some information about the properties
of the antifreeze (such as its molecular weight) from the freezing point decrease? As it turns out, this ca n be done fairly easily and
accurately.
Figure: Changes in temperature.
Calculating Molar Mass
In the laboratory, freezing point or boiling point d ata can be used to determine the molar mass of an u nknown solute. Since we
know the relationship between a decrease in freezing point and the concentration of solute, if we dissolve a known mass of our
unknown solute into a known amount of solvent, we can ca lculate the molar mass of the solute. The or of the solvent must
be known. We also need to know if the solute is an ele ctrolyte or a nonelectrolyte. If the solvent is an electrolyte, we would need to
know the number of ions produced when it dissociates.
of a nonelectrolyte is dissolved into of water. The freezing point of the solution is measured to be.
Calculate the molar mass of the solute.
Solution
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
Mass solute
Unknown
Use the freezing point depression to calculate the m olality of the solution. Then use the molality equat ion to calculate
the moles of solute. Then divide the grams of solute by the moles to determine the molar mass.
Step 2: Solve.Example

16.18.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332250Step 3: Think about your result.
The molar mass of the unknown solute is. Knowing the m olar mass is an important step in determining the i dentity
of an unknown. A similar problem could be done with the chan ge in boiling point.
Summary
This page titled 16.18: Calculating Molar Mass is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
16.16: Calculating Molar Mass by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

16.19.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33237716.19: Stoichiometry Map
Solving problems in chemistry requires choosing the right types of equations and equivalencies to get f rom what we know to what
we want to know. In stoichiometry, we have often complex calculations, with many steps, so we need to organized to make sure
we're choosing the right steps. Below, you can find a summarized map of steps for solving various types of stoichiometric
problems. For all of these problems, we have some typ e of measurement or measurements of one substance, b ut we want to know
something about a different substance. We also know or can find the balanced equation that relates these two substances to each
other. Notice that no matter what information we start or end with, we need to find the moles! Each of the relationships in this map
is explained further below.
Finding moles of A
We can find the moles of A from a wide range of info rmation. You do not need the balanced equation to f ind the moles of A, but
you would need to know the molar mass of the substance!
If we're given the grams of A:
This was covered in previous chapter, but it helps to have a re minder of the steps:
1. Find the chemical formula of A, if it isn't given to you
2. Use the chemical formula to find the molar mass (remember, molar mass is measured in g/mol)
3. Use the molar mass and dimensional analysis to convert the g A to mol A
Convert 2.34 g of sodium chloride to moles.
Solution
1. the formula for sodium chloride is NaCl
2. Use the Periodic Table to find the molar mass of NaCl.
Mass of Na = 22.989769 g/mol
Mass of Cl = 35.453 g/mol
Add the masses = 22.989769 g/mol + 35.453 g/mol = 58.442769 g/mol
Round for proper significant figures = 58.443 g/mol (re member - we're using addition, so we round based on the le ast
decimal places)Example

16.19.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3323773. Use dimensional analysis to perform the conversion
If we're given the particles of A:
This is review, too! Here's a reminder of your steps:
1. Make sure the information given matches A. For example, if you are given that there are 1.2 * 10 molecules of CO, and the
balanced equation includes CO, then you'll be able to go to the next step directly. If, instead, you are given tha t there are 1.2 *
10 ions from NaCl and the balanced equation is for NaCl, you 'll first have to convert your number of ions to your form ula
units of NaCl.
2. Use Avogadro's number and dimensional analysis to convert from particles to moles, 6.022*10 particles = 1 mole of particle.
If there are 1.2*10 ions from NaCl, how many moles of NaCl is this?
Solution
1. Since you are given ions, not the full NaCl, you will firs t need to convert the number of ions to the number of f ormula units
of NaCl. If you recall, each NaCl will break up into one Na ion and one Cl ion. This gives the following relationship:
1 NaCl = 2 ions
Using this relationship, we can convert the ions to full NaCl:
2. Convert the formula unit of NaCl to moles

Converting A to moles, if it's a Gas
In the previous 2 examples, the substance we're conve rting could be a liquid, a gas, or a solid. There are specific, additional
calculations we can do if A is a gas. We can only use these if A is a gas! Check the balanced equation - is there a (g) after the
substance? This is also review, but there are two diff erent conditions we look at for gases, so be careful to use the right one! Here's
our steps:
1. Check if the gas is at STP (standard temperature and pres sure). STP is only at a temperature of 273 K (or 0 degrees C) and a
pressure of 1 atm. You will be told that the gas is at STP or g iven both the temperature and pressure. If the gas is at STP, then
you can use the molar volume to find the moles of gas. Th is relationship is given below:
1 mole of a gas = 22.4 L at STP
2. If the gas is not at STP, you'll typically need to use the ideal gas law and solve for the moles of gas (n from the equ ation). Ideal
gas law:
PV = nRT
Convert 85.3 L of a gas at STP to moles.
Solution
This gas is at STP, so we can use the molar volume to convert t he volume of the gas to the moles:242
Example
+ Example

16.19.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332377
How many moles of hydrogen gas is there if the sample of gas is at a pressure of 750 mm Hg, a volume of 1.35 L, and a
temperature of 45 degrees C?
Solution
This gas is not at STP, so we'll need to use the ideal g as law. Remember, to use the ideal gas law, we need t he units to match
the units of R, the ideal gas constant. We'll use the follo wing R value:
That means the units need to match this R value.
From our problem:
P = 750 mm Hg, which does not match the pressure units of atm from the R value, so we'll need to convert it before we
can continue.
V = 1.35 L, which matches the units of R, so we don't need to c onvert it
T = 45 degrees C, which does not match, so we'll need to convert to K. Remember, we always need temperature in
kelvin to be able to do gas calculations.
45 C + 273.15 = 318 K
We'll also need to use the ideal gas law, PV=nRT, and rearrange to solve for n.
Substitute for the values from the problem and the known R value:
= 0.051 moles of hydrogen gas
Converting A to moles, if it's a Solution
The previous examples all assume you have a direct measurement of the pure substance, such as pure soli d NaCl or pure hydrogen
gas, but many substances are easier to handle and mor e common as a mixture, particularly as a solution. Wit h these types of
situations, we would need to use the information we hav e about the solution to find the moles of the compone nt we are interested
in. Be careful about these - if your mixture has mult iple solutes in it, then you'll need to make sure you focus on the right solute.
Common solutions with many solutes in them include foo ds, beverages, air, and blood. Here's how we approach these pro blems:
1. Identify if you are working with a solution. There are a v ariety of hints you might get about this - you won't alway s be told
directly. Some ways to tell:
In the balanced equation, solutes that are dissolved in wa ter are marked with (aq) - if the equation is fully labeled, this is a
quick way to tell
We know or can more easily measure the volume (L or mL) o f the solution and its MolarityExample

16.19.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332377Rarely - you may know other measurements of the solution, such as the concentration in percent by mass, percent by
volume, or percent mass/volume and either the volume or mass of the solution. These require more steps to solve, but ar e
still solvable. We'll focus on Molarity for this course, but do be aware you could encounter other types of info rmation in lab
or clinical settings.
2. Once we know the volume and Molarity of a solute in a sol ution, we can find the moles using the Molarity equation
You measure out 12.32 mL of 0.1085 M NaOH in lab. How many moles of NaOH is this?
Solution
We are given a volume, 12.32 mL, and a concentration, 0.1085 M NaOH. The concentration is M, which is Molarity, so we can
use the Molarity equation.
We need to rearrange the equation to solve for moles so lute:
M * L solution = moles solute
Notice that this problem requires L of solution, but we know the volume of the solution in mL. That means we 'll need to
convert the volume to L before we do the problem:
Plug in our M and the volume in L to solve for moles solute:
moles solute = 0.1085 M * 0.01232 L = 0.00133672 mole s NaOH = 0.001337 moles NaOH (once we round for significant
figures)
You can verify the units by remembering that the units of M can also be rewritten as mol/L.
Converting moles A to moles B
We have one, single piece of information that allows us to convert from moles of one compound to moles of another compound that's our balanced equation! Here's how we do that:
1. Check that your equation is complete and balanced.
If you don't know what the formulas are for the products, you'll need to figure that out first.
Make sure the equation is balanced - remember, you can only change the coefficients to balance a chemical equation, you
cannot change the formulas of the reactants or products.
2. Use the molar ratio from the coefficients in the balan ced equation to convert from moles of A to moles of B.
If 0.351 mol Zn fully reacts with excess aqueous hydrochlo ric acid, how many moles of ZnCl would be made?
Solution
Since this is a mole to mole conversion (notice we are starting with a different substance than we end with), we 'll need to use
the balanced equation. That means writing it out. Based on the information given, we can determine a few things:
Our first reactant is Zn, which is in its element form. Looki ng at the Periodic Table, or going from the experience of s eeing
Zinc in lab or lab videos, we can determine that Zn would be a solid.
Our second reactant is aqueous hydrochloric acid. Base d on the name, we know the formula is HCl and that it is (aq)
One of our products has to be ZnCl since we're told it is "mad e."
We'll need to write out the equation to determine what, if a nything, is missing.Example
Example

16.19.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332377When we see this equation, we need to know what is going on to predict the products. Notice that the "H" in HC l from the
reactants is replaced by "Zn" in ZnCl for the produ cts. This tells us that we're probably working with a si ngle replacement
reaction. That tells us that the unknown missing compo und would be hydrogen. We know from previous chapters that when
hydrogen is by itself it forms H, and it is found as a gas. Our ZnCl is also missing its physical state. We can use our solubility
rules to find that it would be soluble in water, so it must be (aq).
This gives the equation:
This equation isn't balanced, so we need to balance it:
Now we can use the balanced equation to find our moles of ZnC l formed.
Notice that the 1's in this conversion factor come f rom the coefficients in the balanced equation. These could be any value,
based on what they are in the balanced equation. Noti ce also that we only needed the balanced equation to convert moles to
moles.
Using moles B to find other values for B
Generally, once we have the moles of B, we can simply re verse the processes we did to find the moles of A to convert the moles of
B back into grams, particles, pressure, volume, temperat ure, or Molarity. Be very careful to track what you kn ow so you pick an
appropriate process! Make a plan!
16.19: Stoichiometry Map is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
2 2

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
17: Equilibrium
17.1: Reversible Reaction
17.2: Chemical Equilibrium
17.3: Equilibrium Constant
17.4: Calculations with Equilibrium Constants
17.5: Le Châtelier's Principle
17.6: Effect of Concentration
17.7: Effect of Temperature
17.8: Effect of Pressure
17.9: Nonreversible Reactions
17.10: Le Châtelier's Principle and the Equilibrium Consta nt
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 17: Equilibrium is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

17.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225217.1: Reversible Reaction
A solution of cobalt chloride in water is pink due t o the presence of the solvated ion. If sufficient is added, the solution
turns blue as the ion forms. The reaction can be shifted back to the pink form if more water is added to the so lution.
Figure: Cobalt chloride in various stages of equilibri um with hydrochloric acid. (Public Domain; Chemicalinterest via
wikipedia)
Chemical Reversibility
Up until this point, we have written the equations for chemical reactions in a way that would seem to indicat e that all reactions
proceed completely until all the reactants have bee n converted into products. In reality, a great many chemical reactions do not
proceed entirely to completion. A reversible reaction is a reaction in which the conversion of reactants to products and the
conversion of products to reactants occur simultaneous ly. One example of a reversible reaction is the reactio n of hydrogen gas and
iodine vapor to form hydrogen iodide. The forward and re verse reactions can be written as follows.
In the forward reaction, hydrogen and iodine combine to form hydrogen iodide. In the reverse reaction, h ydrogen iodide
decomposes back into hydrogen and iodine. The two react ions can be combined into one equation by the use of a double arrow:
The double arrow is the indication that the reaction is re versible.
When hydrogen and iodine gases are mixed in a sealed container, they begin to react and form hydrogen iod ide. At first, only the
forward reaction occurs because no is present. As the forward reaction proceeds, it begins to slow down as the concentrations of
the and the decrease. As soon as some has formed, i t begins to decompose back into and. The rate of the reverse
reaction starts out slow because the concentration of i s low. Gradually, the rate of the forward reaction dec reases while the rate
of the reverse reaction increases. Eventually the rat e of combination of and to produce becomes equal to the rate of
decomposition of into and. When the rates of the forward and reverse reactions have become equal to one another, the
reaction has achieved a state of balance.
Summary
A reversible reaction is defined.
This page titled 17.1: Reversible Reaction is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.1: Reversible Reaction by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

17.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225317.2: Chemical Equilibrium
A tug of war involves two teams at the ends of a rope. The goal is to pull the other team over a line in t he middle. At first, there is a
great deal of tension on the rope, but no apparent mo vement. A bystander might think that there is nothing happening. In reality,
there is a great deal of tension on the rope as the two tea ms pull in opposite directions at the same time.
Chemical Equilibrium
Hydrogen and iodine gases react to form hydrogen iodide, according to the following reaction:
Initially, only the forward reaction occurs because no is present. As soon as some has formed, it begins to decompose back
into and. Gradually, the rate of the forward reactio n decreases while the rate of the reverse reaction in creases. Eventually, the
rate of combination of and to produce becomes equ al to the rate of decomposition of into and. Whe n the rates of
the forward and reverse reactions have become equal t o one another, the reaction has achieved a state of balance. Chemical
equilibrium is the state of a system in which the rate of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the reverse reaction.
Figure: Equilibrium in reaction:.
Chemical equilibrium can be attained whether the rea ction begins with all reactants and no products, all products and no reactants,
or some of both. The figure below shows changes in conce ntration of,, and for two different reactions. In th e reaction
depicted by the graph on the left (A), the reaction b egins with only and present. There is no initially. As the reaction
proceeds toward equilibrium, the concentrations of t he and gradually decrease, while the concentration of the gradually
increases. When the curve levels out and the concent rations all become constant, equilibrium has been rea ched. At equilibrium,
concentrations of all substances are constant. In reac tion B, the process begins with only and no or. In t his case, the
concentration of gradually decreases while the conce ntrations of and gradually increase until equilibr ium is again reached.
Notice that in both cases, the relative position of e quilibrium is the same, as shown by the relative conc entrations of reactants and
products. The concentration of at equilibrium is sign ificantly higher than the concentrations of and. This is true whether
the reaction began with all reactants or all product s. The position of equilibrium is a property of the particular reversible reaction
and does not depend upon how equilibrium was achieved.

17.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332253
Figure: Equilibrium between reactants and products.
Conditions for Equilibrium
It may be tempting to think that once equilibrium h as been reached, the reaction stops. Chemical equil ibrium is a dynamic process.
The forward and reverse reactions continue to occur e ven after equilibrium has been reached. However, becau se the rates of the
reactions are the same, there is no change in the rela tive concentrations of reactants and products for a reaction that is at
equilibrium. The conditions and properties of a system at eq uilibrium are summarized below.
1. The system must be closed, meaning no substances can ente r or leave the system.
2. Equilibrium is a dynamic process. Even though we don't n ecessarily see the reactions, both the forward and reve rse reactions
are taking place.
3. The rates of the forward and reverse reactions must be eq ual.
4. The amount of reactants and products do not have to be e qual. However, after equilibrium is attained, the amounts of reactants
and products will be constant.
The description of equilibrium in this concept refer s primarily to equilibrium between reactants and pro ducts in a chemical
reaction. Other types of equilibrium include phase eq uilibrium and solution equilibrium. A phase equilibrium occurs when a
substance is in equilibrium between two states. For exam ple, a stoppered flask of water attains equilibrium when the rate of
evaporation is equal to the rate of condensation. A solution equilibrium occurs when a solid substance is in a saturated solut ion. At
this point, the rate of dissolution is equal to the rate of recrystallization. Although these are all di fferent types of transformations,
most of the rules regarding equilibrium apply to any situa tion in which a process occurs reversibly.
Summary
Chemical equilibrium is the state of a system in which the rat e of the forward reaction is equal to the rate of the rever se
reaction.
Conditions for chemical equilibrium are listed.
A phase equilibrium occurs when a substance is in equilibriu m between two states.
A solution equilibrium occurs when a solid substance is i n a saturated solution.
This page titled 17.2: Chemical Equilibrium is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.2: Chemical Equilibrium by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

17.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225417.3: Equilibrium Constant
Red blood cells transport oxygen to tissues so that t hey can function. In the absence of oxygen, cells c annot carry out their
biochemical responsibilities. Oxygen moves to the cells a ttached to hemoglobin, a protein found in red blood cells.
The protein inside (a) red blood cells that carries oxygen t o cells and carbon dioxide to the lungs is (b) hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is
made up of four symmetrical subunits and four heme groups. Ir on associated with the heme binds oxygen. It is the iron in
hemoglobin that gives blood its red color. (CC_BY Openstax)
In cases of carbon monoxide poisoning, binds much m ore strongly to the hemoglobin, blocking oxygen att achment and
lowering the amount of oxygen reaching the cells. Tr eatment involves the patient breathing pure oxygen to displace the carbon
monoxide. The equilibrium reaction shown below illustrate s the shift toward the right when excess oxygen is add ed to the system:
Equilibrium Constant
Consider the hypothetical reversible reaction in whi ch reactants and react to form products and. Thi s equilibrium can be
shown as demonstrated below, where the lower case letters r epresent the coefficients of each substance.
As we have established, the rates of the forward and reve rse reactions are the same at equilibrium, and so the concentrations of all
of the substances are constant. Since that is the case, it stands to reason that a ratio of the concentrat ions for any given reaction at
equilibrium maintains a constant value. The equilibrium constant is the ratio of the mathematical product of the
concentrations of the products of a reaction to the mathematical product of the concentrations of the r eactants of the reaction. Each
concentration is raised to the power of its coefficie nt in the balanced chemical equation. For the general reaction above, the
equilibrium constant expression is written as follows:
The concentrations of each substance, indicated by the squ are brackets around the formula, are measured in molarit y units.
The value of the equilibrium constant for any react ion is only determined by experiment. As detailed in the previous section, the
position of equilibrium for a given reaction does n ot depend on the starting concentrations, and so the value of the equilibrium
constant is truly constant. It does, however, depend on the temperature of the reaction. This is because e quilibrium is defined as a
condition resulting from the rates of forward and rev erse reactions being equal. If the temperature change s, the corresponding
change in those reaction rates will alter the equilib rium constant. For any reaction in which a is given, the temperature should
be specified.
Summary
This page titled 17.3: Equilibrium Constant is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

17.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225419.3: Equilibrium Constant by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

17.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225517.4: Calculations with Equilibrium Constants
Iron is an important component of red blood cells. Pat ients who have low iron will usually be anemic and have a lower than normal
number of red blood cells. One way to assess serum iro n concentration is with the use of Ferrozine, a complex organic molecule.
Ferrozine forms a product with, producing a pink col or. In order to determine factors affecting the reac tion, we need to
measure the equilibrium constant. If the equilibrium does not lie far in the direction of products, prec autions need to be taken when
using this material to measure iron in serum.
Calculations with Equilibrium Constants
The general value of the equilibrium constant gives u s information about whether the reactants or the pro ducts are favored at
equilibrium. Since the product concentrations are in the numerator of the equilibrium expression, a mean s that the products
are favored over the reactants. A means that the react ants are favored over the products.
Though it would often seem that the value would have various units depending on the values of the exponent s in the
expression, the general rule is that any units are dropped. Al l values will be reported as having no units.
Equilibrium occurs when nitrogen monoxide gas reacts with oxygen gas to form nitrogen dioxide gas:
At equilibrium at, the concentrations are measured t o be,, and. Calculate
the equilibrium constant at this temperature.
Solution:
Step 1: List the known quantities and plan the problem.
Known
Unknown
The equilibrium expression is first written according to the general form in the text. The equilibrium v alues are substituted into
the expression and the value calculated.
Step 2: Solve.
Substituting in the concentrations at equilibrium:
Step 3: Think about your result.
The equilibrium concentration of the product is sig nificantly higher than the concentrations of the re actants and. As
a result, the value is much larger than 1, an indication that the product is favored at equilibrium.
The equilibrium expression only shows those substances who se concentrations are variable during the reaction. A pure solid or a
pure liquid does not have a concentration that will v ary during a reaction. Therefore, an equilibrium expr ession omits pure solids
and liquids, and only shows the concentrations of ga ses and aqueous solutions. The decomposition of mercu ry (II) oxide can be
shown by the following equation, followed by its equilibrium expression.Example

17.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332255The stoichiometry of an equation can also be used in a calculation of an equilibrium constant. At, solid ammonium carbamate
decomposes to ammonia and carbon dioxide gases.
At equilibrium, the is found to be. Can the value be calculated from that information alone? Because the
ammonium carbamate is a solid, it is not present in the equil ibrium expression.
The stoichiometry of the chemical equation indicate s that as the ammonium carbamate decomposes, of amm onia gas is
produced for every of carbon dioxide. Therefore, at equilibrium, the concentration of the ammonia will b e twice the
concentration of carbon dioxide. So,
Substituting these values into the expression:
Using Equilibrium Constants
The equilibrium constants are known for a great many reactions. Hydrogen and bromine gases combine to fo rm hydrogen bromide
gas. At, the equation and are given below.
A certain reaction is begun with only. When the rea ction mixture reaches equilibrium at, the concentr ation of bromine
gas is measured to be. What is the concentration of th e and the at equilibrium?
Since the reaction begins with only and the mole rat io of to is 1:1, the concentration of at equilib rium is also
. The equilibrium expression can be rearranged to solve fo r the concentration of at equilibrium:
Since the value of the equilibrium constant is very h igh, the concentration of is much greater than that of and at
equilibrium.
Summary
This page titled 17.4: Calculations with Equilibrium Constants is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.4: Calculations with Equilibrium Constants by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

17.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225617.5: Le Châtelier's Principle
There are some who enjoy going up in an airplane, stra pping on a parachute, and diving out the door to fre e-fall before opening the
chute, and dropping to the ground. This stressful acti vity (so they say) relieves the stress of everyday lif e. The release of adrenaline
caused by this stressful behavior is said to promote a mood enhancement that helps you deal better with oth er stresses in your daily
life.
Le Chatelier's Principle
Chemical equilibrium was studied by French chemist Henr i Le Chatelier (1850-1936) and his description of h ow a system responds
to a stress on equilibrium has become known as Le Chatelier's principle: When a chemical system that is at equilibrium is
disturbed by a stress, the system will respond in order to relieve the stress. Stresses to a chemical system inv olve changes in the
concentration of reactants or products, changes in t he temperature of the system, or changes in the press ure of the system. We will
discuss each of these stresses separately. The chang e to the equilibrium position in every case is eithe r a favoring of the forward
reaction or a favoring of the reverse reaction. When the forward reaction is favored, the concentrations of products increase, while
the concentrations of reactants decrease. When the rev erse reaction is favored, the concentrations of produ cts decrease, while the
concentrations of reactants increase.
Le Chatelier's Principle
Table
Original Equilibrium Favored Reaction Result
Forward: decreases; increases
Reverse: increases; decreases
Figure: Henri Le Chatelier.
Summary
This page titled 17.5: Le Châtelier's Principle is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.5: Le Châtelier's Principle by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

17.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225717.6: Effect of Concentration
Phenolphthalein is a chemical that has one structure in a high acid environment, and another structure in a low acid environment. If
the hydrogen ion concentration is high, the compoun d is colorless, but turns red if the hydrogen ion con centration is low. By adding
hydrogen ions to the solution, or removing them through a chemical reaction, we can vary the color of the dye.
Effect of Concentration
A change in concentration of one of the substances i n an equilibrium system typically involves either th e addition or the removal of
one of the reactants or products. Consider the Haber-Bo sch process for the industrial production of ammonia from nitrogen and
hydrogen gases:
If the concentration of one substance in a system is increased, the system will respond by favoring the reac tion that removes that
substance. When more is added, the forward reaction wi ll be favored because the forward reaction uses up an d converts it to
. The forward reaction speeds up temporarily as a re sult of the addition of a reactant. The position of e quilibrium shifts as more
is produced. The concentration of increases, while the concentrations of and decrease. After some tim e passes,
equilibrium is reestablished with new concentrations o f all three substances. As can be seen in the figure below, if more is
added, a new equilibrium is achieved by the system. T he new concentration of is higher because of the favo ring of the forward
reaction. The new concentration of the is lower. The concentration of is higher than in the original e quilibrium, but went
down slightly following the addition of the that dis turbed the original equilibrium. By responding in th is way, the value of the
equilibrium constant for the reaction,, does not change as a result of the stress to the system.
Figure: The Haber-Bosch process is an equilibrium betwe en reactant and and product.
If more were added, the reverse reaction would be fav ored. This "favoring" of a reaction means temporaril y speeding up the
reaction in that direction until equilibrium is ree stablished. Recall that once equilibrium is reestabl ished, the rates of the forward
and reverse reactions are again equal. The addition of would result in increased formation of the reactants, and.
An equilibrium can also be disrupted by the removal o f one of the substances. If the concentration of a substance is decreased, the
system will respond by favoring the reaction that rep laces that substance. In the industrial Haber-Bosch pr ocess, is removed
from the equilibrium system as the reaction proceed s. As a result, the forward reaction is favored so that more will be
produced. The concentrations of and decrease. Conti nued removal of will eventually force the reaction to go to
completion until all of the reactants are used up. I f either or were removed from the equilibrium syste m, the reverse reaction
would be favored, and the concentration of would decrea se.
The effects of changes in concentration on an equil ibrium system, according to Le Chatelier's principle, are summarized in the table
below.
Effects of changes in concentration on an equilibrium system, according to Le Chatelier's principle

17.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332257Table
Stress Response
Addition of reactant Forward reaction favored.
Addition of product Reverse reaction favored.
Removal of reactant Reverse reaction favored.
Removal of product Forward reaction favored.
Summary
This page titled 17.6: Effect of Concentration is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.6: Effect of Concentration by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

17.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225817.7: Effect of Temperature
Carbon monoxide is often thought of as nothing more than a hazardous gas produced from incomplete combu stion of carbon
products. However, there is a large market for industrial ly-manufactured carbon monoxide that is used to syn thesize most of the
acetic acid produced in the world. One reaction that l eads to formation involves its formation by passing air over excess carbon
at high temperatures. The initial product (carbon d ioxide) equilibrates with the remaining hot carbon, forming carbon monoxide. At
lower temperatures, formation is favored, while is the p redominant product above.
Effect of Temperature
Increasing or decreasing the temperature of a system at equilibrium is also a stress to the system. The equa tion for the Haber-Bosch
process is written again below, as a thermochemical equati on.
The forward reaction is the exothermic direction: th e formation of releases heat. The reverse reaction i s the endothermic
direction: as decomposes to and, heat is absorbed. An increase in the temperature of a system favors the direction of the
reaction that absorbs heat, the endothermic directi on. Absorption of heat in this case is a relief of the stress provided by the
temperature increase. For the Haber-Bosch process, an i ncrease in temperature favors the reverse reaction. The concentration of
in the system decreases, while the concentrations of and increase.
A decrease in the temperature of a system favors th e direction of the reaction that releases heat, the exothermic direction. For the
Haber-Bosch process, a decrease in temperature favors the forward reaction. The concentration of in the s ystem increases,
while the concentrations of and decrease.
For changes in concentration, the system responds in s uch a way that the value of the equilibrium constant,, is unchanged.
However, a change in temperature shifts the equilibrium, and the value either increases or decreases. As discu ssed in the
previous section, values of are dependent on the temp erature. When the temperature of the system for the Haber-Bosch process
is increased, the resultant shift in equilibrium towar d the reactants means that the value decreases. When the temperature is
decreased, the shift in equilibrium toward the products mean s that the value increases.
Le Chatelier's principle, as related to temperature c hanges, can be illustrated by the reaction in which d initrogen tetroxide is in
equilibrium with nitrogen dioxide:
Dinitrogen tetroxide is colorless, while nitrogen diox ide is dark brown in color. When breaks down into,
heat is absorbed according to the forward reaction a bove. Therefore, an increase in temperature of the s ystem will favor the forward
reaction. Conversely, a decrease in temperature will fa vor the reverse reaction.
Summary
This page titled 17.7: Effect of Temperature is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.7: Effect of Temperature by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

17.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33225917.8: Effect of Pressure
The ammonia storage tank in the picture below does two things. First, it stores ammonia at high pressure to m inimize the reverse
reaction that would lead to less ammonia, and more ni trogen and hydrogen. Secondly, it sends an important mess age. Ammonia is
used to make methamphetamine, a dangerous drug of ab use. Locks and other safety mechanisms built into the t anks help stop the
theft of ammonia to be used for this illicit activity.
Figure: An ammonia storage tank.
Effect of Pressure
Changing the pressure of an equilibrium system in whi ch gases are involved is also a stress to the system. A change in the pressure
on a liquid or a solid has a negligible effect. We wil l return again to the equilibrium for the Haber-Bosch process. Imagine the gases
are contained in a closed system in which the volume of the system is controlled by an adjustable piston, a s shown in the figure
below.
Figure: Effect of pressure on ammonia formation.
On the far left, the reaction system contains primar ily and, with only one molecule of present. As the piston is pushed
inwards, the pressure of the system increases according t o Boyle's Law. This is a stress to the equilibrium. In the middle image, the
same number of molecules is now confined in a smaller space and so the pressure has increased. According to Le Chatelier's
principle, the system responds in order to relieve the stress. In the image on the right, the forward react ion has been favored, in
which one molecule of combines with three molecules o f to form two molecules of. The overall result is a decrease in
the number of gas molecules in the entire system. This in turn decreases the pressure and provides a relief to the original stress of a
pressure increase. An increase in pressure on an equi librium system favors the reaction which produces fewe r total moles of gas. In
this case, it is the forward reaction that is favored.
A decrease in pressure on the above system could be a chieved by pulling the piston outward, increasing the container volume. The
equilibrium would respond by favoring the reverse re action in which decomposes to and. This is because the overall
number of gas molecules would increase, and so would t he pressure. A decrease in pressure on an equilibrium system favors the
reaction that produces more total moles of gas. This is summ arized in the table below.
Table

17.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332259Stress Response
Pressure increase Reaction produces fewer gas molecules.
Pressure decrease Reaction produces more gas molecules.
Like changes in concentration, the value for a given reac tion is unchanged by a change in pressure.
It is important to remember when analyzing the effec t of a pressure change on equilibrium that only gase s are affected. If a certain
reaction involves liquids or solids, they should be ignor ed. Calcium carbonate decomposes according to the equi librium reaction:
Oxygen is the only gas in the system. An increase in th e pressure of the system slows the rate of decomposition of because
the reverse reaction is favored. When a system conta ins equal moles of gas on both sides of the equation, pressure has no effect on
the equilibrium position, as in the formation of from a nd.
Summary
This page titled 17.8: Effect of Pressure is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.8: Effect of Pressure by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

17.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226017.9: Nonreversible Reactions
Fires are a part of life. Some fires clear the land an d allow new growth. Other fires provide warmth on a cold night. Unfortunately,
many fires are destructive, leaving damage in their wake. All fires leave the environment changed, never to revert back to its
original state. The carbon dioxide and water generate d by a fire go off into the atmosphere and do not r eturn. The change is
permanent and irreversible.
Going to Completion
When one of the products of a reaction is removed fr om the chemical equilibrium system as soon as it is produced, the reverse
reaction cannot establish itself and equilibrium is never reached. Reactions such as these are said to go to completion. These
processes are often referred to as non-reversible reactions. Reactions which go to completion tend to produce o ne of three types of
products: (1) an insoluble precipitate, (2) a gas, (3) a molecular compound such as water. Examples of th ese reactions are shown
below.
1. Formation of a precipitate:
2. Formation of a gas:
3. Formation of water:
If we look at these reactions in more detail, we can see some things that are not apparent the way the equati ons are written. Looking
at the first equation, we do not see a double arrow bet ween reactants and products, because the reaction is con sidered essentially
irreversible. However, if we consider the net ionic equation
then the reverse reaction would be:
The for the reverse reaction is. For all practical purp oses, the reaction goes to completion.
Formation of a gas in an open system is essentially ir reversible since the gas escapes into the atmosphere. Looking at the activity
series, we see that is much higher in the series than h ydrogen. So the reaction would be expected to go stro ngly in the indicated
direction.
The third reaction gets a little more complicated. In solution, the reactants and will be ionized comple tely, as does the
product. Water exists in an equilibrium with and, wit h the dissociation constant for water being. So, in the
solution resulting from the reaction given here, th e is, a very insignificant amount. For all practica l purposes, this
reaction can be said to go to completion.
Summary
This page titled 17.9: Nonreversible Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.9: Nonreversible Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

17.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226117.10: Le Châtelier's Principle and the Equilibrium Constant
With online banking, management of personal finances can become less complicated in some ways. You can auto matically deposit
paychecks, pay bills, and designate how much goes into savings or other special accounts each month. If you wa nt to maintain
of your bank account in savings, you can set up a pr ogram that moves money in and out of the account whe n you get a paycheck or
pay bills. The amount of money in savings will change as the money comes in and out of the bank, but the ra tio of savings to
checking will always be constant.
Le Chatelier's Principle and the Equilibrium Constant
Occasionally, when students apply Le Chatelier's princi ple to an equilibrium problem involving a change in concentration, they
assume that must change. This seems logical since we talk about "shifting" the equilibrium in one direct ion or the other.
However, is a constant, for a given equilibrium at a gi ven temperature, so it must not change. Here is an exa mple of how this
works. Consider the simplified equilibrium below:
Let's say we have a 1.0 liter container. At equilibrium, the following amounts are measured:
The value of is given by:
Now we will disturb the equilibrium by adding 0.50 moles of to the mixture. The equilibrium will shift towards the right,
forming more. Immediately after the addition of a nd before any response, we how have of and of. The
equilibrium then shifts in the forward direction. We will introduce a variable, which will represent the ch ange in concentrations
as the reaction proceeds. Since the mole ratio of: is 1:1, as decreases by the amount, the increases by the amount. We
set up an analysis called ICE, which stands for Initial, Change, and Equilibrium. T he values in the table below represent molar
concentrations.
At the new equilibrium position, the values for and a s a function of can be set equal to the value of t he. Then, one can
solve for.
Solving for:
This value for is now plugged back in to the Equilib rium line of the table, and used to find the final c oncentrations of and
after the reaction.

17.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332261The value of has been maintained since. This shows t hat even though a change in concentration of one of the
substances in equilibrium causes a shift in the equilibr ium position, the value of the equilibrium constant does no t change.
Summary
This page titled 17.10: Le Châtelier's Principle and the Equilibrium C onstant is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
19.10: Le Châtelier's Principle and the Equilibrium Constant by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
18: Acids and Bases
18.1: Properties of Acids
18.2: Properties of Bases
18.3: Arrhenius Acids
18.4: Arrhenius Bases
18.5: Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases
18.6: Brønsted-Lowry Acid-Base Reactions
18.7: Lewis Acids and Bases
18.8: Ion-Product of Water
18.9: The pH Scale
18.10: Calculating pH of Acids and Bases
18.11: The pOH Concept
18.12: Strong and Weak Acids and Acid Ionization Constant \(\left(K_\text{a} \right)\)
18.13: Strong and Weak Bases and Base Ionization Constant
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
18.15: Calculating \(K_\text{a}\) and \(K_\text{b}\)
18.16: Calculating pH of Weak Acid and Base Solutions
18.17: Neutralization Reaction and Net Ionic Equations for Neutralization Reactions
18.18: Titration Experiment
18.19: Titration Calculations
18.20: Titration Curves
18.21: Indicators
18.22: Hydrolysis of Salts- Equations
18.23: Buffers
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 18: Acids and Bases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

18.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226318.1: Properties of Acids
A cup of coffee first thing in the morning can help start the day. However, keeping the coffee maker clea n can be a problem. Lime
deposits build up after a while and slow down the brewin g process. The best cure for this is to put vinegar (dil ute acetic acid) in the
pot and run it through the brewing cycle. The vinega r dissolves the deposits and cleans the maker, which wi ll speed up the brewing
process back to its original rate. Just be sure to run water through the brewing process after the vinegar, or you will get some really
horrible coffee!
Acids
Acids are very common in some of the foods that we ea t. Citrus fruits such as oranges and lemons contain ci tric acid and ascorbic
acid, which is better known as vitamin C. Carbonated so das contain phosphoric acid. Vinegar contains acetic acid. Your own
stomach utilizes hydrochloric acid to digest food.
Acids are a distinct class of compounds because of the proper ties of their aqueous solutions. These properties are:
1. Aqueous solutions of acids are electrolytes, meaning t hat they conduct electrical current. Some acids are strong electrolytes
because they ionize completely in water, yielding a great m any ions. Other acids are weak electrolytes that exist primari ly in a
non-ionized form when dissolved in water.
2. Acids have a sour taste. Lemons, vinegar, and sour candies all contain acids.
3. Acids change the color of certain acid-base indicates. Two common indicators are litmus and phenolphthalein. Bl ue litmus turns
red in the presence of an acid, while phenolphthalein turn s colorless.
4. Acids react with active metals to yield hydrogen gas. Rec all that an activity series is a list of metals in descendin g order of
reactivity. Metals that are above hydrogen in the activity series will replace the hydrogen from an acid in a single-r eplacement
reaction, as shown below:
5. Acids react with bases to produce a salt compound and water. When equal moles of an acid and a base are combined, the acid is
neutralized by the base. The products of this reaction a re an ionic compound, which is labeled as a salt, and water.
Summary
This page titled 18.1: Properties of Acids is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.1: Properties of Acids by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226418.2: Properties of Bases
Perhaps you have eaten too much pizza and felt very uncomfortable hours later. This feeling is due to ex cess stomach acid being
produced. The discomfort can be dealt with by taking an antacid. The base in the antacid will react with the in the stomach and
neutralize it, taking care of that unpleasant feeling.
Bases
Bases have properties that mostly contrast with those of a cids.
1. Aqueous solutions of bases are also electrolytes. Ba ses can be either strong or weak, just as acids can.
2. Bases often have a bitter taste and are found in foods less frequently than acids. Many bases, like soaps, are slippe ry to the
touch.
3. Bases also change the color of indicators. Litmus turns blue in the presence of a base while phenolphthalein turns p ink.
4. Bases do not react with metals in the way that acids do.
5. Bases react with acids to produce a salt and water.
Figure: Phenolphthalein indicator in presence of base.
Please note that tasting chemicals and touching them a re NOT good lab practices and should be avoided—in oth er words, don't do
this at home.
Bases are less common as foods, but they are nonethel ess present in many household products. Many cleaners contain ammonia, a
base. Sodium hydroxide is found in drain cleaner. Antacids, which combat excess stomach acid, are comprised of base s such as
magnesium hydroxide or sodium hydrogen carbonate.
Summary
This page titled 18.2: Properties of Bases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.2: Properties of Bases by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226518.3: Arrhenius Acids
Venus is the planet nearest to Earth, but has a very different and hostile environment. It has a surface te mperature that averages
around. The atmosphere is composed of carbon dioxid e, but clouds of sulfuric acid move through the upper atmosphere,
helping to create the extremely unfriendly conditio ns. Because of these conditions, Venus is not a place y ou want to visit on
vacation.
Arrhenius Acids
Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius (1859-1927) was the firs t to propose a theory to explain the observed behavi or of acids and
bases. Because of their ability to conduct a current, he knew that both acids and bases contained ions in s olution. An Arrhenius
acid is a compound that ionizes to yield hydrogen ions in aqueous solution.
Acids are molecular compounds with ionizable hydrogen atoms. Only hydrogen atoms that are part of a highly p olar covalent bond
are ionizable. Hydrogen chloride is a gas at room te mperature and under normal pressure. The bond in hy drogen
chloride is a polar bond. The hydrogen atom is elec tron deficient because of the higher electronegativi ty of the chlorine atom.
Consequently, the hydrogen atom is attracted to the lone pair of electrons in a water molecule when is di ssolved in water. The
result is that the bond breaks, with both bonding e lectrons remaining with the, forming a chloride ion. The ion attaches
to the water molecule, forming a polyatomic ion call ed the hydronium ion. The hydronium ion can be thought of as a
water molecule with an extra attached hydrogen ion.
Figure: Formation of a hydronium ion. (CC BY-NC; CK- 12)
Equations showing the ionization of an acid in water are freq uently simplified by omitting the water molecule:
This is merely a simplification of the previous equat ion, but it is commonly used. Any hydrogen ions in an aq ueous solution will be
attached to water molecules as hydronium ions.
Not all hydrogen atoms in molecular compounds are io nizable. In methane, the hydrogen atoms are covalen tly bonded to
carbon in bonds that are only slightly polar. The hyd rogen atoms are not capable of ionizing, and methan e has no acidic properties.
Acetic acid belongs to a class of acids called orga nic acids. There are four hydrogen atoms in the mole cule, but only
the one hydrogen that is bonded to an oxygen atom is ioniz able.
Figure: The bond can be ionized to yield the ion and the acetate ion. The other hydrogen atoms in thi s molecule are
not acidic. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
The table below lists some of the more common acids:
Common Acids

18.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332265Table: Common Acids
Acid Name Formula
Hydrochloric acid
Nitric acid
Sulfuric acid
Phosphoric acid
Acetic acid
Hypochlorous acid
A monoprotic acid is an acid that contains only one ionizable hydrog en. Hydrochloric acid and acetic acid are monoprotic acids. A
polyprotic acid is an acid that contains multiple ionizable hydrogen s. Most common polyprotic acids are either diprotic (such as
) or triprotic (such as).
Summary
An Arrhenius acid is a compound that ionizes to yield hydrog en ions in aqueous solution.
Examples of Arrhenius acids are given.
This page titled 18.3: Arrhenius Acids is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.3: Arrhenius Acids by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226618.4: Arrhenius Bases
Sodium hydroxide is a versatile chemical. It can be us ed for such mundane purposes as cleaning clogged dr ains. Several
commercial preparations contain sodium hydroxide fo r this purpose. It also has a number of applications in the food processing
field. Ice cream is thickened using. If olives are s oaked in a solution containing sodium hydroxide and other chemicals, the
olives will turn black. Soft pretzels are made chewy b y the application of sodium hydroxide to the food. T his compound has been
widely used in the synthesis of plastics, for etching alumi num, for paint removal, and is employed in the dehorning of cattle.
Arrhenius Bases
An Arrhenius base is a compound that ionizes to yield hydroxide ions i n aqueous solution. The table below lists several of
the more common bases.
Table: Common Bases
Base Name Formula
Sodium hydroxide
Potassium hydroxide
Magnesium hydroxide
Calcium hydroxide
All of the bases listed in the table are solids at roo m temperature. Upon dissolving in water, each dissociate s into a metal cation and
the hydroxide ion.
Sodium hydroxide is a very caustic substance also kno wn as lye. Lye is used as a rigorous cleaner and is an ingredient in the
manufacture of soaps. Care must be taken with strong base s like sodium hydroxide, as exposure can lead to sev ere burns (see figure
below).
Figure: This foot has severe burns due to prolonged con tact with a solution of sodium hydroxide, also known a s lye. (CC BYNC; CK-12)
Sodium belongs to the group of elements called the a lkali metals. An alkaline solution is another name for a solution that is basic.
All alkali metals react readily with water to produce the me tal hydroxide and hydrogen gas. The resulting solutions a re basic.
Bases that consist of an alkali metal cation and th e hydroxide anion are all very soluble in water. Comp ounds of the Group 2 metals
(the alkaline earth metals) are also basic. However, the se compounds are generally not as soluble in water. Therefore, the
dissociation reactions for these compounds are shown as equ ilibrium reactions:
These relatively insoluble hydroxides were some of the compounds discussed in the context of the solubility product constant
. The solubility of magnesium hydroxide is per lite r of water at. Because of its low solubility, magnesiu m
hydroxide is not as dangerous as sodium hydroxide. In fact, magnesium hydroxide is the active ingredient i n a product called milk
of magnesia, which is used as an antacid or a mild laxative.

18.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332266Summary
Arrhenius base is a compound that ionizes to yield hydroxid e ions in aqueous solution.
Examples of Arrhenius bases are given.
This page titled 18.4: Arrhenius Bases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.4: Arrhenius Bases by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226718.5: Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases
The Arrhenius concept of acids and bases was a significa nt contribution to the scientific understanding of ac ids and bases. It
replaced and expanded Lavoisier's original idea tha t all acids contained oxygen. However, the Arrhenius the ory also had its
shortcomings. It did not take into account the role of the solvent. In addition, this concept did not d eal with acid-base behavior in
solvents such as benzene, where there could be no ion ization. So, formation of a new theory was imperative, wh ich built on the
findings of Arrhenius, but also went beyond them.
Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases
The Arrhenius definition of acids and bases is somewhat limited. There are some compounds whose properties sug gest that they are
either acidic or basic, but which do not qualify acco rding to the Arrhenius definition. An example is ammo nia. Its aqueous
solution turns litmus blue, it reacts with acids, and displays all the other properties of a base. However, it does not contain the
hydroxide ion. In 1923, a broader definition of acid s and bases was independently proposed by Danish chemis t Johannes Brønsted
(1879-1947) and English chemist Thomas Lowry (1874-193 6). A Brønsted-Lowry acid is a molecule or ion that donates a
hydrogen ion in a reaction. A Brønsted-Lowry base is a molecule or ion that accepts a hydrogen ion i n a reaction. A hydrogen ion
is commonly referred to as a proton, and so acids and bases are proton donors and proton acceptors, respec tively, according to the
Brønsted-Lowry definition. All substances that are cat egorized as acids and bases under the Arrhenius defini tion are also defined as
such under the Brønsted-Lowry definition. The new defin ition, however, includes some substances that are left o ut according to the
Arrhenius definition.
What kind of molecule would qualify as a Brønsted-Lowr y base? These molecules need to be able to accept a hydrogen ion (or
proton). Two possibilities come to mind: an anion that can form a neutral compound with a proton, or a mole cule in which one or
more atoms has lone-pair electrons. The most obviou s anion is the Arrhenius base. This ion can form a wa ter molecule with a
proton by accepting the proton. The acetate anion is another anion that can combine with a proton to f orm acetic acid.
Lone-pair electron groups would include the nitrogen atom (see figure below). The two electrons at the top of the nitrogen atom are
not connected in any type of bond, but they do interact re adily with a bare proton.
Figure: Lone pair electrons on nitrogen. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Oxygen is another atom with lone pair electrons that can function as a Brønsted-Lowry base.
Figure: Electrons in an oxygen atom. (CC BY-NC; CK-1 2)
The two single electrons (to the left and bottom of the atom) can form single covalent bonds with other a toms, while the two pairs
of double electrons (top and right) are available to inte ract with a hydrogen ion.
Summary
A Brønsted-Lowry acid is a molecule or ion that donates a hydrogen ion in a reaction.
A Brønsted-Lowry base is a molecule or ion that accepts a hydrogen ion in a reaction.
This page titled 18.5: Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.5: Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

18.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226818.6: Brønsted-Lowry Acid-Base Reactions
The Roman god Janus was considered the god of gates, doors, beginnings, and endings. He is portrayed with two fa ces, looking in
two directions at once. Janus would have been in a go od position to look at the acid-base reactions we see in this concept, since
they are equilibrium reactions involving two different fo rms of both acids and bases.
Brønsted-Lowry Acid-Base Reactions
An acid-base reaction, according to the Brønsted-Lowry definition, is a transfer of a proton from one molec ule or ion to another.
When ammonia is dissolved in water, it undergoes the followin g reversible reaction.
In this reaction, the water molecule is donating a pro ton to the ammonia molecule. The resulting products are the ammonium ion
and the hydroxide ion. The water is acting as a Brønsted -Lowry acid, while the ammonia is acting as a Brønsted -Lowry base. The
hydroxide ion that is produced causes the solution to be basic.
We can also consider the reverse reaction in the abov e equation. In that reaction, the ammonia ion donates a proton to the
hydroxide ion. The ammonium ion is a Brønsted-Lowry a cid, while the hydroxide ion is a Brønsted-Lowry base. Most BrønstedLowry acid-base reactions can be analyzed in this way. One acid and one base are reactants, and one acid and one base are
products.
In the above reaction, water acted as an acid, which ma y seem a bit unexpected. Water can also act as a base in a Brønsted-Lowry
acid-base reaction, as long as it reacts with a substanc e that is a better proton donor. Shown below is the react ion of water with the
hydrogen sulfate ion.
So, water is capable of being either an acid or a bas e, a characteristic called amphoterism. An amphoteric substance is one that is
capable of acting as either an acid or a base by donating or accepting hydrogen ions.
Conjugate Acids and Bases
When a substance that is acting as a Brønsted-Lowry acid donates its proton, it becomes a base in the re verse reaction. In the
reaction above, the hydrogen sulfate ion donates a proton to water and becomes a sulfate ion. The and the
are linked to one another by the presence or absen ce of the ion. A conjugate acid-base pair is a pair of substances
related by the loss or gain of a single hydrogen io n. A conjugate acid is the particle produced when a base accepts a proto n. The
hydrogen sulfate ion is the conjugate acid of the s ulfate ion. A conjugate base is the particle produced when an acid donates a
proton. The sulfate ion is the conjugate base of the hydroge n sulfate ion.
In the reaction illustrated below, water serves both as acid and base simultaneously. One water molecule ser ves as an acid and
donates a proton. The other water molecule functions as a base by accepting the proton.
Figure: Water molecules as a conjugate acid-base pair. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
A typical Brønsted-Lowry acid-base reaction contains t wo conjugate acid-base pairs, as shown below.
One conjugate acid-base pair is /, while the other pair is /.

18.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332268Summary
An acid-base reaction, according to the Brønsted-Lowry defin ition, is a transfer of a proton from one molecule or ion to another.
A conjugate acid-base pair is a pair of substances relat ed by the loss or gain of a single hydrogen ion.
A conjugate acid is the particle produced when a base acc epts a proton.
A conjugate base is the particle produced when an acid don ates a proton.
Examples of conjugate acid-base pairs are given.
This page titled 18.6: Brønsted-Lowry Acid-Base Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.6: Brønsted-Lowry Acid-Base Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

18.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226918.7: Lewis Acids and Bases
Ideas in science do not stay static. One discovery bui lds upon another. The concept of acids and bases has grown from the
fundamental ideas of Arrhenius to Brønsted-Lowry to Le wis. Each step adds to our understanding of the surroun ding world, and
makes the "big picture" even bigger.
Lewis Acids and Bases
Gilbert Lewis (1875-1946) proposed a third theory of acids and bases that is even more general than either the Arrhenius or
Brønsted-Lowry theories. A Lewis acid is a substance that accepts a pair of electrons to f orm a covalent bond. A Lewis base is a
substance that donates a pair of electrons to form a covalent bond. So, a Lewis acid-base reaction is repre sented by the transfer of a
pair of electrons from a base to an acid. A hydrogen ion, which lacks any electrons, accepts a pair of ele ctrons. It is an acid under
both the Brønsted-Lowry and Lewis definitions. Ammonia c onsists of a nitrogen atom as the central atom with a lone pair of
electrons. The reaction between ammonia and the hydrogen ion can be depicted as shown in the figure below.
Figure: Reaction between ammonia and a proton. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
The lone pair on the nitrogen atom is transferred to the hydrogen ion, making the a Lewis base while the is a L ewis acid.
Some reactions that do not qualify as acid-base reacti ons under the other definitions do so under only th e Lewis definition. An
example is the reaction of ammonia with boron trifluoride.
Figure: Ammonia and boron trifluoride. (CC BY-NC; C K-12)
Boron trifluoride is the Lewis acid, while ammonia is ag ain the Lewis base. As there is no hydrogen ion involv ed in this reaction, it
qualifies as an acid-base reaction only under the Lewis definition. The table below summarizes the three acid-ba se theories.
Acid-Base Definitions
Table: Acid-Base Definitions
Type Acid Base
Arrhenius ions in solution ions in solution
Brønsted-Lowry donor acceptor
Lewis electron-pair acceptor electron-pair donor
Summary
A Lewis acid is a substance that accepts a pair of electron s to form a covalent bond.
A Lewis base is a substance that donates a pair of elec trons to form a covalent bond.
Examples of Lewis acids and bases are given.
This page titled 18.7: Lewis Acids and Bases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

18.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33226921.7: Lewis Acids and Bases by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227018.8: Ion-Product of Water
At one time, you could take the little caps off the t op of a car battery and check the condition of the sulfuric acid inside. If it got
low, you could add more acid. But, sulfuric acid is h azardous stuff, so the batteries are now sealed to prot ect people. Because of the
acid's dangerous nature, it is not a good idea to cut into a battery to see what it looks like—you could get acid bur ns.
The Ion-Product of Water
The self-ionization of water (the process in which water ionizes to hydronium ions and hydroxide ions) occurs to a very limited
extent. When two molecules of water collide, there can be a transfer of a hydrogen ion from one molecule to the other. The
products are a positively charged hydronium ion and a ne gatively charged hydroxide ion.
We often use the simplified form of the reaction:
The equilibrium constant for the self-ionization of wat er is referred to as the ion-product for water and is give n the symbol.
The ion-product of water is the mathematical product of the concentration of hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions. Note that
is not included in the ion-product expression becau se it is a pure liquid. The value of is very small, in accordance with a
reaction that favors the reactants. At, the experimental ly determined value of in pure water is.
In pure water, the concentrations of hydrogen and hydr oxide ions are equal to one another. Pure water or an y other aqueous
solution in which this ratio holds is said to be neutral. To find the molarity of each ion, the square root of is taken.
An acidic solution is a solution in which the concentration of hydroge n ions is greater than the concentration of hydroxide ions.
For example, hydrogen chloride ionizes to produce and ions upon dissolving in water.
This increases the concentration of ions in the solut ion. According to Le Chatelier's principle, the equili brium represented by
is forced to the left, towards the reactant. As a resu lt, the concentration of the hydroxide ion
decreases.
A basic solution is a solution in which the concentration of hydroxid e ions is greater than the concentration of hydroge n ions. Solid
potassium hydroxide dissociates in water to yield potass ium ions and hydroxide ions.
The increase in concentration of the ions causes a decrease in the concentration of the ions and the ion-product of
remains constant.
Hydrochloric acid is a strong acid, meaning it is ion ized in solution. What is the and the in a soluti on of
Solution
Step 1: List the known values and plan the problem.
KnownExample

18.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332270Unknown
Because is ionized, the concentration of ions in solution will be equal to the original concentratio n of. Each
molecule that was originally present ionizes into o ne ion and one ion. The concentration of can then be
determined from the and.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The is much higher than the because the solution is acidic. As with other equilibrium constants, the un it for is
customarily omitted.
Summary
The self-ionization of water is described and an ionizati on constant for the process is stated.
Acidic and basic solutions are defined.
Calculations using are illustrated.
This page titled 18.8: Ion-Product of Water is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.8: Ion-Product of Water by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227118.9: The pH Scale
Grapefruit juice has a pH of somewhere between 2.9 and 3.3, depending on the specific product. Excessive exposu re to this juice
can cause erosion of tooth enamel and can lead to to oth damage. The acids in grapefruit juice are carbo n-based, with citric acid
being one of the major constituents. This compound h as three ionizable hydrogens on each molecule which c ontribute to the
relatively low pH of the juice. Another component of gr apefruit juice is malic acid, containing two ionizab le hydrogens per
molecule.
The pH Scale
Expressing the acidity of a solution by using the mo larity of the hydrogen ion is cumbersome because the quantities are generally
very small. Danish scientist Søren Sørensen (1868-1939) proposed an easier system for indicating the concent ration of called
the pH scale. The letters pH stand for the power of the hydrogen ion. The pH of a solution is the negative logarithm of the
hydrogen-ion concentration:
In pure water or a neutral solution, the. Substituting into the pH expression:
The pH of pure water or any neutral solution is thus 7.00. For recording purposes, the numbers to the right of the decimal point in
the pH value are the significant figures. Since has two si gnificant figures, the pH can be reported as 7.00.
A logarithmic scale condenses the range of acidity to numbers that are easy to use. Consider a solution with.
That is a hydrogen-ion concentration that is 1000 tim es higher than the concentration in pure water. The pH of such a solution is
4.00, a difference of just 3 pH units. Notice that when t he is written in scientific notation and the coeffi cient is 1, the pH is
simply the exponent with the sign changed. The pH of a solution with is 2 and the pH of a solution with
is 10.
As we saw earlier, a solution with higher than is acidi c, while a solution with lower than is basic.
Consequently, solutions with a pH of less than 7 are aci dic, while those with a pH higher than 7 are basic. Figure illustrates
this relationship, along with some examples of various solution s.
Figure: The pH values for several common materials. (C C BY-NC; CK-12)

18.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332271Summary
The pH of a solution is the negative logarithm of the hydrog en-ion concentration.
Solutions with a pH of less than 7 are acidic, while those with a pH hi gher than 7 are basic.
pH values for several common materials are listed.
This page titled 18.9: The pH Scale is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.9: The pH Scale by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

18.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227218.10: Calculating pH of Acids and Bases
It's not uncommon to see a tropical fish tank in ho mes or businesses. These brightly-colored creatures a re relaxing to watch, but do
require a certain amount of maintenance in order fo r them to survive. Tap water is usually too alkaline when it comes out of the
faucet, so some adjustments need to be made. The pH of the water will change over time while it is in the ta nk, which means it
needs to be tested every so often. Any fish tank caretaker ha s a chance to be a chemist for their fish!
Calculating pH of Acids and Bases
Calculation of pH is simple when there is a problem. However, in real life, this is rarely the situation. If the coefficient is
not equal to 1, a calculator must be used to find th e pH. For example, the pH of a solution with can be fou nd as
shown below.
When the pH of a solution is known, the concentration of the hydrogen ion can be calculated. The inverse of the logarithm (or
antilog) is the key on a calculator.
For example, suppose that you have a solution with a pH o f 9.14. To find the use the key.
Hydroxide Ion Concentration and pH
As we saw earlier, the hydroxide ion concentration of a ny aqueous solution is related to the hydrogen ion c oncentration through the
value of. We can use that relationship to calculate the pH of a solution of a base.
Sodium hydroxide is a strong base. Find the pH of a solu tion prepared by dissolving of into enough water to make
of solution.
Solution
Step 1: List the known values and plan the problem.
Known
Mass
Molar mass
V olume solution
Unknown
First, convert the mass of to moles. Second, calculate t he molarity of the solution. Because is a strong b ase
and is soluble, the will be equal to the concentrat ion of the. Third, use to calculate the in the sol ution.
Lastly, calculate the pH.
Step 2: Solve.Example

18.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332272Step 3: Think about your result.
The solution is basic and so its pH is greater than 7. The reported pH is rounded to two decimal places becau se the original
mass and volume has two significant figures.
Summary
This page titled 18.10: Calculating pH of Acids and Bases is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.10: Calculating pH of Acids and Bases by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck12-chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

18.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227318.11: The pOH Concept
Soap Lake has a long history as a healing place. Indian tribes would put aside their rivalries when they came to the lake to enjoy the
high mineral content of the water. In the days before good antibiotics, thousands of visitors would come and enjoy the soothing
waters of the lake. Soap Lake is alkaline, with water quality though to be similar to that of the moons of the planet J upiter.
The pOH Concept
As with the hydrogen-ion concentration, the concentrati on of the hydroxide ion can be expressed logarithmic ally by the pOH. The
pOH of a solution is the negative logarithm of the hydroxide -ion concentration:
The pH of a solution can be related to the pOH. Consider a solution with a pH. The of the solution would be
. Dividing by this yields a of. Finally the pOH of th e solution equals. This
example illustrates the following relationship.
The pOH scale is similar to the pH scale in that a pOH of 7 is indicative of a neutral solution. A basic soluti on has a pOH less than
7, while an acidic solution has a pOH of greater than 7. The pOH is convenient to use when finding the hydroxide ion
concentration from a solution with a known pH.
Find the hydroxide concentration of a solution with a pH o f 4.42.
Solution
Step 1: List the known values and plan the problem.
Known
pH
pH pOH
Unknown
First, the pOH is calculated, followed by the.
Step 2: Solve.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The pH is that of an acidic solution, and the resultin g hydroxide-ion concentration is less than. The answe r has two
significant figures because the given pH has two decimal p laces.
The diagram below shows all of the interrelationships between,, pH, and pOH.Example

18.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332273
Figure: Relationships between hydrogen ion concentrat ion, hydroxide ion concentration, pH and pOH. (CC B Y-NC; CK-12)
Summary
The pOH of a solution is the negative logarithm of the hy droxide-ion concentration.
Calculations involving pOH are described.
This page titled 18.11: The pOH Concept is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.11: The pOH Concept by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227418.12: Strong and Weak Acids and Acid Ionization Constant (𝐾 a)
The etching of glass is a slow process that can produce beautiful artwork. Traditionally, the glass has been tr eated with dilute
hydrofluoric acid which gradually dissolves the glass under it. Parts of the piece that should not be etche d are covered with wax or
some other non-reactive material. In more recent tim es, compounds such as ammonium bifluoride have been u sed. Whichever
chemical is employed, the artist must be very careful n ot to get any on their skin.
Strong and Weak Acids and Acid Ionization Constant
Acids are classified as either strong or weak, based on t heir ionization in water. A strong acid is an acid which is completely
ionized in an aqueous solution. Hydrogen chloride ionize s completely into hydrogen ions and chloride ions in wate r.
A weak acid is an acid that ionizes only slightly in an aqueous solution. Acetic acid (found in vinegar) is a very common weak
acid. Its ionization is shown below.
The ionization of acetic acid is incomplete, and so the equation is shown with a double arrow. The extent of ionization of weak
acids varies, but is generally less than. A soluti on of acetic acid is only about ionized, meaning t hat the equilibrium
strongly favors the reactants.
Weak acids, like strong acids, ionize to yield the i on and a conjugate base. Because is a strong acid, it s conjugate base
is extremely weak. The chloride ion is incapable of a ccepting the ion and becoming again. In general, the stronger the acid,
the weaker its conjugate base. Likewise, the weaker the ac id, the stronger its conjugate base.
Table: Relative Strengths of Acids and their Conjugat e Bases
Acid Conjugate Base
Strong Acids
(hydrochloric acid) (strongest) (chloride ion) (weakest)
(sulfuric acid) (hydrogen sulfate ion)
(nitric acid) (nitrate ion)
Weak Acids
(phosphoric acid) (dihydrogen phosphate ion)
(acetic acid) (acetate ion)
(carbonic acid) (hydrogen carbonate ion)
(hydrocyanic acid) (weakest) (cyanide ion) (strongest)
Strong acids are ionized in solution. Weak acids ar e only slightly ionized. Phosphoric acid is stronger than acetic acid, and so
is ionized to a greater extent. Acetic acid is stronger than carbonic acid, and so on.
The Acid Ionization Constant,
The ionization for a general weak acid,, can be written as follows:
Because the acid is weak, an equilibrium expression ca n be written. An acid ionization constant is the equilibrium constant
for the ionization of an acid.

18.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332274The acid ionization represents the fraction of the original acid that has been ionized in solution. The refore, the numerical value of
is a reflection of the strength of the acid. Weak acids with relatively higher values are stronger tha n acids with relatively
lower values. Because strong acids are essentially ion ized, the concentration of the acid in the denomina tor is nearly zero
and the value approaches infinity. For this reason, val ues are generally reported for weak acids only.
The table below is a listing of acid ionization cons tants for several acids. Note that polyprotic acids h ave a distinct ionization
constant for each ionization step, with each successive ionization constant being smaller than the previous one.
Table: Acid Ionization Constants at
Name of Acid Ionization Equation
Sulfuric acidvery large
Oxalic acid
Phosphoric acid
Hydrofluoric acid
Nitrous acid
Benzoic acid
Acetic acid
Carbonic acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Summary
A strong acid is an acid which is completely ionized in an aqueous solution.
A weak acid is an acid that ionizes only slightly in an aque ous solution.
The acid ionization constant is defined.
This page titled 18.12: Strong and Weak Acids and Acid Ionization Con stant is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.12: Strong and Weak Acids and Acid Ionization Constant \(\l eft(K_\text{a} \right)\) by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original
source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

18.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227518.13: Strong and Weak Bases and Base Ionization Constant
All the complex electronics and apparatuses in a spac e shuttle generate heat, as do the astronauts. The s huttles have a complex
arrangement of systems to dissipate that heat into ou ter space. One of the components of this system is a s eries of coils filled with
ammonia that are located on the outside of the shutt le. Ammonia absorbs the heat and then releases it into space as the gas
circulates through the coils. This approach is both inex pensive and effective.
Strong and Weak Bases and Base Ionization Constant,
As with acids, bases can either be strong or weak, dependi ng on the extent of their ionization. A strong base is a base that ionizes
completely in an aqueous solution. The most common s trong bases are soluble metal hydroxide compounds su ch as potassium
hydroxide. Some metal hydroxides are not as strong, si mply because they are not as soluble. Calcium hydroxi de is only slightly
soluble in water, but the portion that does dissolve also dissociates into ions.
A weak base is a base that ionizes only slightly in an aqueous solu tion. Recall that a base can be defined as a substanc e that accepts
a hydrogen ion from another substance. When a weak bas e such as ammonia is dissolved in water, it accepts an ion from water,
forming the hydroxide ion and the conjugate acid of th e base, the ammonium ion.
The equilibrium greatly favors the reactants and the exte nt of ionization of the ammonia molecule is very small.
An equilibrium expression can be written for the react ions of weak bases with water. Because the concentration of water is
extremely large and virtually constant, the water is not included in the expression. A base ionization constant is the
equilibrium constant for the ionization of a base. For amm onia, the expression is:
The numerical value of is a reflection of the stre ngth of the base. Weak bases with relatively high val ues are stronger than
bases with relatively low values. The table below is a list ing of base ionization constants for several weak bases.
Table: Base Ionization Constants at
Name of Base Ionization Equation
Methylamine
Ammonia
Pyridine
Acetate ion
Fluoride ion
Urea
Notice that the conjugate base of a weak acid is also a weak base. For example, the acetate ion has a small te ndency to accept a
hydrogen ion from water to form acetic acid and the hydroxi de ion.
Summary
A strong base is a base that ionizes completely in an aqueou s solution.
A weak base is a base that ionizes only slightly in an aq ueous solution.
A base ionization constant is the equilibrium constan t for the ionization of a base.
The conjugate base of a weak acid is also a strong base.
This page titled 18.13: Strong and Weak Bases and Base Ionization Consta nt is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

18.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227521.13: Strong and Weak Bases and Base Ionization Constant by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

18.14.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332365
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
Learning Objectives
Assess the relative strengths of acids and bases according to their ionization constants
We can rank the strengths of acids by the extent to which they ionize in aqueous solution. The reaction o f an acid with water is
given by the general expression:
Water is the base that reacts with the acid, is the conjugate base of the acid, and the hydronium ion is the conjugate acid
of water. A strong acid yields 100% (or very nearly so) of and when the acid ionizes in water; Figure list s several
strong acids. A weak acid gives small amounts of and.
Figure: Some of the common strong acids and bases are listed h ere.
Six Strong Acids Six Strong Bases
perchloric acid lithium hydroxide
hydrochloric acid sodium hydroxide
hydrobromic acid potassium hydroxide
hydroiodic acid calcium hydroxide
nitric acid strontium hydroxide
sulfuric acid barium hydroxide
The relative strengths of acids may be determined by measuring their equilibrium constants in aqueous solut ions. In solutions of
the same concentration, stronger acids ionize to a gre ater extent, and so yield higher concentrations of h ydronium ions than do
weaker acids.
We can rank the strengths of bases by their tendency to form hydroxide ions in aqueous solution. The rea ction of a base with water
is given by:
Water is the acid that reacts with the base, is the conjugate acid of the base, and the hydroxide ion is the conjugate base of
water. A strong base yields 100% (or very nearly so) of OH and HB when it reacts with water; Figure lists sever al strong
bases. A weak base yields a small proportion of hydrox ide ions. Soluble ionic hydroxides such as NaOH are consid ered strong
bases because they dissociate completely when dissolved in water.
The Ionization of Weak Acids and Weak Bases
Many acids and bases are weak; that is, they do not i onize fully in aqueous solution. A solution of a wea k acid in water is a mixture
of the nonionized acid, hydronium ion, and the conju gate base of the acid, with the nonionized acid prese nt in the greatest
concentration. Thus, a weak acid increases the hydroniu m ion concentration in an aqueous solution (but not as much as the same
amount of a strong acid).
Acetic acid () is a weak acid. When we add acetic acid to wat er, it ionizes to a small extent according to the equation:
giving an equilibrium mixture with most of the acid present in the nonionized (molecular) form. This equi librium, like other
equilibria, is dynamic; acetic acid molecules donate hydrogen ions to water molecules and form hydronium io ns and acetate ions at
the same rate that hydronium ions donate hydrogen i ons to acetate ions to reform acetic acid molecules and water molecules. We
can tell by measuring the pH of an aqueous solution o f known concentration that only a fraction of the wea k acid is ionized at any
moment (Figure). The remaining weak acid is present in t he nonionized form.− +

18.14.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332365

Figure: pH paper indicates that a 0.l-M solution of (beaker on left) has a pH of 1. The acid is fully ion ized and =
0.1 M. A 0.1-M solution of CH CO H (beaker on right) has a pH of 3 (= 0.001 M) because the weak acid CH CO H is
only partially ionized. In this solution,. (credit: mo dification of work by Sahar Atwa)

At equilibrium, a solution of a weak base in water is a mixture of the nonionized base, the conjugate acid o f the weak base, and
hydroxide ion with the nonionized base present in th e greatest concentration. Thus, a weak base increases the hydroxide ion
concentration in an aqueous solution (but not as much as the sa me amount of a strong base).
For example, a solution of the weak base trimethylamine, (CH) N, in water reacts according to the equation:
This gives an equilibrium mixture with most of the ba se present as the nonionized amine. This equilibrium is analogous to that
described for weak acids.
We can confirm by measuring the pH of an aqueous solu tion of a weak base of known concentration that only a fraction of the base
reacts with water (Figure 14.4.5). The remaining weak base is present as the unreacted form.
Figure: pH paper indicates that a 0.1-M solution of N H (left) is weakly basic. The solution has a pOH of 3 ([OH] = 0.001
M) because the weak base NH only partially reacts with water. A 0.1-M solution of NaOH (right) has a pOH of 1 because NaOH is
a strong base (credit: modification of work by Sahar A twa).
Example: Formic Acid in Ant stings
Formic acid, HCO H, is the irritant that causes the body’s reaction to ant stings.3 2 3 2
3 3
3−

18.14.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332365
The pain of an ant’s sting is caused by formic acid. (c redit: John Tann)
Summary
The strengths of acids and bases in aqueous solutions can be determined by their acid or base ionization constants. Strong acids are
completely ionized in aqueous solution because their conjugate bases are weaker bases than water. Weak acid s are only partially
ionized because their conjugate bases are strong enou gh to compete successfully with water for possession of protons. Strong bases
react with water to quantitatively form hydroxide ions. W eak bases give only small amounts of hydroxide ion.

Glossary
percent ionization
ratio of the concentration of the ionized acid to the i nitial acid concentration, times 100
Contributors
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax.

18.15.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227618.15: Calculating 𝐾 a and 𝐾 b
The pH meter was invented because Florida orange growers needed a way to test the acidity of their fruit. The first meter was
invented by Arnold Beckman, who went on to form Beckman Instruments. Beckman's business was very successful, a nd he used
much of his fortune to fund science education and rese arch. The Beckman family donated $40 million to buil d the Beckman
Institute at the University of Illinois.
Calculating and
The numerical value of and can be determined from an experiment. A solution of known concentration is prepared and its
pH is measured with an instrument called a pH meter.
Figure: A pH meter is a laboratory device that provi des quick, accurate measurements of the pH of solutions. (CC BY-NC;
CK-12)
A solution of formic acid is prepared and its pH is measu red to be 2.04. Determine the for formic acid.
Solution
Step 1: List the known values and plan the problem.
Known
Initial
pH
Unknown
First, the pH is used to calculate the at equilibrium. An ICE table is set up in order to determine the conce ntrations of
and at equilibrium. All concentrations are then sub stituted into the expression and the value is
calculated.
Step 2: Solve.
Since each formic acid molecule that ionizes yields o ne ion and one formate ion, the concentrations of and
are equal at equilibrium. We assume that the initia l concentrations of each ion are zero, resulting in the following ICE
table.
Now, substituting into the expression gives:Example

18.15.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332276Step 3: Think about your result.
The value of is consistent with that of a weak acid. Two significant figures are appropriate for the answer, since there are
two digits after the decimal point in the reported pH.
Similar steps can be taken to determine the of a ba se. For example, a solution of the weak base ethylamine
has a pH of 12.31.
Since one of the products of the ionization reaction is the hydroxide ion, we need to first find the at equilibrium. The pOH is
. The is then found from. The ICE table is then set up as shown below.
Substituting into the expression yields the for ethylam ine.
Summary
This page titled 18.15: Calculating and is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.14: Calculating Acid and Base Dissociation Constants by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

18.16.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227718.16: Calculating pH of Weak Acid and Base Solutions
Bees are beautiful creatures that help plants flouri sh. They carry pollen from one plant to another to facilitate plant growth and
development. However, they can be troublesome when they sting! For those who are allergic to bee venom, this ca n be a serious,
life-threatening problem. For all other humans, it can be a painful experience. When stung by a bee, one fi rst-aid treatment is to
apply a paste of baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) t o the stung area. This weak base helps with the itching and swelling that
accompanies the bee sting.
Calculating pH of Weak Acid and Base Solutions
The and values have been determined for a great m any acids and bases, as shown in Tables 21.12.2 and 21. 13.1. These can
be used to calculate the pH of any solution of a weak acid o r base whose ionization constant is known.
Calculate the pH of a solution of nitrous acid. The for nitrous acid is.
Solution
Step 1: List the known values and plan the problem.
Known
Initial
Unknown
First, an ICE table is set up with the variable used to signif y the change in concentration of the substance due t o ionization of
the acid. Then the expression is used to solve for a nd calculate the pH.
Step 2: Solve.
The expression and value are used to set up an equatio n to solve for.
The quadratic equation is required to solve this equa tion for. However, a simplification can be made of th e fact that the extent
of ionization of weak acids is small. The value of will be significantly less than 2.00, so the " " in the den ominator can be
dropped.
Since the variable represents the hydrogen-ion concent ration, the pH of the solution can now be calculated.
Step 3: Think about your result.
The pH of a solution of a strong acid would be equal t o. The higher pH of the nitrous acid is
consistent with it being a weak acid and therefore not as ac idic as a strong acid would be.
The procedure for calculating the pH of a solution o f a weak base is similar to that of the weak acid in t he example. However, the
variable will represent the concentration of the hy droxide ion. The pH is found by taking the negative logarithm to get the pOH,Example

18.16.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332277followed by subtracting from 14 to get the pH.
Summary
The procedure for calculating the pH of a weak acid or base is illustrated.
This page titled 18.16: Calculating pH of Weak Acid and Base Solutions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.15: Calculating pH of Weak Acid and Base Solutions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

18.17.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227818.17: Neutralization Reaction and Net Ionic Equations for Neutralization Reactions
Pouring concrete and working it are messy jobs. In the p rocess, a lot of wastewater with an alkaline pH is gene rated. Often,
regulations require that this wastewater be cleaned up at the site. One practical way to neutralize the basic pH is to bubble into
the water. The carbon dioxide forms a weak acid (carbon ic acid,) in solution which serves to bring the alka line pH down to
something closer to neutral.
Neutralization Reactions and Net Ionic Equations for Neutralization Reactions
A neutralization reaction is a reaction in which an acid and a base react in a n aqueous solution to produce a salt and water. The
aqueous sodium chloride that is produced in the react ion is called a salt. A salt is an ionic compound composed of a cation from a
base and an anion from an acid. A salt is essentially any ioni c compound that is neither an acid nor a base.
Strong Acid-Strong Base Reactions
When equal amounts of a strong acid such as hydrochl oric acid are mixed with a strong base such as sodium hydroxide, the result
is a neutral solution. The products of the reaction d o not have the characteristics of either an acid or a base. The balanced molecular
equation is:
Chemical reactions occurring in aqueous solution ar e more accurately represented with a net ionic equat ion. The full ionic equation
for the neutralization of hydrochloric acid by sodium hydr oxide is written as follows:
Since the acid and base are both strong, they are ful ly ionized and so are written as ions, as is the form ed as a product. The
sodium and chloride ions are spectator ions in the reactio n, leaving the following as the net ionic reaction.
All neutralization reactions of a strong acid with a strong base simplify to the net ionic reaction of hyd rogen ion combining with
hydroxide ion to produce water.
What if the acid is a diprotic acid such as sulfuric acid? The balanced molecular equation now involves a 1:2 ratio between acid
and base.
In order for the reaction to be a full neutralizati on, twice as many moles of must react with the. The s odium sulfate
salt is soluble, and so the net ionic reaction is aga in the same. Different mole ratios occur for other po lyprotic acids or bases with
multiple hydroxides such as.
Reactions Involving a Weak Acid or Weak Base
Reactions where at least one of the components is weak do not generally result in a neutral solution. The re action between weak
nitrous acid and strong potassium hydroxide is shown below.
In order to write the net ionic equation, the weak aci d must be written as a molecule since it does not ioni ze to a great extent in
water. The base and the salt are fully dissociated.
The only spectator ion is the potassium ion, resulting in t he net ionic equation:
The strong hydroxide ion essentially "forces" the wea k nitrous acid to become ionized. The hydrogen ion f rom the acid combines
with the hydroxide ion to form water, leaving the nitr ite ion as the other product. The resulting solution is not neutral (pH), but

18.17.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332278instead is slightly basic.
Reactions can also involve a weak base and strong acid, resulting in a solution that is slightly acidic. Th e molecular and net ionic
equations for the reaction of hydrochloric acid and am monia are shown below.
Reactions between acids and bases that are both weak may result in solutions that are neutral, acidic, or basic.
Summary
A neutralization reaction is a reaction in which an acid and a base react in an aqueous solution to produce a sa lt and water.
Equations for acid-base neutralizations are given.
Net ionic equations for neutralization reactions are gi ven.
This page titled 18.17: Neutralization Reaction and Net Ionic Equati ons for Neutralization Reactions is shared under a CK-12 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.16: Neutralization Reaction and Net Ionic Equations for Neutralization Reactions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original
source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

18.18.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33227918.18: Titration Experiment
A large amount of current research involves the deve lopment of biodiesel fuels. Often this material can be m ade from used
vegetable oils. The vegetable oil is treated with lye to create the biofuel. In the oils is a variable am ount of acid that needs to be
determined, so that the workers will know how much lye to add to make the final fuel. Before the lye is adde d, the native vegetable
oil is titrated to find out how much free acid is pres ent. Then, the amount of lye added can be adjusted t o take into account the
amount needed to neutralize these free acids.
Titration Experiment
In the neutralization of hydrochloric acid by sodium hydr oxide, the mole ratio of acid to base is 1:1.
One mole of would be fully neutralized by one mole o f. If instead the hydrochloric acid was reacted with barium
hydroxide, the mole ratio would be 2:1.
Now two moles of would be required to neutralize one m ole of. The mole ratio ensures that the number of mo les of
ions supplied by the acid is equal to the number o f ions supplied by the base. This must be the case f or neutralization to
occur. The equivalence point is the point in a neutralization reaction where the number of moles of hydrogen ions is equal to the
number of moles of hydroxide ions.
In the laboratory, it is useful to have an experimen t where the unknown concentration of an acid or a base can be determined. This
can be accomplished by performing a controlled neut ralization reaction. A titration is an experiment where a volume of a solution
of known concentration is added to a volume of anoth er solution in order to determine its concentration. Many titrations are acidbase neutralization reactions, though other types of titr ations can also be performed.
In order to perform an acid-base titration, the chemi st must have a way to visually detect that the neutra lization reaction has
occurred. An indicator is a substance that has a distinctly different color when in an acidic or basic solution. A commonly used
indicator for strong acid-strong base titrations is p henolphthalein. Solutions in which a few drops of phenol phthalein have been
added turn from colorless to brilliant pink as the sol ution turns from acidic to basic. The steps in a titr ation reaction are outlined
below.
1. A measured volume of an acid of unknown concentration is added to an Erlenmeyer flask.
2. Several drops of an indicator are added to the acid and m ixed by swirling the flask.
3. A buret is filled with a base solution of known molarity.
4. The stopcock of the buret is opened and base is slowly a dded to the acid, while the flask is constantly swirled t o ensure mixing.
The stopcock is closed at the exact point at which the indic ator just changes color.
The standard solution is the solution in a titration whose concentration is known. In the titration described above, the base
solution is the standard solution. It is very importan t in a titration to add the solution from the buret slowly, so that the point at
which the indicator changes color can be found accura tely. The end point of a titration is the point at which the indicator changes
color. When phenolphthalein is the indicator, the end p oint will be signified by a faint pink color.
Figure: Phenolphthalein in basic solution. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)

18.18.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332279Summary
The equivalence point is the point in a neutralization reaction where the number of moles of hydrogen ions is equal to the
number of moles of hydroxide ions.
A titration is an experiment where a volume of a solutio n of known concentration is added to a volume of another so lution in
order to determine its concentration. (Many titrations are acid-base neutralization reactions.)
An indicator is a substance that has a distinctly differen t color when in an acidic or basic solution.
The process for carrying out a titration is described.
This page titled 18.18: Titration Experiment is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.17: Titration Experiment by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.19.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228018.19: Titration Calculations
The manufacture of soap requires a number of chemistr y techniques. One necessary piece of information is the saponification
number. This is the amount of base needed to hydrol yze a certain amount of fat to produce the free fat ty acids that are an essential
part of the final product. The fat is heated with a known amount of base (usually or). After hydrolysis is complete, the
leftover base is titrated to determine how much was needed to hydrolyze the fat sample.
Titration Calculations
At the equivalence point in a neutralization, the moles of ac id are equal to the moles of base.
Recall that the molarity of a solution is defined a s the moles of the solute divided by the liters of so lution. So the moles of
solute are therefore equal to the molarity of a solution m ultiplied by the volume in liters.
We can then set the moles of acid equal to the moles of base.
is the molarity of the acid, while is the molarity o f the base. and are the volumes of the acid and base, res pectively.
Suppose that a titration is performed and of is requ ired to reach the end point when titrated against
of of unknown concentration. The above equation can b e used to solve for the molarity of the acid.
The higher molarity of the acid compared to the base in this case means that a smaller volume of the aci d is required to reach the
equivalence point.
The above equation works only for neutralizations in which there is a 1:1 ratio between the acid and the b ase. The example below
demonstrates the technique to solve a titration problem for a titration of sulfuric acid with sodium hydroxide.
In a titration of sulfuric acid against sodium hydr oxide, of is required to neutralize of.
Calculate the molarity of the sulfuric acid.
Solution
Step 1: List the known values and plan the problem.
Molarity
V olume
V olume
Unknown
First determine the moles of in the reaction. From t he mole ratio, calculate the moles of that reacted. Finally,
divide the moles of by its volume to get the molarity.
Step 2: Solve.Example

18.19.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332280Step 3: Think about your result.
The volume of required is smaller than the volume o f because of the two hydrogen ions contributed by eac h
molecule.
Summary
The process of calculating concentration from titration data is described and illustrated.
This page titled 18.19: Titration Calculations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.18: Titration Calculations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.20.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228118.20: Titration Curves
The - plot that we know of as a graph was the brainchil d of the French mathematician-philosopher Rene Descart es (1596-1650).
His studies in mathematics led him to develop what was k nown as "Cartesian geometry", including the concept of today's graphs.
The coordinates are often referred to as Cartesian coo rdinates.
Titration Curves
As base is added to acid at the beginning of a titrat ion, the pH rises very slowly. Nearer to the equivalence p oint, the pH begins to
rapidly increase. If the titration is a strong acid with a strong base, the pH at the equivalence point is equal to 7. A bit past the
equivalence point, the rate of change of the pH again slows down. A titration curve is a graphical representation of the pH of a
solution during a titration. The figure below shows two different examples of a strong acid-strong base tit ration curve. On the left is
a titration in which the base is added to the acid, a nd so the pH progresses from low to high. On the right i s a titration in which the
acid is added to the base. In this case, the pH starts out high and decreases during the titration. In both cases, the equivalence point
is reached when the moles of acid and base are equal and t he pH is 7. This also corresponds to the color change of the indicator.
Figure: A titration curve shows the pH changes that oc cur during the titration of an acid with a base. On the left, base is
being added to acid. On the right, acid is being add ed to base. In both cases, the equivalence point is at pH 7. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Titration curves can also be generated in the case of a weak acid-strong base titration or a strong acid-wea k base titration. The
general shape of the titration curve is the same, but the pH at the equivalence point is different. In a wea k acid-strong base titration,
the pH is greater than 7 at the equivalence point. In a stron g acid-weak base titration, the pH is less than 7 at the equi valence point.
Figure: Titration curve of weak acid and strong base. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Summary
A titration curve is a graphical representation of the p H of a solution during a titration.
In a strong acid-strong base titration, the equivalence point is reached when the moles of acid and base are equal and the pH is
7.

18.20.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332281In a weak acid-strong base titration, the pH is greater than 7 at the equivalence point.
In a strong acid-weak base titration, the pH is less than 7 a t the equivalence point.
This page titled 18.20: Titration Curves is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.19: Titration Curves by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

18.21.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228218.21: Indicators
"Boil Them Cabbage Down" is an old bluegrass song. Many p eople enjoy the music, but chemistry students also enj oy the product
of boiled cabbage. Extracting the anthocyanin dye fr om cabbage leaves with boiling water gives a solution t hat is red when acidic,
purple when neutral, and green to yellow when basic.
Indicators
An acid-base indicator is a substance that displays different colors when in the presence of an acid or a base. How does that work?
An indicator is a weak acid that ionizes within a known pH range, usually about 2 pH units. We can represent t he protonated form
of the indicator molecule as and the deprotonated form a s. The following equilibrium exists for the indicator:
According to Le Chatelier's principle, the addition of ions (as in a low pH solution) drives the equilibr ium to the left and the
protonated predominates. The addition of (as in a high pH solution) decreases the concentration and dr ives the
equilibrium to the right and the deprotonated pred ominates. To be useful as an indicator, the two forms must be different colors.
In the case of phenolphthalein, the protonated form is colorless, while the deprotonated form is pink. The figure below shows a
variety of acid-base indicators that can be used in titr ation experiments.
Figure: pH indicators. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)
Depending on the pH at the equivalence point, the appr opriate indicator must be chosen. For example, bromphe nol blue has a
yellow color below a pH of about 3 and a blue-violet c olor above a pH of about 4. Bromphenol blue would not be a good choice as
the indicator for a strong acid-strong base titration, because the pH is 7 at the equivalence point. Instead, i t could be used for a
strong acid-weak base titration, where the pH at the equival ence point is lower.
Most indicators have two colored forms. Universal indic ator displays the entire rainbow of colors from low pH t o high pH (see
figure below). Universal indicator is used to make pH paper, wh ich can be used to quickly test solutions for their approx imate pH.
Figure: Universal indicator tape. (CC BY-NC; CK-12)

18.21.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332282Summary
An acid-base indicator is a substance that displays differ ent colors when in the presence of an acid or a base.
Examples of acid-base indicators are given.
This page titled 18.21: Indicators is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.20: Indicators by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

18.22.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228318.22: Hydrolysis of Salts- Equations
Baking seems easy with all the pre-mixed items availab le. ("just add water and stir"). However, there is a goo d amount of
chemistry involved in baking with ingredients that ar e measured out. One important ingredient is baking powd er. The fluffiness in
the final product of a non-yeast recipe is usually d ue to the carbon dioxide formed by baking powder. One popular brand uses a mix
of sodium bicarbonate and sodium aluminum sulfate to pro duce the. The reaction is:
If all goes well, the biscuits rise, the pancakes are fluffy, and everybody is happy.
Hydrolysis of Salts: Equations
A salt is an ionic compound that is formed when an aci d and a base neutralize each other. While it may see m that salt solutions are
always neutral, they can frequently be either acidic or basi c.
Consider the salt formed when the weak acid hydrofluo ric acid is neutralized by the strong base sodium hy droxide. The molecular
and net ionic equations are shown below.
Since sodium fluoride is soluble, the sodium ion is a spectator ion in the neutralization reaction. The flu oride ion is capable of
reacting, to a small extent, with water, accepting a proton.
The fluoride ion is acting as a weak Brønsted-Lowry ba se. The hydroxide ion that is produced as a result of the above reaction
makes the solution slightly basic. Salt hydrolysis is a reaction in which one of the ions from a salt reacts with water, forming either
an acidic or basic solution.
Salts That Form Basic Solutions
When solid sodium fluoride is dissolved into water, it completely dissociates into sodium ions and fluoride ions. The sodium ions
do not have any capability of hydrolyzing, but the fluoride ions hydrolyze to produce a small amount of hydrofluoric acid and
hydroxide ion.
Salts that are derived from the neutralization of a we ak acid by a strong base will always produce salt sol utions that
are basic.
Salts That Form Acidic Solutions
Ammonium chloride is a salt that is formed when the str ong acid is neutralized by the weak base. Ammonium
chloride is soluble in water. The chloride ion produ ced is incapable of hydrolyzing because it is the co njugate base of the strong
acid. In other words, the ion cannot accept a proton from water to form and, as the fluoride ion did i n the
previous section. However, the ammonium ion is capable of re acting slightly with water, donating a proton and so actin g as an acid.
Salts That Form Neutral Solutions
A salt that is derived from the reaction of a strong acid with a strong base forms a solution that has a p H of 7. An example is
sodium chloride, formed from the neutralization of by. A solution of in water has no acidic or basic properties,
since neither ion is capable of hydrolyzing. Other sal ts that form neutral solutions include potassium nitr ate and lithium
bromide. The table below summarizes how to determine the a cidity or basicity of a salt solution.
Table

18.22.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332283Salt formed from: Salt Solution
Strong acid Strong base Neutral
Strong acid Weak base Acidic
Weak acid Strong base Basic
Salts formed from the reaction of a weak acid and a wea k base are more difficult to analyze due to competin g hydrolysis reactions
between the cation and the anion. These salts are not considere d in this chapter's concept.
Summary
Salt hydrolysis is a reaction in which one of the ions from a salt reacts with water, forming either an acidic or basic s olution.
Salts that are derived from the neutralization of a weak acid by a strong base will always produce salt solutions t hat are basic.
Salts that are derived from the neutralization of a stro ng acid by a weak base will always produce salt solutions tha t are acidic.
A salt that is derived from the reaction of a strong aci d with a strong base forms a solution that has a pH of 7.
This page titled 18.22: Hydrolysis of Salts- Equations is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.21: Hydrolysis of Salts - Equations by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

18.23.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228418.23: Buffers
Diabetes mellitus is a disorder of glucose metabolism in which insulin production by the pancreas is impaire d. Since insulin helps
glucose enter the cells, a decrease of this hormone me ans that glucose cannot be used in its normal fashio n. When this happens, the
body begins to break down fats, producing a decrease i n blood pH. Chemical systems in the body can balance t his pH shift for a
while, but excessive acid production can create serio us problems if not corrected by administering insulin to restore normal glucose
use.
Buffers
If only of hydrochloric acid is added to of pure water, the pH drops drastically from 7.0 to 4.0. This is a 1000fold increase in the acidity of the solution. For man y purposes, it is desirable to have a solution which is capable of resisting such
large changes in pH when relatively small amounts of ac id or base are added to it. Such a solution is called a buffer. A buffer is a
solution of a weak acid or a base and its salt. Both c omponents must be present for the system to act as a buffer to resist changes in
pH. Commercial buffer solutions, which have a wide variety of pH values, can be obtained.
Some common buffer systems are listed in the table below.
Table: Some Common Buffers
Buffer System Buffer ComponentspH of buffer (equal molarities of both
components)
Acetic acid/acetate ion / 4.74
Carbonic acid/hydrogen carbonate ion / 6.38
Dihydrogen phosphate ion/hydrogen
phosphate ion/ 7.21
Ammonia/ammonium ion / 9.25
One example of a buffer is a solution made of acetic acid (the weak acid) and sodium acetate (the salt). T he pH of a buffer
consisting of and is 4.74. If of is added to of t he buffer, the pH only
decreases to 4.73. This ability to "soak up" the additio nal hydrogen ions from the that was added is due to the re action below.
Since both the acetate ion and the acetic acid were a lready present in the buffer, the only thing that ch anges is the ratio of one to the
other. Small changes in that ratio have only very minor effects on the pH.
If of were added to another of the same buffer, the pH would only increase to 4.76. In this case the buff er
takes up the additional hydroxide ions.
Again the ratio of acetate ion to acetic acid changes sli ghtly, this time causing a very small increase in the pH.
It is possible to add so much acid or base to a buff er that its ability to resist a significant change i n pH is overwhelmed. The buffer
capacity is the amount of acid or base that can be added to a buffer solution before a large change in pH occur s. The buffer
capacity is exceeded when the number of moles of or that are added to the buffer exceeds the number o f moles of the
buffer components.
Summary
A buffer is a solution of a weak acid or a base and its salt.
The buffer capacity is the amount of acid or base that can be added to a buffer solution before a large change in pH occurs.
Reactions showing how buffers regulate pH are described.

18.23.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332284This page titled 18.23: Buffers is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
21.23: Buffers by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
19: Nuclear Chemistry
19.1: Discovery of Radioactivity
19.2: Nuclear Decay Processes
19.3: Detection of Radioactivity
19.4: Half-Life
19.5: Background Radiation
19.6: Nuclear Fission Processes
19.7: Nuclear Power Generation
19.8: Nuclear Fusion
19.9: Penetrating Ability of Emissions
19.10: Effects of Radiation
19.11: Radioisotopes in Medical Diagnosis and Treatment
19.12: PET Scans
Template:HideTOC
Contributors and Attributions
This page titled 19: Nuclear Chemistry is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

19.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228619.1: Discovery of Radioactivity
Figure: The radioactive danger symbol. (By Clkr-Free-Vector-Images; under Pixabay license)
If you visit the nuclear medicine department of a la rge hospital, you are very likely to see the symbol sh own above. This sign
means that radioactive materials are present, and spec ial safety precautions need to be taken. These materia ls are used for the
diagnosis and treatment of many diseases. The people u sing these materials are specially trained to handle t hem safely. Radioactive
materials can be dangerous and should be respected, but ne ed not be feared.
Discovery of Radioactivity
John Dalton first proposed his atomic theory in an 180 4 lecture to the Royal Institution, a prestigious Bri tish scientific society. In
this talk, he put forth the idea that all atoms of an element were identical, and that atoms were indestruc tible. In a little over 100
years, both of these ideas were shown to be incorrect.
In 1919, studies on atomic weights led Francis Aston (1 877-1925) to the conclusion that some elements with different atomic
weights were actually the same element in different is otope forms. Aston used a mass spectrograph to separate isotopes of different
elements. He won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this work in 192 2.
Natural Radioactivity
In 1895, Wilhelm Röntgen produced great interest ar ound what caused the phenomenon of x-rays. One resear cher of this
phenomenon was Henri Becquerel. Becquerel studied the fl uorescent properties of uranium salts, believing they had something to
do with x-rays. He soon learned that uranium could expos e a photographic plate without an external input of energy (thought to be
needed to produce uranium fluorescence). Becquerel a lso showed that the uranium salt emissions could be aff ected by a magnetic
field, which was not true for x-rays.
Figure: Becquerel's experiment: uranium exposure to p hotographic plate.
Pierre and Marie Curie studied the properties of uran ium salts with the express purpose of identifying the details of these
emissions. They were the first to coin the term " radioactivity ", meaning the spontaneous emission of radiation in the form of
particles or high energy photons, resulting from a nu clear reaction. The major contributions to the work came from Marie, who
showed that the amount of radioactivity present was du e to the amount of a specific element, and not due t o some chemical

19.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332286reaction. She discovered the element polonium and nam ed it after her native Poland. Madame Curie shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in
Physics with her husband Pierre and Henri Becquerel. She won th e Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911.
Figure: Pierre and Marie Curie in their lab.
Ernest Rutherford, a later researcher, was able to dem onstrate three different types of radioactive emissio ns. These emission types
differed in terms of mass, charge, and their ability to penetrate materials. He designated them simply as alpha emissions, beta
emissions, and gamma emissions.
Radioactivity involves the spontaneous emission of ma terial and/or energy from the nucleus of an atom. Th e most common
radioactive atoms have high atomic numbers and cont ain a large excess of neutrons. Some typical radioacti ve elements are
technetium (atomic number 43), promethium (atomic nu mber 61), and all elements atomic number 84 (poloni um) and higher. There
are four primary types of emission, either involving the release of a particle from the nucleus or the re lease of energy. In many
instances, both energy and a particle are produced by th e radioactive event.
It should be noted that some elements considered to be stable do have radioactive isotopes. Carbon-14 is r adioactive, but this
isotope is only a small fraction of the total amoun t of carbon in existence (about one part per trillio n carbon atoms). Hydrogen also
has a radioactive isotope known as hydrogen-3 or tritium, again a very small fraction of the total elemental hydrogen p resent.
Summary
Francis Aston discovered that some elements with differen t atomic weights were actually the same element in differ ent isotope
forms.
Henri Becquerel showed that uranium salt emissions could be affected by a magnetic field, which was not true for x-rays.
Marie and Pierre Curie were the first to coin the term radioactivity, meaning the spontaneous emission of radiation in the form
of particles or high energy photons, resulting from a nucle ar reaction.
Ernest Rutherford, a later researcher, was able to demonstr ate three different types of radioactive emissions: alpha
emissions, beta emissions, and gamma emissions.
This page titled 19.1: Discovery of Radioactivity is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.1: Discovery of Radioactivity by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

19.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228719.2: Nuclear Decay Processes
Food irradiation is a sensitive subject for many peo ple. The practice involves exposing food to ionizing radiation in order to kill
harmful bacteria (such as salmonella) that cause sic kness. The food is essentially unchanged and does not lo se any nutritive value.
Parasites and insect pests are easily destroyed by this process, while bacteria take longer to kill. Viruses a re not affected by the
radiation treatment. But don't worry—the food is not ra dioactive, and you will not glow in the dark if you eat i t.
Nuclear Decay Processes
Radioactive decay involves the emission of a particle and/or energy as one atom changes into another. In most instances, the atom
changes its identity to become a new element. There a re four different types of emissions that occur.
Alpha Emission
Alpha decay involves the release of helium ions from the nucleus of an atom. This ion consists of two protons and two
neutrons and has a charge. Release of an -particle p roduces a new atom that has an atomic number two less t han the original
atom and an atomic weight that is four less. A typical alpha decay reaction is the conversion of uranium-238 to thor ium:
We see a decrease of two in the atomic number (uraniu m to thorium) and a decrease of four in the atomic weight (238 to 234).
Usually the emission is not written with atomic number and weight indicated since it is a common particle wh ose properties should
be memorized. Quite often the alpha emission is accom panied by gamma radiation, a form of energy releas e. Many of the
largest elements in the periodic table are alpha-emitters.
Figure: Emission of an alpha particle from the nucleu s.
Beta Emission
Beta decay is a more complicated process. Unlike the -emission, which simply expels a particle, the -emission involves the
transformation of a neutron in the nucleus to a prot on and an electron. The electron is then ejected fro m the nucleus. In the process,
the atomic number increases by one while the atomic we ight stays the same. As is the case with -emissions, -emissi ons are often
accompanied by -radiation.
Figure: Beta emission.

19.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332287A typical beta decay process involves carbon-14, oft en used in radioactive dating techniques. The reactio n forms nitrogen-14 and
an electron:
Again, the beta emission is usually simply indicated b y the Greek letter; memorization of the process is n ecessary in order to
follow nuclear calculations in which the Greek letter appear s without further notation.
Positron Emission
A positron is a positive electron (a form of antimatter). This rare type of emission occurs when a proton is conve rted to a neutron
and a positron in the nucleus, with ejection of the po sitron. The atomic number will decrease by one, while the atomic weight does
not change. A positron is often designated by.
Carbon-11 emits a positron to become boron-11:
Electron Capture
An alternate way for a nuclide to increase its neutro n to proton ratio is by a phenomenon called electron capture. In electron
capture, an electron from an inner orbital is captur ed by the nucleus of the atom, and combined with a pr oton to form a neutron. For
example, silver-106 undergoes electron capture to become p alladium-106.
Note that the overall result of electron capture is i dentical to positron emission. The atomic number decr eases by one while the
mass number remains the same.
Gamma Emission
Gamma radiation is simply energy. It may be released by itself or, m ore commonly, in association with other radiation eve nts.
There is no change of atomic number or atomic weight in a simple -emission. Often, an isotope may produce -radiation as a
result of a transition in a metastable isotope. This type of isotope may just "settle", with a shifting of particles in the nucleus. The
composition of the atom is not altered, but the nucle us could be considered more "comfortable" after the shift. This shift increases
the stability of the isotope from the energetically u nstable (or "metastable") isotope to a more stable form o f the nucleus.
Summary
Radioactive decay involves the emission of a particle and/ or energy as one atom changes into another.
Alpha decay involves the release of helium ions from the nucleus of an atom.
Beta decay involves the transformation of a neutron in the nucleus to a proton and an electron.
A positron is a positive electron (a form of antimatte r). This rare type of emission occurs when a proton is con verted to a
neutron and a positron in the nucleus, with ejection of th e positron.
Gamma radiation is simply energy. It may be released b y itself or, more commonly, in association with other radia tion
events.
This page titled 19.2: Nuclear Decay Processes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.2: Nuclear Decay Processes by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

19.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228819.3: Detection of Radioactivity
Uranium is worth more on the open market than it was sev eral years ago. So, people are out there looking for m ore uranium.
However, uranium-hunters are not waving Geiger counters a round to find this material—all the surface uranium has been found.
Instead, they must study geology. Deep holes are drill ed to explore the underground geology of a site, an d the rocks obtained are
chemically analyzed. No more clicking—just modern-day g eology and chemistry.
Detection of Radioactivity
Radioactivity is determined by measuring the number of decay processes per unit time. Perhaps the easiest way is simply to
determine the number of counts/minute, with each cou nt measuring a single decay process, such as the emissi on of an -particle. A
particular isotope may have an activity of 5,000 co unts/minute while another isotope might only have. The amount
of activity gives a rough indication of the amount of the radioisotope present—the higher the activity, the more radioactive isotope
in the sample.
Units of Measurement
The curie is one measure of the rate of decay (named after Pier re and Marie Curie). One curie is equivalent to
disintegrations per second. Since this is obviously a large and unwieldy number, radiation is often expr essed in millicuries or
microcuries (still very large numbers). Another measu re is the becquerel, named after Henri Becquerel. The becquerel is
defined as an activity of one disintegration/second. Both of these units are concerned with the disinteg ration rate of the radioactive
isotope, and give no indication of dosage to the target material.
Personal Dosimeters
Measurement of exposure to radioactivity is important for anyone who deals with radioactive materials on a regular basis. Perhaps
the simplest device is a personal dosimeter —a film badge that will fog up when exposed to radiati on. The amount of fogging is
proportional to the amount of radiation present. The se devices are not very sensitive to low levels of r adiation. More sensitive
systems use crystals that respond in some way to radio activity by registering the number of emissions in a given time. These
systems tend to be more sensitive and more reliable than fi lm badges.
Figure: Dosimeter.
Geiger Counters
A Geiger counter provides a sensitive means of detecting radioactiv ity. A tube is filled with an inert gas, which will con duct
electricity when radiation enters it. When a charged particle comes into the tube, it changes the electri cal potential between the
anode and the cathode. This change in potential in the tube produces a change in voltage in the electr ical circuit and registers as a
count. Geiger counters are fairly inexpensive and re liable, so they are useful in a wide range of applica tions. More complicated
types of counters are also available, but are generally use d in sophisticated experiments.

19.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332288
Figure: Geiger counter.
Summary
The curie is one measure of the rate of radioactive d ecay; one curie is equivalent to disintegrations per sec ond.
Another measure of radioactive decay is the becquerel, de fined as an activity of one disintegration/second.
The dosimeter is a device to measure radioactivity—a f ilm badge that will fog up when exposed to radiation.
The Geiger counter provides a sensitive means of detecting radioactivity.
This page titled 19.3: Detection of Radioactivity is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.3: Detection of Radioactivity by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

19.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33228919.4: Half-Life
Uranium isotopes produce plutonium-239 as a decay pro duct. The plutonium can be used in nuclear weapons an d is a power source
for nuclear reactors, which generate electricity. Thi s isotope has a half-life of 24,100 years, causing conce rn in regions where
radioactive plutonium has accumulated and is stored. At some storage sites, the waste is slowly leaking into th e groundwater and
contaminating nearby rivers. The 24,100 year half-li fe means that it will be present in the earth for a very long ti me.
Half-Life
Radioactive materials lose some of their activity e ach time a decay event occurs. This loss of activity can be estimated by
determining the half-life of an isotope. The half-life is defined as the perio d of time needed for one half of a given quantity o f a
substance to undergo a change. For a radioisotope, eve ry time a decay event occurs, a count is detected on the Geiger counter, or
other measuring device. A specific isotope might hav e a total count of. In one hour, the count could b e (half
of the original count). So, the half-life of that iso tope is one hour. Some isotopes have long half-lives—t he half-life of -234 is
245,000 years. Other isotopes have shorter half-lives. - 131, used in thyroid scans, has a half-life of 8.02 days.
Half-Life Calculations
Information on the half-life of an isotope can be u sed to calculate how much radioactivity of that isoto pe will be present after a
certain period of time. There is a formula that all ows calculation at any time after the initial count, b ut we are just going to look at
loss of activity after different half-lives. The iso tope -125 is used in certain laboratory procedures and has a half-life of 59.4 days.
If the initial activity of a sample of -125 is, how m uch activity will be present in 178.2 days? Begin by d etermining
how many half-lives are represented by 178.2 days:
Then, simply count activity:
Be sure to keep in mind that the initial count is a t time zero, and to subtract from that count at the first half-life. The second
half-life has an activity of half the previous count (no t the initial count).
For the more mathematically inclined, the following fo rmula can be used to calculate the amount of radioa ctivity remaining after a
given time:
where activity at time and initial activity at time.
If we have an initial activity of, what will the activity be after four half-lives?

19.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332289
Figure: Typical radioactive decay curve.
The graph above illustrates a typical decay curve f or a radioactive material. The activity decreases by on e-half during each
succeeding half-life. Half-lives of different elements vary considerably, as shown in the table below:
Table: Isotope Half-Lives
Isotope Decay Mode Half-Life
Cobalt-60 beta 5.3 years
Neptunium-237 alpha 2.1 million years
Polonium-214 alpha 0.00016 seconds
Radium-224 alpha 3.7 days
Tritium (-3) beta 12 years
We have talked about the activity and decay of indi vidual isotopes. In the real world, there is a decay c hain that takes place until a
stable end-product is produced. For -238, the chain is a long one, with a mix of isotopes having very dif ferent half-lives. The end
of the chain resides in lead, a stable element that does not decay further.

19.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332289
Figure: Decay of uranium to stable end-product.
Summary
Radioactive materials lose some of their activity each t ime a decay event occurs.
Radioactive loss of activity can be estimated by determ ining the half-life of an isotope.
Half-life is defined as the period of time needed for one half of a given quantity of a substance to undergo a c hange.
Half-lives of different elements vary considerably.
This page titled 19.4: Half-Life is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.4: Half-Life by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

19.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229019.5: Background Radiation
Sitting in a hot bath or spa has always been a great p rescription for dealing with sore muscles. People used t o believe that it was
even more beneficial to immerse themselves in radioa ctive hot springs, and drink water containing radioacti ve materials (some still
do). In the early 1900s, people spent millions of d ollars on treatments and "radioactive water" with the belief that all of their
ailments would cease. Radioactivity in the water was u sually due to radon gas that leaked up from deep und erground, formed by
decay of other radioisotopes.
Background Radiation
We are all exposed to a small amount of radiation in our daily lives. This background radiation comes from naturally occurring
sources and from human-produced radiation. Exposure to x-rays and nuclear medicine isotopes, ground sour ces, and cosmic
radiation account for almost half of the background exposure of the average American. Radon gas, formed from the decay of
uranium and thorium isotopes, is responsible for a l ittle over half the total amount of background radi ation. See the table below for
background sources.
Sources of Background Radiation
Table: Sources of Background Radiation
radon
consumer products
nuclear medicine
cosmic radiation
terrestrial
internal
x-rays
other
The Problem of Radon
Small amounts of uranium and thorium are found in th e soil of a large number of areas in the U.S. When radioa ctive isotopes of
these elements decay, radon is one of the products form ed. Radon is a colorless, odorless gas and is chemically inert, as it is one of
the noble gases.
Radon is also radioactive and can easily be inhaled into the lungs. Over time, this internal radon exposure can lead to the
development of lung cancer. The incidence of lung c ancer in smokers exposed to radon is much higher th an in non-smokers
exposed to radon, since smoking has already produced some lung damage, and the radon simply makes the dama ge worse. Radon
exposure is highest in homes lacking good air circul ation to move the gas out of the residence. There ar e a number of inexpensive
approaches to decreasing your exposure to radon. A good start is to test your living area for radon with a radon test kit.

19.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332290
Figure: Radon test kit.
Summary
Background radiation is defined.
Sources of background radiation are listed.
This page titled 19.5: Background Radiation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.5: Background Radiation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

19.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229119.6: Nuclear Fission Processes
Nuclear fission was first discovered by two German scienti sts, Fritz Strassman and Otto Hahn, in the 1930s. They beg an their work
by bombarding uranium with neutrons, hoping to create larger elements. Instead, they were very surprised to find -141, a much
smaller element. They immediately contacted a fello w scientist in the field, Lise Meitner, who carried out c alculations to
demonstrate that fission had taken place.
Nuclear Fission
Radioactive decay by the release of alpha or beta pa rticles is not the only way new isotopes are formed. W hen a neutron collides
with a nucleus, the nucleus splits into two isotopes, each of which is roughly half the mass of the origin al atom. A small amount of
mass is "left over" and released as energy, as predi cted by Einstein's famous equation, that relates mass and energy. This
process is known as nuclear fission. The neutron must be a "slow" neutron, traveling at a speed that is approximately that of the
molecules of a gas at the same temperature in the sys tem producing the neutrons. High-speed ("fast") neutro ns will not result in
nuclear fission.
Figure: Fission of a uranium nucleus produced by collisi on with a neutron.
The example above illustrates the basic nuclear fissi on process. A neutron (generally produced by some cont rolled process, not
usually a natural event) collides with an atom of -2 35. Momentarily, a -236 atom forms, which then splits i nto two smaller
atoms (-93 and -141) in the diagram. This process res ults in the release of three new neutrons, which can t hen initiate fission
reactions with more atoms. We will see later how this propa gation of neutrons can be employed in a reactor for the generation of
electricity.
An extended version of this process can be seen in th e figure below. Not every collision of a neutron with - 235 results in a fission
reaction. A neutron from the initial fission process may strike an atom of -238, which does not continue t he process. Another
neutron may not collide with a nucleus, and be lost in the environment. However, a third neutron produced f rom the initial collision
can collide with more -235, and continue the chain react ion to produce more neutrons.

19.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332291
Figure: Fission reaction with -235.
Typical nuclear fission reactions balance in terms of mas s. The total mass of the reactants is equal to the total m ass of the products:
There are a total of 236 mass units on the left of t he equation and 236 mass units on the right. In the same manner, we see 92
protons on the left and 92 on the right. The energy that i s released is the binding energy that holds the nucleus tog ether.
Another set of fission products from -235 can be seen in the following reaction:
Again, we see that the total number of mass units and of proto ns is equal on both sides of the equation.
Summary
Nuclear fission is the process of a neutron colliding with a n ucleus. The nucleus splits into two isotopes, each of which is
roughly half the mass of the original atom. A small amoun t of mass is "left over" and released as energy.
Examples of nuclear fission processes are illustrated.
This page titled 19.6: Nuclear Fission Processes is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.6: Nuclear Fission Processes by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

19.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229219.7: Nuclear Power Generation
On Wednesday, March 28, 1979, the residents of Middleto n, PA woke up to a very scary situation. A nuclear power plant near the
town had experienced a series of malfunctions that le d to the release of some radioactive gases into the atmosphere, along with a
partial meltdown of the reactor core. Fortunately, fol low-up studies showed that there were no health effects on workers or the
general public. A thorough investigation was conducted that led to significant improvements in safety and operation of these
nuclear power plants. One of the two reactors was shut do wn completely, while the other remained in operation u ntil its permanent
deactivation in 2014.
Nuclear Power Generation
The generation of electricity is critical for opera tion of businesses, health care delivery, schools, ho mes, and other areas requiring
the use of electrical power. According to 2011 statisti cs, coal is used for of the total power generated, with natural gas being
employed for another. Nuclear power plants are emplo yed in about of the cases, with renewable energy sources supplying
the last. All of these fuels are used to heat water to gene rate steam. The steam then turns a turbine to generate elec tricity.
The diagram below shows the layout of a typical nucle ar power plant. The radioactive rods are in the red co ntainer along with
water, which is heated to steam. The energy for this he at comes from fission reactions of uranium. The steam passes through the
turbine and causes the turbine to spin, generating e lectricity. As the steam condenses, it is run through a cooling tower to lower its
temperature. The water then recirculates through the rea ctor core to be used again.
The control rods play an important role in the modu lation of the nuclear chain reaction (usually a coll ision of a neutron with
uranium). Each collision produces more neutrons than were present initially. If left unsupervised, the re action would soon get out of
control. Rods are commonly made of boron or a number of metals and metal alloys. The purpose of the cont rol rods is to absorb
neutrons to regulate the rate of the chain reaction, so that the water does not overheat and destroy the reactor.
Figure: Schematic for a nuclear power plant.
Nuclear power is also used to propel ships. The turbine ca n be connected to a propeller system. The rotating tu rbine shaft will turn
the propeller to move the ship.
Figure: Nuclear submarine.

19.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332292Summary
The importance of nuclear power in generating electricit y is described.
The operation of a nuclear power plant is described.
This page titled 19.7: Nuclear Power Generation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.7: Nuclear Power Generation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

19.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229319.8: Nuclear Fusion
A number of reactions take place in the sun that can not be duplicated on Earth. Some of these reactions i nvolve the formation of
large elements from smaller ones. So far, we have only been able to observe formation of very small elemen ts here on Earth. The
reaction sequence observed appears to be the followin g: hydrogen-1 atoms collide to form the larger hydro gen isotopes, hydrogen2 (deuterium) and hydrogen-3 (tritium). In the proce ss, positrons and gamma rays are formed. The positro ns will collide with any
available electrons and annihilate, producing more g amma rays. In the process, tremendous amounts of ene rgy are produced to
keep us warm and continue supplying reactions.
Nuclear Fusion
In contrast to nuclear fission, which results in small er isotopes being formed from larger ones, the goal of nuclear fusion is to
produce larger materials from the collision of smalle r atoms. The forcing of the smaller atoms together r esults in tighter packing,
and the release of energy. As seen in the figure belo w, energy is released in the formation of the large r atom, helium from the
fusion of hydrogen-2 and hydrogen-3, as well as from the e xpulsion of a neutron.
Figure: Nuclear fusion reaction between deuterium an d tritium.
This release of energy is what drives research on fusi on reactors today. If such a reaction could be accom plished efficiently on
Earth, it could provide a clean source of nuclear en ergy. Unlike fission reactions, nuclear fusion does n ot produce radioactive
products that represent hazards to living systems.
Nuclear fusion reactions in the laboratory have been extraordinarily difficult to achieve. Extremely high temperatures (i.e., millions
of degrees) are required. Methods must be developed t o force the atoms together and hold them together lo ng enough to react. The
neutrons released during the fusion reactions can inte ract with atoms in the reactor, and convert them to radioactive materials.
There has been some success in the field of nuclear fusion reactions, but the journey to feasible fusion power is still a long and
uncertain one.
Summary
Nuclear fusion produces larger materials from the collisio n of smaller atoms. The forcing of the smaller atoms togethe r results
in tighter packing, and the release of energy.
Examples of nuclear fusion reactions are given.
This page titled 19.8: Nuclear Fusion is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.

19.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229324.8: Nuclear Fusion by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

19.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229419.9: Penetrating Ability of Emissions
Designated containers can store radioisotopes that will be administered to patients as part of a medical t reatment. Isotopes are
stored in lead containers that block the radiation from escaping and exposing people. These lead contai ners are called a "pig", a
term long used for referring to castings of lead or other metals. The origin of the term is not clear, bu t was probably first applied to
these containers by the people who made them.
Penetrating Ability of Emissions
The various emissions differ considerably in their ab ility to go through matter, known as their penetrating ability. The -particle
has the least penetrating power since it is the large st and slowest emission. It can be blocked by a sheet of paper or a human hand.
Beta particles are more penetrating than alpha part icles, but can be stopped by a thin sheet of aluminu m. Of the three basic types of
emissions, gamma particles are the most penetrating. A thick lead shield is required to stop gamma emissions. Positrons represent a
special case in that they annihilate when they come i n contact with electrons. The collision of a positron and an electron results in
the formation of two gamma emissions that go 180 degrees awa y from each other.
Figure: Penetrating ability of radioactive emissions.
Blocking of alpha particles can easily be accomplishe d by as little as plastic or paper. Beta emissions rep resent a somewhat
different situation. The negative charge on a beta particle has the potential for activating the elemen t being used to block the
radiation. Lead and tungsten are large atoms with ma ny protons and neutrons in their nuclei. While the b eta electron may be
blocked, the target material could become irradiated in the process.
High-density materials are much more effective protec tion against gamma emissions than low-density ones. Gam ma rays are
usually blocked effectively by lead shielding. The t hickness of the shielding will determine the effectiv eness of the protection
offered by the lead.
Summary
The penetrating ability of a radioactive emission is i ts ability to go through matter.
The relative penetrating abilities of radioactive emi ssions are described.
This page titled 19.9: Penetrating Ability of Emissions is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12
Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.9: Penetrating Ability of Emissions by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12chemistry-flexbook-2.0/.

19.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229519.10: Effects of Radiation
Bacterial contamination in our food often makes the news. There are many bacteria present on raw food, es pecially raw meat.
Campylobacter, salmonella, and other microorganisms c an be present, even after cooking, if the meat has n ot been sufficiently
exposed to the heat. Ionizing radiation can be used to disrupt the DNA-RNA-protein synthesis cycle that allows the bacteria to
reproduce. Cobalt-60 is a common radiation source, as is ces ium-137. But...just to be safe...order that burger well-done!
Effects of Radiation
In order to better understand how cellular radiation damage occurs, we need to take a quick review of how the cell functions. DNA
in the nucleus is responsible for protein synthesis and for regulation of many cellular functions. In the pr ocess of protein synthesis,
DNA partially unfolds to produce messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA leaves the nucleus and interacts with r ibosomes, transfer
RNA, amino acids, and other cellular constituents in th e cytoplasm. Through a complex series of reactions, pr oteins are produced
to carry out a number of specialized processes within the organism. Anything that disturbs this flow of react ions can produce
damage to the cell.
Figure: DNA replication.
The major effect of ionizing radiation on the cell is the disruption of the DNA strand. With the DNA structu re damaged, the cell
cannot reproduce in its normal fashion. Protein synth esis is affected, as are a number of processes necessary for proper cell
function. One common effect is the generation of canc er cells. These cells have an abnormal structure due to the damaged DNA. In
addition, they usually grow rapidly since the normal control processes regulating cell growth have been ch anged by the altered
composition of the DNA. Tissue damage is also common in peop le with severe exposure to radiation.
Effects of Radiation on Humans
We can see two general types of effects when humans are exposed to radiation. Low-level exposure can lead to development of
cancer. The regulatory processes regulating cell gro wth are disrupted, leading to uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells. Acute
exposure can produce nausea, weakness, skin burns, and int ernal tissue damage. Cancer patients receiving radia tion therapy
experience these symptoms; the radiation is targeted to a specific site in the body so that the damage is primarily to the cancer cells,
and the patient is able to recover from the exposure.
Summary
Anything that affects DNA replication and protein synthes is can damage a cell.
Effects of ionizing radiation on protein synthesis are li sted.
The impact of ionizing radiation on human health is discu ssed.

19.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332295This page titled 19.10: Effects of Radiation is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.10: Effects of Radiation by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistryflexbook-2.0/.

19.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229619.11: Radioisotopes in Medical Diagnosis and Treatment
The molecule picture below is thyroxine, a compound p roduced by the thyroid gland. This molecule regulat es how the body uses
energy. In a condition known as hypothyroidism, the t hyroid makes less thyroxine than normal. A person wit h this disease feels
tired all the time and often puts on weight. Hypothyroidi sm is treated with thyroid hormone supplements.
Figure: Thyroxine molecule.
Radioisotopes in Medical Diagnosis and Treatment
Radioisotopes are widely used to diagnose disease an d as effective treatment tools. For diagnosis, the isotop e is administered, and
then located in the body using a scanner of some sort. The decay product (often gamma emission) can be lo cated, and the intensity
measured. The amount of isotope taken up by the body can then give information as to the extent of the medical problem.
An isotope of iodine (-131) is used in both the diagno sis and treatment of thyroid cancer. The thyroid will normally absorb iodine
to produce the iodine-containing thyroid hormones. An overactive thyroid gland will absorb the radioactive m aterial, which can
then destroy excess thyroid tissue or any cancer of the thyroid. The material is sometimes used to image cancers in other parts of
the body.
Technetium-99m is perhaps the most widely used radiois otope in diagnosis and treatment (the "m" stands for metastable). This
isotope decays to -99 and a gamma emission of low int ensity, making the radiation damage fairly negligible. The half-life is
about six hours, so it will remain in the body for som e time. -99m can be used to look at cardiac damage. T he isotope flows in
the bloodstream; if there is less blood flow in the heart, there will be less isotope concentrated in the heart muscle. Similar
information can be obtained for blood flow in the brain.
Figure: Radioisotope scan to detect tumors.
Isotopes can be very useful in scans to locate cance r cells. The patient in the above image has multipl e tumors that have spread
(metastasized) from the main tumor. A radioisotope has been attached to antibodies that bind to specific cancer cells. The very dark
spots in the armpits, neck, and groin represent areas wher e tumor cells exist.
Many other examples could be presented. There are pres ently over 25 different isotopes in use for diagnosi s and treatment. A very
partial list can be seen in the table below.
Radioisotopes Employed in Diagnosis and/or Treatment

19.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332296Table: Radioisotopes Employed in Diagnosis and/or Treatment
Isotope Half-Life Application
-51 28 days Label red blood cells.
-59 446 days Study iron metabolism in spleen.
-133 5 days Study lung function.
-166 26 hours Cancer treatment.
Summary
This page titled 19.11: Radioisotopes in Medical Diagnosis and Treatment is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by CK-12 Foundation via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.11: Radioisotopes in Medical Diagnosis and Treatment by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source:
https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook-2.0/.

19.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/33229719.12: PET Scans
Does your heart beat faster when you are scared? Do yo u have a tender feeling in your heart for that "spe cial person"? Sorry to
disappoint you, but that is actually simply a respon se generated by the brain. Science tells us that the sea t of emotion is in the brain.
Using PET scans and other techniques, scientists look at sp ecific areas of the brain that process and store inf ormation dealing with
strong emotions. They haven't localized the love site, b ut they're working on it.
PET Scans
One of the more interesting and useful approaches to radioisotope use in medicine is positron emission topography (PET), often
referred to as a PET scan. This technique is especial ly useful in studying the processes in the brain. Man y compounds do not enter
the brain because of what is called the " blood-brain barrier ", a filtering system to block material from being t ransported into brain
tissue. This mechanism serves to protect the brain from a wide variety of harmful substances.
In order to get a good picture of what is happening in the brain, radiolabels are attached to different compounds that will enter the
brain. Since the brain uses about of the glucose fo und in the body, this molecule is often labeled with a positron emitter such as
-18 (half-life of 109.8 minutes) to study brain fun ction in general. Other labels are attached to specif ic compounds that will
localize in certain areas of the brain to look at specif ic structures.
The PET scanner detects gamma emissions from the collis ion of a positron with an electron (see figure below). As the positron is
released from the nucleus of the atom, it will collid e with an electron. This meeting of matter (electron) with antimatter (positron)
results in annihilation of both particles, and the r elease of two gamma emissions that are apart from on e another. The apparatus
detects these gamma rays and stores the data in a computer. From this information, a detailed picture of the brain c an be developed.
Figure: Scanner used to detect positron emissions.
One useful application of PET scanning is in the diagn osis of Alzheimer's disease. This debilitating memory loss condition
primarily occurs in elderly individuals. A protein known as beta-amyloid gradually forms deposits in the brain called plaque.
Memory loss and impaired movement are the result of the pl aque growth.
The compound known as Pittsburgh compound B is often used to identify areas of plaque in the brain. The r adiolabel is -11 (halflife of 20.38 minutes).
Figure: Pittsburgh compound B used in diagnosis of Alzhe imer's disease.
The label attaches to plaque and can be observed using PET s cans.

19.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332297
Figure: Brain scans using Pittsburgh compound B to locat e plaque.
The computer translates the amount of isotope into a color scale, with red indicating a high level of radi oactivity and yellow
indicating somewhat less activity. We can see from the scans that the cognitively healthy individual shows t he presence of very
little plaque in the brain (see figure above). The i ndividual with Alzheimer's demonstrates high concentrati ons of beta-amyloid in
numerous areas of the brain.
Other studies have been done looking at brain functio n in drug addicts. One of the theories about drug addi ction involves the
amount of dopamine action in the brain (a chemical that is a part of the system to transport nerve imp ulses). Studies of dopamine
action have been helpful in understanding addictive pro cesses.
Figure: PET scan of dopamine binding in brains of norm al and addicted individuals.
The figure above shows the binding of chemicals that a ttach to dopamine receptors. The non-addicted individ uals have large
numbers of receptors for dopamine. The addicted perso ns show less binding to these receptors, indicating tha t fewer receptors are
present. Since dopamine is somehow linked with the sense of pleasure, these data may help to bring a better u nderstanding to the
biochemical processes in drug addiction.
Summary
Positron Emission Topography (PET) scans make use of radioiso topes in medicine.
As an example, PET scans can be used to detect Alzheimer's Dis ease and to help scientists learn about addiction.
This page titled 19.12: PET Scans is shared under a CK-12 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by CK-12 Foundation via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the Libr eTexts platform.
24.12: PET Scans by CK-12 Foundation is licensed CK-12. Original source: https://flexbooks.ck12.org/cbook/ck-12-chemistry-flexb ook2.0/.

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332301Index
A
acid ionization constant
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
Aufbau principle
5.8: Aufbau Principle
B
base ionization constant
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
Becquerel
19.3: Detection of Radioactivity
C
chemical formula
7.8: Formulas for Binary Ionic Compounds
chromatography
3.8: Methods for Separating Mixtures
curie (unit)
19.3: Detection of Radioactivity
D
Dalton’s law of partial pressures
13.14: Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures
democritus
4.1: Democritus' Idea of the Atom
distillation
3.8: Methods for Separating Mixtures
dosimeter
19.3: Detection of Radioactivity
E
evaporation
3.8: Methods for Separating Mixtures
exercises
2.19: Measurements and Problem-Solving
(Exercises)
4.20: Atomic Structure PracticeG
Gas Density
13.17: Gas Density
Geiger counter
19.3: Detection of Radioactivity
H
halogens
6.12: Halogens
heat capacity
14.4: Heat Capacity and Specific Heat
I
ionic bonding
8.6: Ionic Bonding
L
law of definite proportions
4.3: Law of Definite Proportions
length
2.4: SI Length and V olume Units
leveling effect of water
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
lone pair
9.12: Molecular Shapes - Lone Pair(s) on Central
Atom
N
noble gas configuration
5.12: Noble Gas Configuration
O
oxyacid
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and BasesP
percent of ionization
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
periodic table
6: The Periodic Table
pOH
18.11: The pOH Concept
polyatomic ion
9.6: Covalent Bonding in Polyatomic Ions
polyatomic ions
7.9: Polyatomic Ions
Q
quantum numbers (electronic)
5.6: Quantum Numbers
R
resonance
9.7: Resonance
S
scienfitic notation
2.3: Scientific Notation in Chemistry
solution stoichiometry
16.9: Solution Stoichiometry
specific heat
14.4: Heat Capacity and Specific Heat
Stock system
7.7: Stock System Naming
V
valence electrons
5.11: Valence Electrons
volume
2.4: SI Length and V olume Units

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/332302Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/417467Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: Chemistry 143 - Introductory Chemistry (Bunag)
Webpages: 300
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial
All licenses found:
CK-12 License: 94.7% (284 pages)
Undeclared: 4.7% (14 pages)
CC BY 4.0: 0.7% (2 pages)
By Page
Chemistry 143 - Introductory Chemistry (Bunag) Undeclared
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: Introduction to Chemistry - CK-12 License
1.1: Defining Chemistry - CK-12 License
1.2: History of Chemistry - CK-12 License
1.3: Areas of Chemistry - CK-12 License
1.4: Pure and Applied Chemistry - CK-12 License
1.5: Energy in Chemistry - CK-12 License
1.6: Medicine - CK-12 License
1.7: Agriculture - CK-12 License
1.8: Materials - CK-12 License
1.9: Chemistry and the Environment - CK-12 License
1.10: Alchemy - CK-12 License
1.11: Nature of Science - CK-12 License
1.12: Scientific Problem Solving - CK-12 License
2: Measurements - CK-12 License
2.1: SI Base Units - CK-12 License
2.2: Metric Prefixes - CK-12 License
2.3: Scientific Notation in Chemistry - CK-12 License
2.4: SI Length and V olume Units - CK-12 License
2.5: SI Mass and Weight Units - CK-12 License
2.6: SI Kinetic Energy Units - CK-12 License
2.7: Temperature and Temperature Scales - CK-12
License
2.8: Scientific Dimensional Analysis - CK-12 License
2.9: Metric Unit Conversions - CK-12 License
2.10: Derived Units - CK-12 License
2.11: Density - CK-12 License
2.12: Accuracy and Precision - CK-12 License2.13: Percent Error - CK-12 License
2.14: Measurement Uncertainty - CK-12 License
2.15: Significant Figures - CK-12 License
2.16: Rounding - CK-12 License
2.17: Uncertainty in Multiplication and Division CK-12 License
2.18: Uncertainty in Addition and Subtraction - CK12 License
2.19: Measurements and Problem-Solving (Exercises)
- Undeclared
3: Matter and Change - CK-12 License
3.1: Substances - CK-12 License
3.2: Physical Properties - CK-12 License
3.3: Extensive and Intensive Properties - CK-12
License
3.4: Solid, Liquid, and Gas - CK-12 License
3.5: Physical Change - CK-12 License
3.6: Homogeneous Mixture - CK-12 License
3.7: Heterogeneous Mixtures - CK-12 License
3.8: Methods for Separating Mixtures - CK-12
License
3.9: Elements - CK-12 License
3.10: Compounds - CK-12 License
3.11: Chemical Change - CK-12 License
3.12: Chemical Symbols and Formulas - CK-12
License
3.13: Chemical Properties and Chemical Reactions CK-12 License
3.14: Reactants and Products - CK-12 License
3.15: Recognizing Chemical Reactions - CK-12
License
4: Atomic Structure - CK-12 License
4.1: Democritus' Idea of the Atom - CK-12 License
4.2: Conservation of Mass - CK-12 License

2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/4174674.3: Law of Definite Proportions - CK-12 License
4.4: Law of Multiple Proportions - CK-12 License
4.5: Mass Ratio Calculation - CK-12 License
4.6: Dalton's Atomic Theory - CK-12 License
4.7: Cathode Ray Tube - CK-12 License
4.8: Electrons - CK-12 License
4.9: Oil Drop Experiment - CK-12 License
4.10: Protons - CK-12 License
4.11: Neutrons - CK-12 License
4.12: Thomson's Atomic Model - CK-12 License
4.13: Rutherford's Atomic Model - CK-12 License
4.14: Atomic Nucleus - CK-12 License
4.15: Atomic Number - CK-12 License
4.16: Mass Number - CK-12 License
4.17: Isotopes - CK-12 License
4.18: Atomic Mass Unit - CK-12 License
4.19: Calculating Atomic Mass - CK-12 License
4.20: Atomic Structure Practice - Undeclared
5: Electrons in Atoms - CK-12 License
5.1: Properties of Light - CK-12 License
5.2: Atomic Emission Spectra - CK-12 License
5.3: Bohr's Atomic Model - CK-12 License
5.4: Spectral Lines of Atomic Hydrogen - CK-12
License
5.5: Quantum Mechanical Atomic Model - CK-12
License
5.6: Quantum Numbers - CK-12 License
5.7: Orbitals - CK-12 License
5.8: Aufbau Principle - CK-12 License
5.9: Pauli Exclusion Principle - CK-12 License
5.10: Electron Configurations - CK-12 License
5.11: Valence Electrons - CK-12 License
5.12: Noble Gas Configuration - CK-12 License
5.13: Hund's Rule and Orbital Filling Diagrams - CK12 License
6: The Periodic Table - CK-12 License
6.1: Early History of the Periodic Table - CK-12
License
6.2: Mendeleev's Periodic Table - CK-12 License
6.3: Periodic Law - CK-12 License
6.4: Modern Periodic Table- Periods and Groups CK-12 License
6.5: Metals - CK-12 License
6.6: Nonmetals - CK-12 License
6.7: Metalloids - CK-12 License
6.8: Blocks of the Periodic Table - CK-12 License
6.9: Hydrogen and Alkali Metals - CK-12 License
6.10: Alkaline Earth Metals - CK-12 License
6.11: Noble Gases - CK-12 License6.12: Halogens - CK-12 License
6.13: Transition Elements - CK-12 License
6.14: Periodic Trends- Atomic Radius - CK-12
License
6.15: Periodic Trends- Ionization Energy - CK-12
License
6.16: Ionic Radii - CK-12 License
6.17: Metallic and Nonmetallic Character - CK-12
License
7: Chemical Nomenclature - CK-12 License
7.1: Molecular Formula - CK-12 License
7.2: Empirical Formula - CK-12 License
7.3: Cations - CK-12 License
7.4: Anions - CK-12 License
7.5: Transition Metal Ions - CK-12 License
7.6: Naming Binary Ionic Compounds - CK-12
License
7.7: Stock System Naming - CK-12 License
7.8: Formulas for Binary Ionic Compounds - CK-12
License
7.9: Polyatomic Ions - CK-12 License
7.10: Names and Formulas of Ternary Ionic
Compounds - CK-12 License
7.11: Naming Binary Molecular Compounds - CK-12
License
7.12: Naming Acids - CK-12 License
7.13: Names and Formulas of Bases - CK-12 License
8: Ionic Bonding - CK-12 License
8.1: Electron Dot Diagrams - CK-12 License
8.2: Octet Rule - CK-12 License
8.3: Cation Formation - CK-12 License
8.4: Anion Formation - CK-12 License
8.5: Transition Metal Ion Formation - CK-12 License
8.6: Ionic Bonding - CK-12 License
8.7: Physical Properties of Ionic Compounds - CK-12
License
8.8: Metallic Bonding - CK-12 License
9: Covalent Bonding - CK-12 License
9.1: Energy and Covalent Bond Formation - CK-12
License
9.2: Lewis Electron-Dot Structures - CK-12 License
9.3: Single Covalent Bonds - CK-12 License
9.4: Multiple Covalent Bonds - CK-12 License
9.5: Coordinate Covalent Bond - CK-12 License
9.6: Covalent Bonding in Polyatomic Ions - CK-12
License
9.7: Resonance - CK-12 License
9.8: Exceptions to the Octet Rule - CK-12 License
9.9: Bond Energy - CK-12 License

3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/4174679.10: VSEPR Theory - CK-12 License
9.11: Molecular Shapes- No Lone Pairs on Central
Atoms - CK-12 License
9.12: Molecular Shapes - Lone Pair(s) on Central
Atom - CK-12 License
9.13: Periodic Trends- Electronegativity - CK-12
License
9.14: Bond Polarity - CK-12 License
9.15: Polar Molecules - CK-12 License
9.16: Van der Waals Forces - CK-12 License
9.17: Hydrogen Bonding - CK-12 License
10: Chemical Reactions - CK-12 License
10.1: Word Equations - CK-12 License
10.2: Chemical Equations - CK-12 License
10.3: Balancing Equations - CK-12 License
10.4: Combination Reactions - CK-12 License
10.5: Decomposition Reactions - CK-12 License
10.6: Combustion Reactions - CK-12 License
10.7: Single Replacement Reactions - CK-12 License
10.8: Double Replacement Reactions - CK-12
License
10.9: Molecular and Ionic Equations - CK-12 License
10.10: Net Ionic Equations - CK-12 License
10.11: Predicting Precipitates Using Solubility Rules
- CK-12 License
10.12: Redox Reactions and Ionic Compounds - CK12 License
10.13: Identifying Reaction Types - CK-12 License
11: The Mole - CK-12 License
11.1: Avogadro's Number - CK-12 License
11.2: Conversions Between Moles and Atoms - CK12 License
11.3: Molar Mass - CK-12 License
11.4: Conversions Between Moles and Mass - CK-12
License
11.5: Conversions Between Mass and Number of
Particles - CK-12 License
11.6: Percent Composition - CK-12 License
11.7: Percent of Water in a Hydrate - CK-12 License
11.8: Determining Empirical Formulas - CK-12
License
11.9: Determining Molecular Formulas - CK-12
License
11.10: Avogadro's Hypothesis and Molar V olume CK-12 License
12: Stoichiometry - CK-12 License
12.1: Everyday Stoichiometry - CK-12 License
12.2: Mole Ratios - CK-12 License12.3: Mass-Mole and Mole-Mass Stoichiometry CK-12 License
12.4: Mass-Mass Stoichiometry - CK-12 License
12.5: Limiting Reactant - CK-12 License
12.6: Determining the Limiting Reactant - CK-12
License
12.7: Theoretical Yield and Percent Yield - CK-12
License
13: The Behavior of Gases - CK-12 License
13.1: Compressibility - CK-12 License
13.2: Factors Affecting Gas Pressure - CK-12 License
13.3: Boyle's Law - CK-12 License
13.4: Charles's Law - CK-12 License
13.5: Gay-Lussac's Law - CK-12 License
13.6: Combined Gas Law - CK-12 License
13.7: Avogadro's Law - CK-12 License
13.8: Ideal Gas Law - CK-12 License
13.9: Calculating the Molar Mass of a Gas - CK-12
License
13.10: Gas Stoichiometry - CK-12 License
13.11: Real and Ideal Gases - CK-12 License
13.12: Mole Fraction - CK-12 License
13.13: Gas Collection by Water Displacement - CK12 License
13.14: Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures - CK-12
License
13.15: Diffusion and Effusion and Graham's Law CK-12 License
13.16: Conversions Between Moles and Gas V olume
- CK-12 License
13.17: Gas Density - CK-12 License
13.18: V olume-V olume Stoichiometry - CK-12
License
13.19: Mass-V olume and V olume-Mass
Stoichiometry - CK-12 License
13.20: Mole Road Map - CK-12 License
14: Thermochemistry - CK-12 License
14.1: Chemical Potential Energy - CK-12 License
14.2: Heat - CK-12 License
14.3: Exothermic and Endothermic Processes - CK12 License
14.4: Heat Capacity and Specific Heat - CK-12
License
14.5: Specific Heat Calculations - CK-12 License
14.6: Enthalpy - CK-12 License
14.7: Calorimetry - CK-12 License
14.8: Thermochemical Equations - CK-12 License
14.9: Stoichiometric Calculations and Enthalpy
Changes - CK-12 License

4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/41746714.10: Heats of Fusion and Solidification - CK-12
License
14.11: Heats of Vaporization and Condensation - CK12 License
14.12: Multi-Step Problems with Changes of State CK-12 License
15: Water - CK-12 License
15.1: Structure of Water - CK-12 License
15.2: Structure of Ice - CK-12 License
15.3: Physical Properties of Water - CK-12 License
15.4: Solute and Solvent - CK-12 License
15.5: Dissolving Process - CK-12 License
15.6: Liquid-Liquid Solutions - CK-12 License
15.7: Electrolytes and Nonelectrolytes - CK-12
License
15.8: Dissociation - CK-12 License
15.9: Strong and Weak Electrolytes - CK-12 License
15.10: Suspensions - CK-12 License
15.11: Colloids - CK-12 License
16: Solutions - CK-12 License
16.1: Solute-Solvent Combinations - CK-12 License
16.2: Rate of Dissolution - CK-12 License
16.3: Saturated and Unsaturated Solutions - CK-12
License
16.4: How Temperature Influences Solubility - CK-12
License
16.5: Supersaturated Solutions - CK-12 License
16.6: Henry's Law - CK-12 License
16.7: Percent Solutions - CK-12 License
16.8: Molarity - CK-12 License
16.9: Solution Stoichiometry - Undeclared
16.10: Preparing Solutions - CK-12 License
16.11: Dilution - CK-12 License
16.12: Molality - CK-12 License
16.13: The Lowering of Vapor Pressure - CK-12
License
16.14: Freezing Point Depression - CK-12 License
16.15: Boiling Point Elevation - CK-12 License
16.16: Electrolytes and Colligative Properties - CK12 License
16.17: Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure - Undeclared
16.18: Calculating Molar Mass - CK-12 License
16.19: Stoichiometry Map - CC BY 4.0
17: Equilibrium - CK-12 License
17.1: Reversible Reaction - CK-12 License
17.2: Chemical Equilibrium - CK-12 License
17.3: Equilibrium Constant - CK-12 License
17.4: Calculations with Equilibrium Constants - CK12 License17.5: Le Châtelier's Principle - CK-12 License
17.6: Effect of Concentration - CK-12 License
17.7: Effect of Temperature - CK-12 License
17.8: Effect of Pressure - CK-12 License
17.9: Nonreversible Reactions - CK-12 License
17.10: Le Châtelier's Principle and the Equilibrium
Constant - CK-12 License
18: Acids and Bases - CK-12 License
18.1: Properties of Acids - CK-12 License
18.2: Properties of Bases - CK-12 License
18.3: Arrhenius Acids - CK-12 License
18.4: Arrhenius Bases - CK-12 License
18.5: Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases - CK-12
License
18.6: Brønsted-Lowry Acid-Base Reactions - CK-12
License
18.7: Lewis Acids and Bases - CK-12 License
18.8: Ion-Product of Water - CK-12 License
18.9: The pH Scale - CK-12 License
18.10: Calculating pH of Acids and Bases - CK-12
License
18.11: The pOH Concept - CK-12 License
18.12: Strong and Weak Acids and Acid Ionization
Constant \(\left(K_\text{a} \right)\) - CK-12 License
18.13: Strong and Weak Bases and Base Ionization
Constant - CK-12 License
18.14: Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases - CC BY
4.0
18.15: Calculating \(K_\text{a}\) and \(K_\text{b}\) CK-12 License
18.16: Calculating pH of Weak Acid and Base
Solutions - CK-12 License
18.17: Neutralization Reaction and Net Ionic
Equations for Neutralization Reactions - CK-12
License
18.18: Titration Experiment - CK-12 License
18.19: Titration Calculations - CK-12 License
18.20: Titration Curves - CK-12 License
18.21: Indicators - CK-12 License
18.22: Hydrolysis of Salts- Equations - CK-12
License
18.23: Buffers - CK-12 License
19: Nuclear Chemistry - CK-12 License
19.1: Discovery of Radioactivity - CK-12 License
19.2: Nuclear Decay Processes - CK-12 License
19.3: Detection of Radioactivity - CK-12 License
19.4: Half-Life - CK-12 License
19.5: Background Radiation - CK-12 License
19.6: Nuclear Fission Processes - CK-12 License

5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/41746719.7: Nuclear Power Generation - CK-12 License
19.8: Nuclear Fusion - CK-12 License
19.9: Penetrating Ability of Emissions - CK-12
License
19.10: Effects of Radiation - CK-12 License
19.11: Radioisotopes in Medical Diagnosis and
Treatment - CK-12 License19.12: PET Scans - CK-12 License
Back Matter - Undeclared
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared