BIOLOGY FOR MAJORS
I

Lumen Learning

Book- Biology for Majors I (Lumen)

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 03/03/2026

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/93710TABLE OF CONTENTS
Licensing
1: Course Contents
1.1: About This Course
1.2: Course Contents at a Glance
1.3: Learning Outcomes
2: Faculty Resources
2.1: Faculty Resources Overview
2.2: Pacing
2.3: PDF
2.4: PowerPoints
2.5: Assignments
2.6: Assignments with Samples
2.7: Question Banks
2.8: I Need Help
3: Module 1- Introduction to Biology
3.1: Why It Matters- Introduction to Biology
3.2: Introduction to Characteristics of Life
3.3: Properties of Life
3.4: Introduction to Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
3.5: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
3.6: Levels of Organization of Living Things
3.7: Introduction to Taxonomy
3.8: The Diversity of Life
3.9: Phylogenetic Trees
3.10: Taxonomy
3.11: Introduction to the Study of Biology
3.12: The Branches of Biology
3.13: Scientific Inquiry
3.14: Experiments and Hypotheses
3.15: Interpreting Results
3.16: Putting It Together- Introduction to Biology
4: Module 2- Chemistry of Life
4.1: Why It Matters- The Chemistry of Life
4.2: Introduction to Atoms and Elements
4.3: Atoms
4.4: The Periodic Table of Elements
4.5: Electrons
4.6: Introduction to Atomic Bonds
4.7: Ionic Bonds
4.8: Covalent Bonds

2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/937104.9: Hydrogen Bonds
4.10: Introduction to Functional Groups
4.11: Functional Groups
4.12: Introduction to The pH Scale
4.13: Acids and Bases
4.14: Buffers
4.15: Introduction to Chemical Reactions
4.16: Chemical Reactions and Molecules
4.17: Anabolic and Catabolic Pathways
4.18: Enzymes
4.19: Introduction to Thermodynamics
4.20: Open and Closed Systems
4.21: The First Law of Thermodynamics
4.22: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
4.23: Putting It Together- Chemistry of Life
4.24: Assignment- Biological Astronaut
4.25: Assignment- Interacting with Attributes of Molecules
5: Module 3- Important Biological Macromolecules
5.1: Why It Matters- Important Biological Macromolecules
5.2: Introduction to Proteins
5.3: Amino Acids
5.4: Protein Structure
5.5: Function of Proteins
5.6: Introduction to Lipids
5.7: Lipids
5.8: Introduction to Carbohydrates
5.9: Structure and Function of Carbohydrates
5.10: Introduction to Nucleic Acids
5.11: Structure of Nucleic Acids
5.12: DNA and RNA
5.13: Introduction to Comparing Biological Macromolecules
5.14: Different Types of Biological Macromolecules
5.15: Putting It Together- Important Biological Macromolecules
5.16: Assignment- Nutritionist for a Day
6: Module 4- Cellular Structure
6.1: Why It Matters- Cellular Structure
6.2: Introduction to Microscopes
6.3: Microscopy
6.4: Introduction to Organelles
6.5: Cytoplasm
6.6: Nucleus
6.7: Ribosomes, Mitochondria, and Peroxisomes
6.8: Endomembrane System
6.9: Vesicles
6.10: Unique Features of Animal and Plant Cells
6.11: Introduction to Cytoskeleton
6.12: Microfilaments

3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/937106.13: Intermediate Filaments
6.14: Microtubules
6.15: Introduction to Cell Surface
6.16: Cell Membranes
6.17: Cell Junctions
6.18: The Cell Wall
6.19: Putting It Together- Cellular Structure
6.20: Assignment- Cell Builder
7: Module 5- Cell Membranes
7.1: Why It Matters- Cell Membranes
7.2: Introduction to Structure of the Membrane
7.3: Structure of the Cell Membrane
7.4: Phospholipids
7.5: Introduction to Kinds of Transport
7.6: Passive Transport
7.7: Active Transport
7.8: Membranes and Transport
7.9: Introduction to Endocytosis and Exocytosis
7.10: Endocytosis
7.11: Exocytosis
7.12: Putting It Together- Cell Membranes
7.13: Assignment- Membranes Alive!
8: Module 6- Metabolic Pathways
8.1: Why It Matters- Metabolic Pathways
8.2: Introduction to Redox Reactions
8.3: Electrons and Energy
8.4: ATP in Living Systems
8.5: Introduction to Photosynthesis
8.6: An Overview of Photosynthesis
8.7: Spectrums of Light
8.8: Light-Dependent Reactions
8.9: Light-Independent Reactions
8.10: Photosynthesis
8.11: Introduction to Cellular Respiration
8.12: Glycolysis
8.13: Pyruvate Oxidation
8.14: Citric Acid Cycle
8.15: Electron Transport Chain
8.16: Cellular Respiration
8.17: Introduction to Fermentation
8.18: Metabolism without Oxygen
8.19: Types of Fermentation
8.20: Putting It Together- Metabolic Pathways
8.21: Assignment- Observing Energy Transactions

4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/937109: Module 7- Cell Communication
9.1: Why It Matters- Cell Communication
9.2: Introduction to Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors
9.3: Types of Signals
9.4: Signaling Molecules
9.5: Signaling Receptors
9.6: Introduction to Propagation of the Signal
9.7: Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway
9.8: Methods of Intracellular Signaling
9.9: Introduction to Response to the Signal
9.10: Expression and Growth
9.11: Cell Death
9.12: Introduction to Signaling in Single-Celled Organisms
9.13: Signaling in Yeast
9.14: Signaling in Bacteria
9.15: Putting It Together- Cell Communication
10: Module 8- Cell Division
10.1: Why It Matters- Cell Division
10.2: Introduction to Chromosomes and DNA Packaging
10.3: DNA and Chromosomes
10.4: Chromosome Structure
10.5: Introduction to the Cell Cycle
10.6: Interphase
10.7: Mitosis
10.8: Cytokinesis
10.9: The Complete Cycle
10.10: Introduction to Cell Cycle Checkpoints
10.11: Control of the Cell Cycle
10.12: Cancer and the Cell Cycle
10.13: Introduction to Meiosis
10.14: Stages of Meiosis
10.15: Meiosis I
10.16: Meiosis II
10.17: Meiosis
10.18: Introduction to Genetic Diversity
10.19: Sexual Reproduction
10.20: Genetic Variation in Meiosis
10.21: Chromosomal Structural Rearrangements
10.22: Mitosis, Meiosis, and Sexual Reproduction
10.23: Introduction to Errors in Chromosome Number
10.24: Karyotypes
10.25: Common Disorders
10.26: Putting It Together- Cell Division
10.27: Assignment- Mitosis and Meiosis Worksheets

5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/9371011: Module 9- DNA Structure and Replication
11.1: Why It Matters- DNA Structure and Replication
11.2: Introduction to Storing Genetic Information
11.3: Structure of DNA
11.4: Genetic Information
11.5: DNA Packaging in Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes
11.6: Introduction to DNA Base Pairs and Replication
11.7: The History of DNA
11.8: Basics of DNA Replication
11.9: Major Enzymes
11.10: “Proofreading” DNA
11.11: Telomeres
11.12: Introduction to DNA Mutations
11.13: What is a Mutation?
11.14: Mutations in Somatic Cells and in Gametes
11.15: Major Types of Mutations
11.16: Putting It Together- DNA Structure and Replication
11.17: Assignment- Which Has More DNA?
12: Module 10- DNA Transcription and Translation
12.1: Why It Matters- DNA Transcription and Translation
12.2: Introduction to Transcription
12.3: Steps of Genetic Transcription
12.4: RNA Polymerase
12.5: pre-RNA and mRNA
12.6: RNA Post-Translational Modification
12.7: Introduction to Translation
12.8: Steps of Translation
12.9: Ribosomes
12.10: tRNA
12.11: Codons
12.12: Protein Modifications
12.13: Introduction to Prokaryotic Transcription and Translation
12.14: Prokaryotic Transcription
12.15: Prokaryotic Translation
12.16: Introduction to the Central Dogma
12.17: The Central Dogma
12.18: Putting It Together- DNA Transcription and Translation
13: Module 11- Gene Expression
13.1: Why It Matters- Gene Expression
13.2: Introduction to Regulation of Gene Expression
13.3: Expression of Genes
13.4: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
13.5: Introduction to Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
13.6: Gene Regulation in Prokaryotes
13.7: Repressors
13.8: Activators and Inducers

6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/9371013.9: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation at Work
13.10: Introduction to Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
13.11: Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
13.12: Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
13.13: Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
13.14: Putting It Together- Gene Expression
13.15: Assignment- How Mutations Work
14: Module 12- Trait Inheritance
14.1: Why It Matters- Trait Inheritance
14.2: Introduction to the Father of Genetics
14.3: Mendel’s Experiments and Heredity
14.4: Characteristics and Traits
14.5: Laws of Inheritance
14.6: Heredity
14.7: Introduction to Beyond Dominance and Recessiveness
14.8: Non-Mendelian Inheritance
14.9: Non-Mendelian Punnett Squares
14.10: Multiple Alleles
14.11: Introduction to Heredity and Disease
14.12: Penetrance and Expressivity
14.13: Pedigrees and Disease
14.14: Pedigree Flowchart
14.15: Genetic Disorder and Pedigrees
14.16: Introduction to Genetics and the Environment
14.17: Epistasis
14.18: Polygenic Inheritance and Environmental Effects
14.19: Effect of the Environment
14.20: Pleiotropy and Human Disorders
14.21: Putting It Together- Trait Inheritance
14.22: Assignment- Dragon Genetics
15: Module 13- Theory of Evolution
15.1: Why It Matters- Theory of Evolution
15.2: Introduction to Charles Darwin
15.3: Darwin and Descent with Modification
15.4: Darwin and the Theory of Evolution
15.5: Natural Selection
15.6: Introduction to Evidence for Evolution
15.7: Physical Evidence
15.8: Biological Evidence
15.9: Misconceptions of Evolution
15.10: Introduction to Mutations and Evolution
15.11: Population Genetics
15.12: Selective and Environmental Pressures
15.13: Introduction to Phylogenetic Trees
15.14: Scientific Classification
15.15: Structure of Phylogenetic Trees
15.16: Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees

7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/9371015.17: The Taxonomic Classification System
15.18: Putting It Together- Theory of Evolution
16: Module 14- Modern Biology
16.1: Why It Matters- Modern Biology
16.2: Introduction to Key Technologies
16.3: Manipulating Genetic Material
16.4: DNA Sequencing
16.5: Cloning
16.6: Genetic Engineering
16.7: Introduction to Biotechnology Applications
16.8: Medicinal Biotechnology
16.9: Agricultural Biotechnology
16.10: Biotechnology at the Cutting Edge
16.11: Introduction to Risks and Benefits of Genomic Science
16.12: Genetic Information Used for Identification
16.13: Medical Uses of Genetic Information
16.14: Genomics in Agriculture
16.15: Putting It Together- Modern Biology
16.16: Assignment- When Jabberjays Attack!
Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/101204Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: Course Contents
1.1: About This Course
1.2: Course Contents at a Glance
1.3: Learning Outcomes
1: Course Contents is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434871.1: About This Course
This gateway biology course provides a strong foundat ion in the principles of biology for students majori ng in Natural Science,
medical and healthcare fields. It is the second of a two-course sequence. Primary topics such as the history o f life, body systems,
and ecology are covered in this course.
This course was developed by Lumen Learning, with contri buting work from Shelli Carter. The course is based on th e OpenStax
textbook Biology, supplemented with relevant materials from Khan Academy and videos from multiple sources. Original practice
activities were authored by Shelli Carter and Lumen Learni ng in the development of this course.
What’s New?
We believe in making continuous improvements to our courses in order to enhance and facilitate student learning. This newest
version of the course includes a vast number of data -driven improvements to assessment questions and text content in order to
better illustrate, clarify, and evaluate concepts.
About Lumen
Lumen Learning’s mission is to make great learning o pportunities available to all students, regardless of s ocioeconomic
background.
We do this by using open educational resources (OER) to create well-designed and low-cost course materials that replace expensive
textbooks. Because learning is about more than affo rdability and access, we also apply learning science ins ights and efficacy
research to develop learning activities that are engineer ed to improve subject mastery, course completion and rete ntion.
If you’d like to connect with us to learn more about adopt ing this course, please Contact Us.
You can also make an appointment for OER Office Hours to connect virtually with a live Lumen expert about any question you
may have.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
About This Course. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
1.1: About This Course is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434881.2: Course Contents at a Glance
The following list shows a summary of the topics covered i n this course. To see all of the course pages, visit the Ta ble of Contents.
Module 1: Introduction to Biology
The Characteristics of Life
Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
Taxonomy
The Study of Biology
Module 2: Chemistry of Life
Atoms and Elements
Atomic Bonds
Functional Groups
The pH Scale
Chemical Reactions
Thermodynamics
Module 3: Important Biological Macromolecules
Proteins
Lipids
Carbohydrates
Nucleic Acids
Comparing Biological Macromolecules
Module 4: Cellular Structure
Microscopy
Organelles
The Cytoskeleton
The Cell Surface
Module 5: Cell Membranes
Structure of the Membrane
Kinds of Transport
Endocytosis and Exocytosis
Module 6: Metabolic Pathways
Redox Reactions
Photosynthesis
Cellular Respiration
Fermentation
Module 7: Cell Communication
Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors
Propagation of the Signal

1.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43488Response to the Signal
Signaling in Single-Celled Organisms
Module 8: Cell Division
Chromosomes and DNA Packaging
The Cell Cycle
Cell Cycle Checkpoints
Meiosis
Genetic Diversity
Errors in Chromosome Number
Module 9: DNA Structure and Replication
Storing Genetic Information
DNA Base Pairs and Replication
DNA Mutations
Module 10: DNA Transcription and Translation
Transcription
Translation
Prokaryotic Transcription and Translation
The Central Dogma
Module 11: Gene Expression
Regulation of Gene Expression
Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
Module 12: Trait Inheritance
The Father of Genetics
Beyond Dominance and Recessiveness
Heredity and Disease
Genetics and the Environment
Module 13: Theory of Evolution
Charles Darwin
Evidence for Evolution
Mutations and Evolution
Phylogenetic Trees
Module 14: Modern Biology
Key Technologies
Biotechnology Applications
Risks and Benefits of Genomic Science
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Course Contents at a Glance. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Binoculars Icon. Authored by: Musmellow. Provided by: Noun Project. Located at: https://thenounproject.com/search/?
q=binoculars&i=1234056. License: CC BY: Attribution

1.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434881.2: Course Contents at a Glance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434891.3: Learning Outcomes
The content, assignments, and assessments for Biology for Majors I are aligned to the following learning outcom es. Click here for
a more detailed list of outcomes.
Module 1: Introduction to Biology
Define biology and apply its principles
List the defining characteristics of biological life
Identify the different kinds of cells that make up differ ent kinds of organisms
Describe classification and organizational tools bio logists use, including modern taxonomy
Describe biology as a science and identify the key component s of scientific inquiry
Module 2: Chemistry of Life
Identify the principles of chemistry that are integral to biology
Identify the building blocks of matter
Classify different types of atomic bonds
Categorize molecules according to their functional group
Demonstrate familiarity with the pH scale
Understand basic chemical reactions
Demonstrate familiarity with the first and second laws of thermodynamics
Module 3: Important Biological Macromolecules
Identify and describe the main features of the four main classes of important biological macromolecules
Describe the structure and function of proteins
Illustrate different types of lipids and relate their str ucture to their role in biological systems
Summarize the roles carbohydrates play in biological systems
Discuss nucleic acids and the role they play in DNA and RNA
Discuss macromolecules and the differences between the f our classes
Module 4: Cellular Structure
Identify and explain a variety of cellular components
Understand why and how the light microscope and electron mic roscope are used in biology
Identify membrane-bound organelles found in eukaryotic cells
Demonstrate familiarity with various components of the cytoskeleton, including monomeric units
Demonstrate familiarity with various cell surface speci alizations
Module 5: Cell Membranes
Describe and explain the structure and function of membranes
Describe the structure and function of membranes, especia lly the phospholipid bilayer
Distinguish between passive and active transport; explain how substances are directly transported across a membra ne
Describe the primary mechanisms by which cells import and export macromolecules

1.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43489Module 6: Metabolic Pathways
Explain the metabolic pathways involved in the capture and release of energy in cells
Understand the role movement of electrons plays in energy ex changes in cells
Identify the basic components and steps of photosynthesis
Identify the reactants and products of cellular respirati on and where these reactions occur in a cell
Illustrate the basic components and steps of fermentati on
Module 7: Cell Communication
Identify the main components of a signal transduction pathway
Differentiate between different types of signals
Describe how a cell propagates a signal
Describe how a cell responds to a signal
Describe how a cell responds to a signal
Module 8: Cell Division
Describe and explain the various stages of cell division
Understand chromosome structure and organization in euka ryotic cells
Identify the stages of the cell cycle, by picture and by description of major milestones
Identify and explain the important checkpoints that a cell passes through during the cell cycle
Identify the stages of meiosis by picture and by descriptio n of major milestones; explain why meiosis involves two rou nds of
nuclear division
Describe and explain a range of mechanisms for generati ng genetic diversity
Examine karyotypes and identify the effects of sign ificant changes in chromosome number
Module 9: DNA Structure and Replication
Relate DNA structure to the process of DNA replication
Explain how DNA stores genetic information
Explain the role of complementary base pairing in the p recise replication process of DNA
Recognize the impact of DNA mutations
Module 10: DNA Transcription and Translation
Describe the conversion of DNA to RNA to proteins
Outline the process of genetic transcription
Summarize the process of genetic translation
Outline the process of prokaryotic transcription and transl ation
Identify the central dogma of life
Module 11: Gene Expression
Explain the regulation of gene expression
Define the term regulation as it applies to genes
Discuss different components of prokaryotic gene regulati on
Discuss different components and types of epigenetic gene regulation
Module 12: Trait Inheritance
Complete monohybrid and dihybrid crosses and family pedigrees, and explain the inheritance of various traits
Identify the impact of Gregor Mendel on the field of geneti cs and apply Mendel’s two laws of genetics
Explain complications to the phenotypic expression of genot ype, including mutations

1.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43489Explain the conventions of a family pedigree and predict whether a disease will be passed through a family in one o f three
modes
Discuss the role environment plays on phenotypes
Module 13: Theory of Evolution
Explain the theory of evolution, which documents the change in the genetic makeup of a biological population over
time
Describe the work of Charles Darwin in the Galapagos Islands, especially his discovery of natural selection in finch po pulations
Describe how the theory of evolution by natural selection i s supported by evidence
Recognize that mutations are the basis of microevolution; and that adaptations enhance the survival and reprod uction of
individuals in a population
Read and analyze a phylogenetic tree that documents e volutionary relationships
Module 14: Modern Biology
Describe and discuss techniques used in modern biology
List key technologies enabling modern uses of biology
Identify societal uses of biotechnology
Discuss the risks and benefits involved in applications of genetic and genomic science
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Learning Outcomes. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Magnify. Authored by: Eucalyp. Provided by: Lumen Learning. Located at:
https://thenounproject.com/term/magnify/1276779/. License: CC BY: Attribution
1.3: Learning Outcomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Faculty Resources
2.1: Faculty Resources Overview
2.2: Pacing
2.3: PDF
2.4: PowerPoints
2.5: Assignments
2.6: Assignments with Samples
2.7: Question Banks
2.8: I Need Help
2: Faculty Resources is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434912.1: Faculty Resources Overview
We’ve seen overwhelming demand for high quality, open ly-licensed course materials, including supplemental resources to enrich
teaching and learning and to make life easier for i nstructors. To support this need, we’ve developed and curated faculty resources to
use with this course.
Free and Open Supplemental Materials
On the following pages, you will find supplemental resou rces that are freely available to use with the intera ctive learning materials
for this course. Since these resources are openly licensed, you may use them as is or adapt them to your needs.
Additional Faculty Resources
Additional supplemental resources, learning tools, and sup port services are available to faculty who adopt Way maker, OHM, or
Candela courses with paid support from Lumen Learnin g. For many courses, these include some combination of summative
assessments, answer keys, solutions manuals, or other mat erials shared only with authorized instructors in ord er to protect
academic integrity.
Click here to learn more about additional instructor tools and resources available to faculty who adopt Lumen-su pported
courseware. Information about pricing and payment options is av ailable on this page. Lumen’s low-cost support fees replace the
cost of expensive textbooks and may be paid by students or by the institution directly.
Continuously Improving Learning Materials
Are you interested in collaborating with us to make t hese course materials better? We use learning data to identify where content
improvements are needed, and then we invite faculty a nd subject matter experts to work with us developing c ontinuous
improvements aimed at increasing learning.
Learn more from this blog post, or sign up here to join our continuous improvement mailing list an d stay up to date about
upcoming OER hackathons and other continuous improvement a ctivities.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Faculty Resources Overview. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Books Icon. Authored by: Ilham Fitrotul Hayat. Provided by: Noun Project. Located at:
thenounproject.com/term/books/2792694/. License: CC BY: Attribution
2.1: Faculty Resources Overview is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434922.2: Pacing
The Biology for Majors I textbook contains fourteen modules—roughly one chapter per week for a 16-week se mester. If you need
to modify the pace and cover the material more quickly, t he following chapters work well together:
Module 2: Chemistry of Life and Module 3: Important Biological Macromolecules
Module 4: Cellular Structure and Module 5: Cell Membranes
Module 9: DNA Structure and Replication and Module 10: DNA Transcription and Translation
Module 11: Gene Expression and Module 12: Trait Inheritance
Module 13: Theory of Evolution and Module 14: Modern Biology
We recommend NOT doubling up Module 6: Metabolic Pathways, because it is long and especially challenging. Stud ents will
need more time for mastery and completion of assignmen ts. In a longer semester, it can be taught over two weeks inst ead of one.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Pacing. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Stopwatch. Authored by: Adrien Coquet, FR. Provided by: Noun Project. Located at:
thenounproject.com/term/stopwatch/1094680/. License: CC BY: Attribution
2.2: Pacing is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434932.3: PDF
Lumen makes significant investments to ensure our d igital courseware is accessible, allowing students to learn using superior
interactivity, multimedia, and a variety of accommodatio ns for individuals with varying abilities.
PDFs offer an inferior learning experience compared to the richness and interactivity in our digital course ware. A PDF version of
the textbook is available as a print alternative. Th e PDF does not include interactive content such as simula tions, videos, and
quizzes and is not vetted for accessibility. For these reasons, we do not recommend using the textbook in the PDF form. The
offline version should be used as a print backup rather than as the primary textbook.
Download the course PDF (58.2 MB)
To share these files with your students, copy and paste the text and download link above into a page or anno uncement in your
learning management system (Blackboard, Canvas, etc.).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
PDF. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Kindle Oasis. Authored by: Richard Slater. Located at: thenounproject.com/term/kindle-oasis/611350/. License: CC BY:
Attribution
2.3: PDF is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434942.4: PowerPoints
A full set of PowerPoint decks is provided for download below. All decks are tightly aligned to the modules in this course. Since
they are openly licensed, you are welcome to retain, reuse, revise, remix, and redistribute as desired.
These PowerPoint files are accessible. If you do revise them, make sure to follow these guidelines for creating accessible
PowerPoints.
Use the following link to download all PowerPoint decks in a single.zip file (40 MB), or download each individual deck below:
Module 1: Introduction to Biology
Module 2: Chemistry of Life
Module 3: Important Biological Macromolecules
Module 4: Cellular Structure
Module 5: Cell Membranes
Module 6: Metabolic Pathways
Module 7: Cell Communication
Module 8: Cell Division
Module 9: DNA Structure and Replication
Module 10: DNA Transcription and Translation
Module 11: Gene Expression
Module 12: Trait Inheritance
Module 13: Theory of Evolution
Module 14: Modern Biology
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
PowerPoints. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Projector Screen. Authored by: Denis Shumaylov. Provided by: Noun Project. Located at:
thenounproject.com/term/projector-screen/1211212/. License: CC BY: Attribution
2.4: PowerPoints is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434952.5: Assignments
The assignments in this course are openly licensed, and are available as-is, or can be modified to suit your students’ needs. Sample
completed assignments are available to faculty who ado pt Waymaker, OHM, or Candela courses with paid support f rom Lumen
Learning. This approach helps us protect the academi c integrity of these materials by ensuring they are shared only with authorized
and institution-affiliated faculty and staff.
This course provides 10 prompts and grading rubrics f or written assignments, designed to align with course outcomes. You can
view them by clicking on the assignment links in course m odules.
If you import this course into your learning manage ment (Blackboard, Canvas, etc.), the assignments will automatically be loaded
into the assignment tool. You can view them below or throu ghout the course.
Assignment Files Module Alignment
Biological Astronaut (download the.docx,.rtf)After both Module 1: Introduction to Biology and
Module 2: Chemistry of Life
Nutritionist for a Day (download the.docx,.rtf)After Module 3: Important Biological
Macromolecules
Cell Builder (download the.docx,.rtf) After Module 4: Cellular Structure
Membranes Alive! (download the.docx,.rtf) After Module 5: Cell Membranes
Observing Energy Transactions (download the.docx,.rtf) After Module 6: Metabolic Pathways
Mitosis and Meiosis Internet Quests (download the.docx,.rtf) After Module 7: Cell Division
Which Has More DNA? (download the.docx,.rtf) After Module 8: DNA Structure and Replication
How Mutations Work (download the.docx,.rtf)After both Module 9: DNA Transcription, Module
10: Translation, and Module 11: Gene Expression
Dragon Genetics (download the.docx,.rtf) Module 12: After Trait Inheritance
When Jabberjays Attack! (download the.docx,.rtf)After both Module 13: Theory of Evolution and
Module 14: Modern Biology
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Assignments. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Pencil Cup. Authored by: IconfactoryTeam. Provided by: Noun Project. Located at: thenounproject.com/term/pencilcup/628840/. License: CC BY: Attribution
2.5: Assignments is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434962.6: Assignments with Samples
The assignments in this course are openly licensed, an d are available as-is, or can be modified to suit your stu dents’ needs.
This course provides 10 prompts and grading rubrics for wri tten assignments, designed to align with course outcom es.
If you import this course into your learning manage ment (Blackboard, Canvas, etc.), the assignments will automatically be loaded
into the assignment tool. You can view them below or throu ghout the course.
Assignment Files Module Alignment
Biological Astronaut (download the.docx,.rtf)After both Module 1: Introduction to Biology and
Module 2: Chemistry of Life
Nutritionist for a Day (download the.docx,.rtf)
Example completed assignment to distribute to studentsAfter Module 3: Important Biological
Macromolecules
Cell Builder (download the.docx,.rtf)
Here is an example of what students might createAfter Module 4: Cellular Structure
Membranes Alive! (download the.docx,.rtf)
Example completed assignment to distribute to studentsAfter Module 5: Cell Membranes
Observing Energy Transactions (download the.docx,.rtf)
Here is an example of what students might createAfter Module 6: Metabolic Pathways
Mitosis and Meiosis Internet Quests (download the.docx,.rtf)
See this example of what students might submitAfter Module 7: Cell Division
Which Has More DNA? (download the.docx,.rtf)
See the examples contained hereAfter Module 8: DNA Structure and Replication
How Mutations Work (download the.docx,.rtf)
This document shows an example submission
Please note that it only includes answers to a few question s and a single
snapshot to give you an idea of how to complete this a ssignment.After both Module 9: DNA Transcription, Module
10: Translation, and Module 11: Gene Expression
Dragon Genetics (download the.docx,.rtf)
Here is a worked example showing a screenshot and requir ed text explanationModule 12: After Trait Inheritance
When Jabberjays Attack! (download the.docx,.rtf)
Hints document to distribute to studentsAfter both Module 13: Theory of Evolution and
Module 14: Modern Biology
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Assignments. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Pencil Cup. Authored by: IconfactoryTeam. Provided by: Noun Project. Located at: thenounproject.com/term/pencilcup/628840/. License: CC BY: Attribution

2.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434962.6: Assignments with Samples is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434972.7: Question Banks
Note: It is your responsibility to handle question ban ks and answer keys securely and appropriately to prevent them from being
widely available and searchable via the Internet.
The machine-graded assessments in this course are orga nized by module and are aligned to specific learnin g outcomes. Waymaker
assess students in three locations: Show What You Know (un graded pretests at the beginning of each module), Sel f-Checks (short,
ungraded practice tests), and end-of-module quizzes (grad ed).
Faculty can edit and delete any of the quiz question s and also add new ones. To learn more about editing t he assessments in
Waymaker, visit the Waymaker Faculty User Guide AFTER the course package has been imported to your lea rning management
system (Blackboard, Canvas, etc.).
Optional Download
The Show What You Know and Self-Check questions are also available as a separate file that can be downloaded and imported into
the assessment tool in your LMS. This format and extra step are needed ONLY if you want to make your own custom ized quiz,
midterm, or final exam that combines quiz questions from multiple modules.
There are 14 question banks with a total of 620 multiple ch oice questions.
We provide quiz banks as QTI files, a standard format that allows you to import questions, build, and customi ze quizzes in most
learning management systems (Canvas, Blackboard, etc.). These files cannot be opened outside of an LMS.
According to Lumen company policy, we do not provide quizzes in written (e.g. MS Word) form, in order to pre serve the academic
integrity of our quiz banks on behalf of everyone u sing our materials. We adopted this policy after obse rving how easy it is for quiz
banks in written formats to find their way onto websites that promote academic cheating.
Click the name of your LMS to prompt the download of the fi le.
Canvas
Blackboard
D2L
Moodle
Once you’ve downloaded the file, visit the Quiz Imports page and click through to the directions for your LMS.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Quiz Banks. Authored by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Usability Testing. Authored by: Maxim Basinski. Provided by: Noun Project. Located at: thenounproject.com/term/usabilitytesting/1290736/. License: CC BY: Attribution
2.7: Question Banks is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/434982.8: I Need Help
Need more information about this course? Have question s about faculty resources? Can’t find what you’re lo oking for?
Experiencing technical difficulties?
We’re here to help! Take advantage of the following Lumen customer-support resources:
Check out one of Lumen’s Faculty User Guides here.
Submit a support ticket here and tell us what you need.
Talk and screen-share with a live human during Lumen’s OER office hours. See available times here.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
I Need Help. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Help. Authored by: Michael Finney. Provided by: Noun Project. Located at: thenounproject.com/term/help/1112130/.
License: CC BY: Attribution
2.8: I Need Help is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Module 1- Introduction to Biology
3.1: Why It Matters- Introduction to Biology
3.2: Introduction to Characteristics of Life
3.3: Properties of Life
3.4: Introduction to Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
3.5: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
3.6: Levels of Organization of Living Things
3.7: Introduction to Taxonomy
3.8: The Diversity of Life
3.9: Phylogenetic Trees
3.10: Taxonomy
3.11: Introduction to the Study of Biology
3.12: The Branches of Biology
3.13: Scientific Inquiry
3.14: Experiments and Hypotheses
3.15: Interpreting Results
3.16: Putting It Together- Introduction to Biology
3: Module 1- Introduction to Biology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435073.1: Why It Matters- Introduction to Biology
Why define biology and apply its principles?
Figure 1. The pangolin (also known as the scaly anteate r) is a unique animal. It walks on just its hind legs an d uses its front claws
to tear open termite mounds.
One night while she was scrolling through her social me dia feeds, Cristina saw that her brother had linked to an article about some
of the world’s weirdest animals. As she paged through t he article, Cristina became increasingly interested in the different features
these animals had: some were eyeless, some were colorless, a nd others had even stranger features.
Before Cristina could dig deeper into these animals, she got a message from her cousin Samuel. He’d sent a link to an article about
genetically modified foods and the dangers they inhe rently contain. Cristina was only halfway through readi ng the first paragraph
of the article when Samuel sent her another article: t his one lauding the paleo diet and its benefits. Cr istina started to read the
article, but before she got too far, she remembered t hat she had a paper due the next day. She made a men tal note to come back to
the articles from her cousin, and she bookmarked the an imals article.
Though Cristina might not realize it, she’s just bee n presented with three different biological questions. How did these animals
develop such unique characteristics? Are GMOs dangerous? Are ex treme diets (like the paleo diet) beneficial?
Cristina still has to come to her own conclusions and make her own choices, but having an understanding o f biology will help her
make the best choices she can.
Learning Outcomes
List the defining characteristics of biological life
Identify the different kinds of cells that make up differ ent kinds of organisms
Describe classification and organizational tools bio logists use, including modern taxonomy
Describe biology as a science and identify the key component s of scientific inquiry
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: Introduction to Biology. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Scaly Anteater. Authored by: David Brossard. Located at: https://flic.kr/p/dqrpWk. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
3.1: Why It Matters- Introduction to Biology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435083.2: Introduction to Characteristics of Life
List the defining characteristics of biological life
Biology is the science that studies life, but what exa ctly is life? This may sound like a silly question with an obvious response, but
it is not always easy to define life. For example, a b ranch of biology called virology studies viruses, wh ich exhibit some of the
characteristics of living entities but lack others. I t turns out that although viruses can attack living organisms, cause diseases, and
even reproduce, they do not meet the criteria that biologists use to define life. Consequently, virologis ts are not biologists, strictly
speaking. Similarly, some biologists study the early molecular evolution that gave rise to life; since the events that preceded life are
not biological events, these scientists are also exclu ded from biology in the strict sense of the term.
From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with these questions: What are the shared properties that make something
“alive”? And once we know something is alive, how do we find m eaningful levels of organization in its structure?
What You’ll Learn to Do
List the properties of life
Order the levels of organization of living things
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Properties of Life
Levels of Organization of Living Things
Self Check: Characteristics of Life
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Characteristics of Life. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
3.2: Introduction to Characteristics of Life is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435093.3: Properties of Life
All living organisms share several key characteristic s or functions: order, sensitivity or response to the env ironment, reproduction,
growth and development, regulation, homeostasis, and e nergy processing. When viewed together, these character istics serve to
define life.
Order
Figure 1. A toad represents a highly organized structur e consisting of cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems.
Organisms are highly organized, coordinated structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, sing le-celled organisms
are remarkably complex: inside each cell, atoms make up molecules; these in turn make up cell organelles and other cellular
inclusions.
In multicellular organisms (Figure 1), similar cells form tissues. Tissues, in turn, collaborate to create organs (body structures with
a distinct function). Organs work together to form organ sys tems.
Sensitivity or Response to Stimuli
Figure 2. The leaves of this sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) will instantly droop and fold when touched. After a few minutes, the
plant returns to normal. (credit: Alex Lomas)
Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plant s can bend toward a source of light, climb on fences a nd walls, or respond
to touch (Figure 2). Even tiny bacteria can move towar d or away from chemicals (a process called chemotaxis) or light
(phototaxis). Movement toward a stimulus is considered a positiv e response, while movement away from a stimulus is con sidered a
negative response.
Watch this video to see how plants respond to a stimulus—from openin g to light, to wrapping a tendril around a branch, to
capturing prey.
Reproduction
Single-celled organisms reproduce by first duplicating their DNA, and then dividing it equally as the cell pr epares to divide to form
two new cells. Multicellular organisms often produce s pecialized reproductive germline cells that will for m new individuals. When
reproduction occurs, genes containing DNA are passed a long to an organism’s offspring. These genes ensure th at the offspring will
belong to the same species and will have similar characte ristics, such as size and shape.

3.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43509Growth and Development
Figure 3. Although no two look alike, these puppies ha ve inherited genes from both parents and share many of the same
characteristics.
Organisms grow and develop following specific instructio ns coded for by their genes. These genes provide instru ctions that will
direct cellular growth and development, ensuring tha t a species’ young (Figure 3) will grow up to exhibit many of the same
characteristics as its parents.
Regulation
Even the smallest organisms are complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate intern al functions, respond to
stimuli, and cope with environmental stresses. Two exampl es of internal functions regulated in an organism ar e nutrient transport
and blood flow. Organs (groups of tissues working togeth er) perform specific functions, such as carrying oxygen throughout the
body, removing wastes, delivering nutrients to every cell, and cooling the body.
Homeostasis
Figure 4. Polar bears (Ursus maritimus) and other mammals living in ice-covered regions mai ntain their body temperature by
generating heat and reducing heat loss through thick fur and a dense layer of fat under their skin. (credi t: “longhorndave”/Flickr)
In order to function properly, cells need to have a ppropriate conditions such as proper temperature, pH, and appropriate
concentration of diverse chemicals. These condition s may, however, change from one moment to the next. Orga nisms are able to
maintain internal conditions within a narrow range al most constantly, despite environmental changes, throu gh homeostasis
(literally, “steady state”)—the ability of an organis m to maintain constant internal conditions. For examp le, an organism needs to
regulate body temperature through a process known as t hermoregulation. Organisms that live in cold climates, s uch as the polar
bear (Figure 4), have body structures that help them withstand low temperatures and conserve body heat. Str uctures that aid in this
type of insulation include fur, feathers, blubber, an d fat. In hot climates, organisms have methods (suc h as perspiration in humans
or panting in dogs) that help them to shed excess body he at.
Energy Processing
All organisms use a source of energy for their metab olic activities. Some organisms capture energy from th e sun and convert it into
chemical energy in food (photosynthesis); others use che mical energy in molecules they take in as food (cellu lar respiration).

3.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43509
Figure 5. The California condor (Gymnogyps californianus) uses chemical energy derived from food to power fli ght. California
condors are an endangered species; this bird has a wing tag that helps biologists identify the individual.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
fresh litter. Authored by: Magalie LAbbe. Located at: https://flic.kr/p/9yeYXd. License: CC BY-NC: AttributionNonCommercial
Public domain content
Bufo viridis/European Green Toad. Authored by: Ivengo(RUS). Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Bufo_viridis.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Young California condor (Gymnogyps californianus) read y for flight. Provided by: US Fish and Wildlife Service. Located at:
https://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:California-condor.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
3.3: Properties of Life is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435113.4: Introduction to Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
Identify the different kinds of cells that make up different kinds of organisms
There are two types of cells: prokaryotic and eukaryo tic. In this section, we’ll explore the similarities and differences between these
two types.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify features common to all cells
Contrast the composition and size of prokaryotic and eu karyotic cells
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
Self Check: Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
3.4: Introduction to Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435123.5: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
Cells fall into one of two broad categories: prokaryo tic and eukaryotic. The single-celled organisms of the domains Bacteria and
Archaea are classified as prokaryotes (pro = before; karyon – = nucleus). Animal cells, plant cells, fungi, and p rotists are eukaryotes
(eu = true).
Components of Prokaryotic Cells
All cells share four common components: (1) a plasma membrane, an outer covering that separates the cell’s interior from its
surrounding environment; (2) cytoplasm, consisting of a jelly-like region within the cell in which other cellular components are
found; (3) DNA, the genetic material of the cell; and (4) ribosomes, particles that synthesize proteins. Howev er, prokaryotes differ
from eukaryotic cells in several ways.
Figure 1. This figure shows the generalized structure of a prokaryotic cell.
A prokaryotic cell is a simple, single-celled (unicellular) organism t hat lacks a nucleus, or any other membrane-bound org anelle.
We will shortly come to see that this is significantly d ifferent in eukaryotes. Prokaryotic DNA is found in the central part of the
cell: a darkened region called the nucleoid (Figure 1).
Unlike Archaea and eukaryotes, bacteria have a cell wa ll made of peptidoglycan, comprised of sugars and amino acids, and many
have a polysaccharide capsule (Figure 1). The cell wall acts as an extra layer of protection, helps the cel l maintain its shape, and
prevents dehydration. The capsule enables the cell t o attach to surfaces in its environment. Some prokaryot es have flagella, pili, or
fimbriae. Flagella are used for locomotion, while most pili are used to exchange genetic material during a type of reproduction
called conjugation.
Eukaryotic Cells
In nature, the relationship between form and function is apparent at all levels, including the level of the cell, and this will become
clear as we explore eukaryotic cells. The principle “ form follows function” is found in many contexts. It m eans that, in general, one
can deduce the function of a structure by looking a t its form, because the two are matched. For example, birds and fish have
streamlined bodies that allow them to move quickly throug h the medium in which they live, be it air or water.
A eukaryotic cell is a cell that has a membrane-bound nucleus and ot her membrane-bound compartments or sacs, called
organelles, which have specialized functions. The word eukaryot ic means “true kernel” or “true nucleus,” alluding to the presence
of the membrane-bound nucleus in these cells. The word “organelle” means “little organ,” and, as we learned earlier, organelles
have specialized cellular functions, just as the organs o f your body have specialized functions.
Cell Size
At 0.1–5.0 µm in diameter, prokaryotic cells are signifi cantly smaller than eukaryotic cells, which have diame ters ranging from 10–
100 µm (Figure 2). The small size of prokaryotes allows ions and organic molecules that enter them to quick ly spread to other parts
of the cell. Similarly, any wastes produced within a pro karyotic cell can quickly move out. However, larger euk aryotic cells have
evolved different structural adaptations to enhance cellular transport. Indeed, the large size of these cells would not be possible
without these adaptations. In general, cell size is lim ited because volume increases much more quickly than does cell surface area.
As a cell becomes larger, it becomes more and more dif ficult for the cell to acquire sufficient materials to support the processes
inside the cell, because the relative size of the surf ace area across which materials must be transported declin es.

3.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43512
Figure 2. This figure shows the relative sizes of differe nt kinds of cells and cellular components. An adult hu man is shown for
comparison.
Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms of the domain s Bacteria and Archaea. All prokaryotes have plasma me mbranes,
cytoplasm, ribosomes, a cell wall, DNA, and lack membrane-b ound organelles. Many also have polysaccharide capsul es.
Prokaryotic cells range in diameter from 0.1–5.0 µm.
Like a prokaryotic cell, a eukaryotic cell has a pl asma membrane, cytoplasm, and ribosomes, but a eukaryot ic cell is typically
larger than a prokaryotic cell, has a true nucleus (meaning its DNA is surrounded by a membrane), and has o ther membranebound organelles that allow for compartmentalization of functions. Eukaryotic cells tend to be 10 to 100 times the size of
prokaryotic cells.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Concepts of Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2-839c-42b0-a314e119a8aafbdd@8.10. License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@8.10
3.5: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

3.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435103.6: Levels of Organization of Living Things
Living things are highly organized and structured, f ollowing a hierarchy that can be examined on a scale from small to large. The
atom is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. It consists of a nucleus surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules.
A molecule is a chemical structure consisting of at least two at oms held together by one or more chemical bonds. Man y molecules
that are biologically important are macromolecules, large molecules that are typically formed by poly merization (a polymer is a
large molecule that is made by combining smaller un its called monomers, which are simpler than macromole cules). An example of
a macromolecule is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (Figure 1), which contains the instructions for the structur e and functioning of all
living organisms.
Figure 1. All molecules, including this DNA molecule, are composed of atoms. (credit: “brian0918″/Wikimedia Commons)
Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surr ounded by membranes; these are called organelles. Organelles are small
structures that exist within cells. Examples of organel les include mitochondria and chloroplasts, which carry out indispensable
functions: mitochondria produce energy to power the cell, while chloroplasts enable green plants to utiliz e the energy in sunlight to
make sugars. All living things are made of cells; the cell itself is the smallest fundamental unit of structure and function in living
organisms. (This requirement is why viruses are not consid ered living: they are not made of cells. To make new viruses, they have
to invade and hijack the reproductive mechanism of a living cell; only then can they obtain the materi als they need to reproduce.)
Some organisms consist of a single cell and others are multicellular. Cells are classified as prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Prokaryotes
are single-celled or colonial organisms that do not have membrane-bound nuclei or organelles; in contra st, the cells of eukaryotes
do have membrane-bound organelles and a membrane-bound nuc leus.
In larger organisms, cells combine to make tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out simil ar or related functions.
Organs are collections of tissues grouped together perform ing a common function. Organs are present not only in animals but also
in plants. An organ system is a higher level of organization that consists of functionally related organs. Mammals have many organ
systems. For instance, the circulatory system transport s blood through the body and to and from the lungs; it includes organs such
as the heart and blood vessels. Organisms are individual living entities. For example, each tree in a forest is an organism. Singlecelled prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are a lso considered organisms and are typically referred to as microorganisms.
All the individuals of a species living within a spec ific area are collectively called a population. For example, a forest may include
many pine trees. All of these pine trees represent the population of pine trees in this forest. Different p opulations may live in the
same specific area. For example, the forest with the pin e trees includes populations of flowering plants and also insects and
microbial populations. A community is the sum of populations inhabiting a particular a rea. For instance, all of the trees, flowers,
insects, and other populations in a forest form the forest’s community. Keep in mind that the community l evel only consists of
living organisms. The forest itself is an ecosystem; this is the first level that contains non-living asp ects of a given area that impact
the living things in that environment. An ecosystem consists of all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic,
non-living parts of that environment such as nitrog en in the soil or rain water. At the highest level of o rganization (Figure 2), the
biosphere is the collection of all ecosystems, and it represen ts the zones of life on earth. It includes land, water, and even the
atmosphere to a certain extent.

3.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43510Practice Question
From a single organelle to the entire biosphere, living org anisms are parts of a highly structured hierarchy.
Figure 2. The biological levels of organization of li ving things are shown. From a single organelle to the entire biosphere, living
organisms are parts of a highly structured hierarchy. (credit “organelles”: modification of work by Umberto Salvagnin; credit
“cells”: modification of work by Bruce Wetzel, Harry Schaefer/ National Cancer Institute; credit “tissues”: modification of work by
Kilbad; Fama Clamosa; Mikael Häggström; credit “organ s”: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal; credit “organisms”:
modification of work by “Crystal”/Flickr; credit “eco systems”: modification of work by US Fish and Wildlife Ser vice
Headquarters; credit “biosphere”: modification of wor k by NASA)
Which of the following statements is false?
a. Tissues exist within organs, which exist within organ syst ems.
b. Communities exist within populations, which exist within ecosystems.
c. Organelles exist within cells, which exist within tissues.
d. Communities exist within ecosystems, which exist in th e biosphere.
[reveal-answer q=”750531″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”750531″]Statement b is false: populati ons exist within communities.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8

3.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435103.6: Levels of Organization of Living Things is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435133.7: Introduction to Taxonomy
Describe classification and organizational tools biologists use, including modern taxonomy
Figure 1. Our planet
Viewed from space, Earth offers no clues about the div ersity of life forms that reside there. The first form s of life on Earth are
thought to have been microorganisms that existed for b illions of years in the ocean before plants and anim als appeared. The
mammals, birds, and flowers so familiar to us are all r elatively recent, originating 130 to 200 million ye ars ago. Humans have
inhabited this planet for only the last 2.5 million years, and only in the last 200,000 years have humans started looking like we do
today.
When faced with the remarkable diversity of life, how do we organize the different kinds of organisms so tha t we can better
understand them? As new organisms are discovered ever y day, biologists continue to seek answers to these and other questions. In
this outcome, we will discuss taxonomy, which both demonstrates the vast diversity of life and tries to organize these organisms in
a way we can understand.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Explain the “diversity of life”
Explain the purpose of phylogenetic trees
Explain how relationships are indicated by the binomial n aming system
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
The Diversity of Life
Phylogenetic Trees
Taxonomy
Self Check: Taxonomy
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Taxonomy. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY:
Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Public domain content
EPIC Earth Image. Provided by: NASA. Located at: http://www.nasa.gov/image-feature/nasa-captures-epic-ea rth-image.
License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
3.7: Introduction to Taxonomy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435143.8: The Diversity of Life
Figure 1. Life on earth is incredibly diverse.
Biological diversity is the variety of life on earth. Thi s includes all the different plants, animals, and microorgan isms; the genes they contain; and the ecosystems they form on land and in water.
Biological diversity is constantly changing. It is increased by n ew genetic variation and reduced by extinction and habitat degradat ion.
What Is Biodiversity?
Biodiversity refers to the variety of life and its processes, including the variety of living organisms, the genetic di fferences among them, and the communities and ecosystems in which they occur.
Scientists have identified about 1.9 million species alive t oday. They are divided into the six kingdoms of life shown in Fig ure 2. Scientists are still discovering new species. Thus, they do not know
for sure how many species really exist today. Most estimates range from 5 to 30 million species.
Figure 2. Click for a larger image. Known life on earth
Cogs and Wheels
To save every cog and wheel is the first precaution of intelligent t inkering.
—Aldo Leopold, Round River: from the Journals of Aldo Leopold, 1953
Leopold—often considered the father of modern ecology—would have likely found the term biodiversity an appropriate description of his “cogs and wheels,” eve n though idea did not become a
vital component of biology until nearly 40 years after his death i n 1948.
Literally, the word biodiversity means the many different kinds (diversity) of life (bio-), or the number of species in a particular area.
Biologists, however, are always alert to levels of organization, a nd have identified three unique measures of life’s variation:
The most precise and specific measure of biodiversity is genetic diversity or genetic variation within a species. This measure of diversity looks at differences amon g individuals within a
population, or at difference across different populations of the sa me species.
The level just broader is species diversity, which best fits the literal translation of biodiversity: the number of different species in a particular ecosystem or on Ear th. This type of diversity simply
looks at an area and reports what can be found there.
At the broadest most encompassing level, we have ecosystem diversity. As Leopold clearly understood, the “cogs and wheels” include not only life but also the land, sea, and air that support
life. In ecosystem diversity, biologists look at the many types of fun ctional units formed by living communities interacting with their e nvironments.
Although all three levels of diversity are important, the term biodiver sity usually refers to species diversity!
Watch this discussion about biodiversity:
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the bottom of th is page.
You can view the transcript for “Biodiversity from ‘the Wild Classroom'” here (link opens in new window).
Biodiversity provides us with all of our food. It also provides fo r many medicines and industrial products, and it has great potential for developing new and improved products for the future. Perhaps
most importantly, biological diversity provides and maintai ns a wide array of ecological “services.” These include pro vision of clean air and water, soil, food and shelter. The quality—and theLearning Objectives

3.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43514continuation— of our life and our economy is dependent on these “servic es.”
Figure 2. The short-beaked echidna is endemic to Austra lia. This animal—along with the platypus and three ot her species of echidnas—is one of the five surviving spec ies of egg-laying
mammals.
The long isolation of Australia over much of the last 50 mi llion years and its northward movement have led to the evolut ion of a distinct biota. Significant features of Australia’s biolo gical diversity
include:
A high percentage of endemic species (that is, they occur nowhere else):
over 80% of flowering plants
over 80% of land mammals
88% of reptiles
45% of birds
92% of frogs
Wildlife groups of great richness. Australia has an exceptional di versity of lizards in the arid zone, many ground orchids, and a tot al invertebrate fauna estimated at 200,000 species with more
than 4,000 different species of ants alone. Marsupials and monotremes co llectively account for about 56% of native terrestrial mammals in Au stralia.
Wildlife of major evolutionary importance. For example, Austra lia has 12 of the 19 known families of primitive flowering plants, two of which occur nowhere else. Some species, such as the
Queensland lungfish and peripatus, have remained relatively unchan ged for hundreds of millions of years.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision and adaptation. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biodiversity. Provided by: CK-12. Located at: http://www.ck12.org/biology/Biodiversity/lesson/Biodiversity-BIO/? referrer=featured_content. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
Conserving Australia's biological diversity. Provided by: Australian Government, Department of the Environment and Energy. Located at:
www.environment.gov.au/sustainability/education/publication s/conserving-australias-biological-diversity-teachers-notes. License: CC BY: Attribution
Long-beaked Echidna. Authored by: Jaganath. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Long-beakedEchidna.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Biodiversity Diagram. Provided by: Alberta Biodiversity Monitoring Institute (ABMI). Located at: www.abmi.ca/home/biodiversity/what-is-biodiversity.html. License: CC BY: Attribution
All rights reserved content
Biodiversity - from The Wild Classroom. Authored by: Rob & Jonas Filmmaking Tips. Located at: https://youtu.be/vGxJArebKoc. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard
YouTube License
3.8: The Diversity of Life is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Libr eTexts.Try It

3.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435153.9: Phylogenetic Trees
In scientific terms, the evolutionary history and r elationship of an organism or group of organisms is cal led phylogeny. Phylogeny
describes the relationships of one organism to othe rs—such as which organisms it is thought to have evolv ed from, which species it
is most closely related to, and so forth. Phylogenet ic relationships provide information on shared ance stry but not necessarily on
how organisms are similar or different.
Scientists use a tool called a phylogenetic tree to show the evolutionary pathways and connections among o rganisms. A
phylogenetic tree is a diagram used to reflect evolutionary relation ships among organisms or groups of organisms. Scientist s
consider phylogenetic trees to be a hypothesis of the evolutionary past since one cannot go back to confir m the proposed
relationships. In other words, a “tree of life” can be co nstructed to illustrate when different organisms evol ved and to show the
relationships among different organisms (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Both of these phylogenetic trees shows the rel ationship of the three domains of life—Bacteria, Arch aea, and Eukarya—
but the (a) rooted tree attempts to identify when va rious species diverged from a common ancestor while the (b) unrooted tree does
not. (credit a: modification of work by Eric Gaba)
A phylogenetic tree can be read like a map of evolu tionary history. Many phylogenetic trees have a single lineage at the base
representing a common ancestor. Scientists call such tre es rooted, which means there is a single ancestral l ineage (typically drawn
from the bottom or left) to which all organisms represe nted in the diagram relate. Notice in the rooted phy logenetic tree that the
three domains—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya—diverge from a single point and branch off. The small branch t hat plants and
animals (including humans) occupy in this diagram shows how recent and minuscule these groups are compared wi th other
organisms. Unrooted trees don’t show a common ancestor but do show relationships among species.
Carl Woese and the Phylogenetic Tree
In the past, biologists grouped living organisms int o five kingdoms: animals, plants, fungi, protists, and bacteria. The organizational
scheme was based mainly on physical features, as oppose d to physiology, biochemistry, or molecular biology, a ll of which are used
by modern systematics. The pioneering work of American microbiologist Carl Woese in the early 1970s has sh own, however, that
life on Earth has evolved along three lineages, now c alled domains—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. The first two are prokaryotic
groups of microbes that lack membrane-enclosed nucle i and organelles. The third domain contains the euka ryotes and includes
unicellular microorganisms together with the four orig inal kingdoms (excluding bacteria). Woese defined Arc haea as a new
domain, and this resulted in a new taxonomic tree (Figu re 1a). Many organisms belonging to the Archaea domain l ive under
extreme conditions and are called extremophiles. To co nstruct his tree, Woese used genetic relationships r ather than similarities
based on morphology (shape).
Woese’s tree was constructed from comparative sequenci ng of the genes that are universally distributed, pre sent in every organism,
and conserved (meaning that these genes have remained essentially unchanged throughout evolution). Woese’ s approach was
revolutionary because comparisons of physical featur es are insufficient to differentiate between the prok aryotes that appear fairly
similar in spite of their tremendous biochemical div ersity and genetic variability (Figure 2). The compar ison of homologous DNA
and RNA sequences provided Woese with a sensitive dev ice that revealed the extensive variability of proka ryotes, and which
justified the separation of the prokaryotes into two domai ns: bacteria and archaea.

3.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43515
Figure 2. These organisms represent different domains. Th e (a) bacteria in this micrograph belong to Domain B acteria, while the
(b) extremophiles (not visible) living in this hot ven t belong to Domain Archaea. Both the (c) sunflower a nd (d) lion are part of
Domain Eukarya. (credit a: modification of work by Drew March; credit b: modification of work by Steve Jurvetson; credit c:
modification of work by Michael Arrighi; credit d: modification of work by Leszek Leszcynski)
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
3.9: Phylogenetic Trees is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435003.10: Taxonomy
Taxonomy (which literally means “arrangement law”) is the sci ence of classifying organisms to construct internatio nally shared
classification systems with each organism placed into more and more inclusive groupings. Think about how a grocery store is
organized. One large space is divided into departments, s uch as produce, dairy, and meats. Then each department further divides
into aisles, then each aisle into categories and bra nds, and then finally a single product. This organiz ation from larger to smaller,
more specific categories is called a hierarchical sys tem.
The taxonomic classification system (also called the Linnaean system after its inventor, Carl Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist,
zoologist, and physician) uses a hierarchical model. Moving from the point of origin, the groups become mo re specific, until one
branch ends as a single species. For example, after the common beginning of all life, scientists divide o rganisms into three large
categories called a domain: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eu karya. Within each domain is a second category call ed a kingdom. After
kingdoms, the subsequent categories of increasing specific ity are: phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species (Figure 1).
Figure 1. The taxonomic classification system uses a hiera rchical model to organize living organisms into incre asingly specific
categories. The common dog, Canis lupus familiaris, is a subspecies of Canis lupus, which also includes the wolf a nd dingo. (credit
“dog”: modification of work by Janneke Vreugdenhil)

3.10.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43500The kingdom Animalia stems from the Eukarya domain. Fo r the common dog, the classification levels would be as shown in
Figure 1. Therefore, the full name of an organism tec hnically has eight terms. For the dog, it is: Eukarya, Animalia, Chordata,
Mammalia, Carnivora, Canidae, Canis, and lupus. Notice that each name is capitalized except for sp ecies, and the genus and
species names are italicized. Scientists generally ref er to an organism only by its genus and species, whi ch is its two-word scientific
name, in what is called binomial nomenclature. Each species has a unique binomial nomenclature to allow for proper
identification.
Therefore, the scientific name of the dog is Canis lupus.
It is important that the correct formatting (capitaliz ation and italics) is used when calling an organism by its s pecific binomial.
The name at each level is also called a taxon. In other words, dogs are in order Carnivora. Carniv ora is the name of the taxon at the
order level; Canidae is the taxon at the family lev el, and so forth. Organisms also have a common name tha t people typically use, in
this case, dog. Note that the dog is additionally a su bspecies: the “ familiaris ” in Canis lupus familiaris. Subspecies are members of
the same species that are capable of mating and repro ducing viable offspring, but they are considered sepa rate subspecies due to
geographic or behavioral isolation or other factors.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
3.10: Taxonomy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435013.11: Introduction to the Study of Biology
Describe biology as a science and identify the key components of scientific inquiry
The scope of biology is vast. Biologists may study a nything from the microscopic (Figure 1a) or submicro scopic view of a cell to
ecosystems (Figure 1b) and the whole living planet.
Figure 1. (a) Formerly called blue-green algae, these cyanobacteria, shown here at 300× magnification unde r a light microscope,
are some of Earth’s oldest life forms. (b) These stromato lites along the shores of Lake Thetis in Western Australi a are ancient
structures formed by the layering of cyanobacteria in shallow waters.
Listening to the daily news, you will quickly realize how many aspects of biology are discussed every day. Yo u may hear about E.
coli (Escherichia coli) outbreaks in spinach or listeria contamination in i ce cream. Or you may hear about efforts toward findin g a
cure for Ebola, Alzheimer’s disease, and cancer. On a g lobal scale, many researchers are committed to findi ng ways to protect the
planet, solve environmental issues, and reduce the ef fects of climate change. All of these diverse endeavo rs are related to different
facets of the discipline of biology.
Regardless of their particular focus of study, all biologists use the same methodology as they seek new dis coveries: scientific
inquiry.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify the main branches of biology
Describe “scientific inquiry” and identify its scope of c overage
Form a hypothesis and use it to design a scientific exper iment
Analyze simple data and graphed results
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
The Branches of Biology
Scientific Inquiry
Experiments and Hypotheses
Interpreting Results
Self Check: The Study of Biology
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision, adaptation, and original content. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution

3.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43501CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Stromatolites at Lake Thetis. Authored by: Ruth Ellison. Located at: https://flic.kr/p/ezabK. License: CC BY-NC: AttributionNonCommercial
Public domain content
Modification of Cyanobacteria; scale-bar data from Matt Russell. Provided by: NASA. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cyanobacteria_gue rrero_negro.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
3.11: Introduction to the Study of Biology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435023.12: The Branches of Biology
The scope of biology is broad and therefore contains many branches and sub-disciplines. Biologists may pursue one of those subdisciplines and work in a more focused field. For inst ance, molecular biology and biochemistry study biolog ical processes at the
molecular and chemical level, including interactions among molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins, as well as the way they
are regulated. Microbiology, the study of microorgan isms, is the study of the structure and function of sin gle-celled organisms. It is
quite a broad branch itself, and depending on the su bject of study, there are also microbial physiologist s, ecologists, and geneticists,
among others.
Forensic Science
Figure 1. This forensic scientist works in a DNA extracti on room at the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Labor atory at Fort
Gillem, GA. (credit: United States Army CID Command P ublic Affairs)
Forensic science is the application of science to ans wer questions related to the law. Biologists as well a s chemists and biochemists
can be forensic scientists. Forensic scientists provide s cientific evidence for use in courts, and their job i nvolves examining trace
materials associated with crimes. Interest in forensi c science has increased in the last few years, possibly b ecause of popular
television shows that feature forensic scientists on the job. Also, the development of molecular techniques an d the establishment of
DNA databases have expanded the types of work that forensic scientists can do.
Their job activities are primarily related to crime s against people such as murder, rape, and assault. Their work involves analyzing
samples such as hair, blood, and other body fluids and also processing DNA (Figure 1) found in many different environments and
materials.
Forensic scientists also analyze other biological evid ence left at crime scenes, such as insect larvae or pollen grains. Students who
want to pursue careers in forensic science will most likely be required to take chemistry and biology co urses as well as some
intensive math courses.
Another field of biological study, neurobiology, stud ies the biology of the nervous system, and although it is considered a branch of
biology, it is also recognized as an interdisciplinar y field of study known as neuroscience. Because of it s interdisciplinary nature,
this sub-discipline studies different functions of the nervous system using molecular, cellular, developmental, medical, and
computational approaches.
Figure 2. Researchers work on excavating dinosaur fossils at a site in Castellón, Spain. (credit: Mario Modesto)
Paleontology, another branch of biology, uses fossils to study life’s history (Figure 2). Zoology and botany ar e the study of animals
and plants, respectively. Biologists can also specia lize as biotechnologists, ecologists, or physiologist s, to name just a few areas.
This is just a small sample of the many fields that biologi sts can pursue.

3.12.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43502Biology is the culmination of the achievements of th e natural sciences from their inception to today. Exc itingly, it is the cradle of
emerging sciences, such as the biology of brain acti vity, genetic engineering of custom organisms, and the biology of evolution that
uses the laboratory tools of molecular biology to r etrace the earliest stages of life on earth. A scan of news headlines—whether
reporting on immunizations, a newly discovered species, sports doping, or a genetically modified food—demons trates the way
biology is active in and important to our everyday world.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
3.12: The Branches of Biology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435033.13: Scientific Inquiry
Science deals with testable knowledge about physical ph enomena in the universe. The goal of science is to u nderstand how the
universe works. Biology focuses on understanding livi ng things. To gain knowledge about nature and physical phenomena,
scientists use a particular approach called “scientific inquiry.”
Scientific inquiry is the best approach we have to un derstanding the natural world and predicting natural phenomena. Evidence for
this claim can be found in the successes of science-ba sed technologies. Take medicine, for example. Prior to t he 1700s, most
medical practices were based on folk traditions or on ideas promoted by religious leaders. Some of these pre scientific remedies
worked, but the process for discovering new treatments wa s a slow and haphazard system of trial and error. Ineff ective treatments
were often accepted simply because there was no clear pr ocedure for evaluating them. Today, with science-base d medicine and
public health practices, we have gained unprecedente d control over threats to our health. According to t he Centers for Disease
Control, the average life expectancy in the United States h as increased by more than 30 years since 1900.
Scientific inquiry has not displaced faith, intuition, and dreams. These traditions and ways of knowing have emotional value and
provide moral guidance to many people. But hunches, feelings, deep convictions, old traditions, or dreams cannot be accepted
directly as scientifically valid. Instead, science limi ts itself to ideas that can be tested through verifi able observations. Supernatural
claims that events are caused by ghosts, devils, God, or other s piritual entities cannot be tested in this way.
Practice Question
Your friend sees this image of a circle of mushrooms and excitedly tells you it was caused by fairies dan cing in a circle on the grass
the night before. Can your friend’s explanation be studi ed using the process of science?
Figure 1. A fairy ring
[reveal-answer q=”665464″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”665464″]In theory, you might try t o observe the fairies. But fairies are magical or su pernatural beings. We have
never observed them using any verifiable method, so s cientists agree that they cannot be studied using sc ientific tools. Instead,
science has an explanation supported by strong evide nce: “fairy rings” result when a single colony of fun gus spreads out into good
habitat over a period of many years. The core area is clear of mushrooms because the soil nutrients hav e been partly depleted there.
This idea can be evaluated with repeated observations over time using chemical soil tests and other verifiab le measurements.
[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Scientific Inquiry. Provided by: Open Learning Initiative. Located at: https://oli.cmu.edu/jcourse/workbook/activity/page?
context=434a5c2680020ca6017c03488572e0f8. Project: Introduction to Biology (Open + Free). License: CC BY-NC-SA:
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
3.13: Scientific Inquiry is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435043.14: Experiments and Hypotheses
Now we’ll focus on the methods of scientific inquiry. Sci ence often involves making observations and developin g hypotheses.
Experiments and further observations are often used to test the hypotheses.
A scientific experiment is a carefully organized pro cedure in which the scientist intervenes in a system to change something, then
observes the result of the change. Scientific inquiry often involves doing experiments, though not always. Fo r example, a scientist
studying the mating behaviors of ladybugs might beg in with detailed observations of ladybugs mating in t heir natural habitats.
While this research may not be experimental, it is sc ientific: it involves careful and verifiable observa tion of the natural world. The
same scientist might then treat some of the ladybugs with a hormone hypothesized to trigger mating and o bserve whether these
ladybugs mated sooner or more often than untreated on es. This would qualify as an experiment because the s cientist is now making
a change in the system and observing the effects.
Forming a Hypothesis
When conducting scientific experiments, researchers develop hypotheses to guide experimental design. A hypothesis is a suggested
explanation that is both testable and falsifiable. Yo u must be able to test your hypothesis, and it must b e possible to prove your
hypothesis true or false.
For example, Michael observes that maple trees lose the ir leaves in the fall. He might then propose a possib le explanation for this
observation: “cold weather causes maple trees to lose their leaves in the fall.” This statement is testabl e. He could grow maple trees
in a warm enclosed environment such as a greenhouse a nd see if their leaves still dropped in the fall. Th e hypothesis is also
falsifiable. If the leaves still dropped in the warm en vironment, then clearly temperature was not the main factor in causing maple
leaves to drop in autumn.
In the Try It below, you can practice recognizing s cientific hypotheses. As you consider each statement, tr y to think as a scientist
would: can I test this hypothesis with observations or experiments? Is the statement falsifiable? If the a nswer to either of these
questions is “no,” the statement is not a valid scientif ic hypothesis.
Determine whether each following statement is a scientif ic hypothesis.
Air pollution from automobile exhaust can trigger sympto ms in people with asthma.
a. No. This statement is not testable or falsifiable.
b. No. This statement is not testable.
c. No. This statement is not falsifiable.
d. Yes. This statement is testable and falsifiable.
[reveal-answer q=”429550″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”429550″]d: Yes. This statement is te stable and falsifiable. This could be tested with a num ber of different
kinds of observations and experiments, and it is pos sible to gather evidence that indicates that air po llution is not linked with
asthma.
[/hidden-answer]
Natural disasters, such as tornadoes, are punishments fo r bad thoughts and behaviors.
a. No. This statement is not testable or falsifiable.
b. No. This statement is not testable.
c. No. This statement is not falsifiable.
d. Yes. This statement is testable and falsifiable.
[reveal-answer q=”74245″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”74245″]
a: No. This statement is not testable or falsifiable. “ Bad thoughts and behaviors” are excessively vague an d subjective variables
that would be impossible to measure or agree upon in a reliable way. The statement might be “falsifiable” i f you came up withPractice Questions

3.14.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43504a counterexample: a “wicked” place that was not punish ed by a natural disaster. But some would question whether the people
in that place were really wicked, and others would cont inue to predict that a natural disaster was bound to strike that place at
some point. There is no reason to suspect that peop le’s immoral behavior affects the weather unless you b ring up the
intervention of a supernatural being, making this idea eve n harder to test.
[/hidden-answer]
Testing a Vaccine
Let’s examine the scientific process by discussing an actual scientific experiment conducted by researcher s at the University of
Washington. These researchers investigated whether a va ccine may reduce the incidence of the human papillo mavirus (HPV). The
experimental process and results were published in an arti cle titled, “ A controlled trial of a human papillomavirus type 16 vac cine.”
Preliminary observations made by the researchers who cond ucted the HPV experiment are listed below:
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most common sexually trans mitted virus in the United States.
There are about 40 different types of HPV. A significant n umber of people that have HPV are unaware of it because many o f
these viruses cause no symptoms.
Some types of HPV can cause cervical cancer.
About 4,000 women a year die of cervical cancer in the United States.
Researchers have developed a potential vaccine agai nst HPV and want to test it. What is the first testable h ypothesis that the
researchers should study?
a. HPV causes cervical cancer.
b. People should not have unprotected sex with many partner s.
c. People who get the vaccine will not get HPV.
d. The HPV vaccine will protect people against cancer.
[reveal-answer q=”20917″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”20917″]Hypothesis A is not the best choice because this information is already known from previous
studies. Hypothesis B is not testable because scientifi c hypotheses are not value statements; they do not i nclude judgments like
“should,” “better than,” etc. Scientific evidence cert ainly might support this value judgment, but a hypo thesis would take a
different form: “Having unprotected sex with many part ners increases a person’s risk for cervical cancer.” B efore the
researchers can test if the vaccine protects agains t cancer (hypothesis D), they want to test if it protects against the virus. This
statement will make an excellent hypothesis for the next study. The researchers should first test hypoth esis C—whether or not
the new vaccine can prevent HPV.[/hidden-answer]
Experimental Design
You’ve successfully identified a hypothesis for the University of Washington’s study on HPV: People who get t he HPV vaccine
will not get HPV.
The next step is to design an experiment that will te st this hypothesis. There are several important factors to consider when
designing a scientific experiment. First, scientific e xperiments must have an experimental group. This is th e group that receives the
experimental treatment necessary to address the hypot hesis.
The experimental group receives the vaccine, but how can we know if the vaccine made a difference? Many thi ngs may change
HPV infection rates in a group of people over time. T o clearly show that the vaccine was effective in helpi ng the experimental
group, we need to include in our study an otherwise s imilar control group that does not get the treatmen t. We can then compare the
two groups and determine if the vaccine made a differ ence. The control group shows us what happens in the ab sence of the factor
under study.
However, the control group cannot get “nothing.” Instea d, the control group often receives a placebo. A placebo is a procedure that
has no expected therapeutic effect—such as giving a person a sugar pill or a shot containing only plain s aline solution with no drug.Practice Question

3.14.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43504Scientific studies have shown that the “placebo effect” can alter experimental results because when individu als are told that they
are or are not being treated, this knowledge can alter their actions or their emotions, which can then alter the results of the
experiment.
Moreover, if the doctor knows which group a patient is i n, this can also influence the results of the experim ent. Without saying so
directly, the doctor may show—through body language or other subtle cues—his or her views about whether the p atient is likely to
get well. These errors can then alter the patient’s e xperience and change the results of the experiment. Therefore, many clinical
studies are “double blind.” In these studies, neither th e doctor nor the patient knows which group the patien t is in until all
experimental results have been collected.
Both placebo treatments and double-blind procedures are designed to prevent bias. Bias is any systematic e rror that makes a
particular experimental outcome more or less likely. Errors can happen in any experiment: people make mist akes in measurement,
instruments fail, computer glitches can alter data. But most such errors are random and don’t favor one outcome over another.
Patients’ belief in a treatment can make it more lik ely to appear to “work.” Placebos and double-blind proc edures are used to level
the playing field so that both groups of study subjects are treated equally and share similar beliefs about th eir treatment.
The scientists who are researching the effectiveness of the HPV vaccine will test their hypothesis by separating 2,392 young
women into two groups: the control group and the expe rimental group. Answer the following questions about th ese two
groups.
1. Which of the following groups most likely represents th e control group?
a. This group is given a placebo.
b. This group is deliberately infected with HPV.
c. This group is given nothing.
d. This group is given the HPV vaccine.
2. Which of the following groups most likely represents th e experimental group?
a. This group is given a placebo.
b. This group is deliberately infected with HPV.
c. This group is given nothing.
d. This group is given the HPV vaccine.
[reveal-answer q=”918962″] Show Answers [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”918962″]
1. a: This group is given a placebo. A placebo will be a sho t, just like the HPV vaccine, but it will have no active in gredient. It
may change peoples’ thinking or behavior to have such a sh ot given to them, but it will not stimulate the immune systems
of the subjects in the same way as predicted for the vaccine itself.
2. d: This group is given the HPV vaccine. The experimental gr oup will receive the HPV vaccine and researchers will then be
able to see if it works, when compared to the control gro up.
[/hidden-answer]
Experimental Variables
A variable is a characteristic of a subject (in thi s case, of a person in the study) that can vary over t ime or among individuals.
Sometimes a variable takes the form of a category, su ch as male or female; often a variable can be measu red precisely, such as
body height. Ideally, only one variable is different between the control group and the experimental grou p in a scientific experiment.
Otherwise, the researchers will not be able to determin e which variable caused any differences seen in the r esults. For example,
imagine that the people in the control group were, o n average, much more sexually active than the peopl e in the experimental
group. If, at the end of the experiment, the control group had a higher rate of HPV infection, could you c onfidently determine why?
Maybe the experimental subjects were protected by the vac cine, but maybe they were protected by their low level of sex ual contact.Practice Questions

3.14.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43504To avoid this situation, experimenters make sure tha t their subject groups are as similar as possible in al l variables except for the
variable that is being tested in the experiment. Thi s variable, or factor, will be deliberately changed in the experimental group. The
one variable that is different between the two groups is called the independent variable. An independent variable is known or
hypothesized to cause some outcome. Imagine an educat ional researcher investigating the effectiveness of a new teaching strategy
in a classroom. The experimental group receives the new teaching strategy, while the control group receive s the traditional strategy.
It is the teaching strategy that is the independent variable in this scenario. In an experiment, the ind ependent variable is the variable
that the scientist deliberately changes or imposes on the subjects.
Dependent variables are known or hypothesized conseque nces; they are the effects that result from changes or differences in an
independent variable. In an experiment, the dependent variables are those that the scientist measures befo re, during, and
particularly at the end of the experiment to see if they have changed as expected. The dependent variab le must be stated so that it is
clear how it will be observed or measured. Rather than comparing “learning” among students (which is a vag ue and difficult to
measure concept), an educational researcher might choose to compare test scores, which are very specific and easy to measure.
In any real-world example, many, many variables MIGHT af fect the outcome of an experiment, yet only one or a few independent
variables can be tested. Other variables must be kept as similar as possible between the study groups and a re called control
variables. For our educational research example, if the contr ol group consisted only of people between the ages o f 18 and 20 and
the experimental group contained people between the ages of 30 and 35, we would not know if it was the teachi ng strategy or the
students’ ages that played a larger role in the result s. To avoid this problem, a good study will be set up so that each group contains
students with a similar age profile. In a well-designe d educational research study, student age will be a c ontrolled variable, along
with other possibly important factors like gender, past edu cational achievement, and pre-existing knowledge of the su bject area.
What is the independent variable in this experiment?
a. Sex (all of the subjects will be female)
b. Presence or absence of the HPV vaccine
c. Age
d. Presence or absence of HPV (the virus)
[reveal-answer q=”68680″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”68680″]Answer b. Presence or absence of the HPV vaccine. This is the variable that is differen t between
the control and the experimental groups. All the subje cts in this study are female, so this variable is the same in all groups. In a
well-designed study, the two groups will be of similar a ge. The presence or absence of the virus is what the r esearchers will
measure at the end of the experiment. Ideally the two groups will both be HPV-free at the start of the experiment.
[/hidden-answer]
List three control variables other than age.
[practice-area rows=”3″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”903121″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”903121″]Some possible control varia bles would be: general health of the women, sexual acti vity, lifestyle,
diet, socioeconomic status, etc.
[/hidden-answer]
What is the dependent variable in this experiment?
a. Sex (male or female)
b. Rates of HPV infection
c. Age (years)
[reveal-answer q=”907103″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”907103″]Answer b. Rates of HPV infectio n. The researchers will measure how many individuals g ot
infected with HPV after a given period of time.[/hidden-a nswer]Practice Questions

3.14.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43504Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision and adaptation. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BYNC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Scientific Inquiry. Provided by: Open Learning Initiative. Located at: https://oli.cmu.edu/jcourse/workbook/activity/page?
context=434a5c2680020ca6017c03488572e0f8. Project: Introduction to Biology (Open + Free). License: CC BY-NC-SA:
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
3.14: Experiments and Hypotheses is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435053.15: Interpreting Results
Gathering Data
After the experiment is completed, the data gathered are carefully interpreted. This involves the measureme nt of the dependent
variable. In the case of our HPV experiment, remember, the dependent variable is the rate of HPV infection.
The researchers found that, of the 1,200 women in the control group, nine were infected with HPV at the end o f the study. Of
the 1,200 women in the experimental group, zero were infected with HPV. Does this result support the original hypothesis, that
the HPV vaccine would reduce HPV infection?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”318356″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”318356″]The results demonstrate tha t fewer individuals who got the vaccine were infected wi th HPV when
compared to the number of infected individuals who di d not get the vaccine. This supports the hypothesis that the new vaccine
protects against HPV.[/hidden-answer]
Significance
Although the HPV study suggests that the vaccine prote cts against infection by HPV, is the finding significan t? In science, as in
life, things can happen for many different reasons. A convincing study will rule out “luck” (random chance) as an explanation for
the results. Strong results are said to be significant: very unlikely to occur by chance or random events.
Whether the outcome is significant often depends on t he size of study; the larger the number of individua ls enrolled, the more
convincing the results are likely to be. For example, i magine only 10 women were enrolled in the study. In th e control group, 2 in 5
of the women became infected. In the experimental gr oup, 0 in 5 were infected. At first you might think th is proves the vaccine’s
effectiveness, but it is NOT a convincing or signific ant result. Why not? Random events could easily expl ain the difference
between the groups. For example, perhaps none of the five women in the experimental group were sexually active over the study
period. They therefore stood no chance of acquiring HPV. The vaccine might appear to work, but a skeptical reader could account
for the results by proposing many other scenarios.
However, imagine if the same study were done with 10,000 women, and the infection rates were 2,000 of 5,000 in t he control
group and zero of 5,000 in the experimental group. Ra ndom events would be spread out among a very large gr oup of people in this
study; on average, the two big groups should have simi lar sexual behavior and other factors influencing i nfection rates. If there is a
big difference at the end of the study, it is very unlikel y that this result occurred by random chance.
Statistical analyses did support the significance of the HPV vaccine result.
Researchers reported significant results from the HPV v accine experiment. If the results had NOT been signifi cant, what would
this mean?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”185159″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”185159″]If the results from this ex periment were not significant, it would mean that the number of women
who did not get HPV after being vaccinated was the same number that would be seen just from random chance.[/hid denanswer]
After the results are interpreted and conclusions are d rawn, researchers often return to their work and begin a sking further
questions. In this way, scientific inquiry is a powerful tool for exploration.Practice Question
Practice Question

3.15.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43505What would be a good next question the HPV vaccine researcher s may want to test? (More than one answer is correct.)
a. At what age is this vaccine most effective (what age group should be vaccinated)?
b. Does the HPV vaccine protect males as well as females?
c. Does protecting against HPV protect against cancer?
d. Should young girls be forced to get the vaccine against their parents’ wishes?
[reveal-answer q=”689643″] Show Answers [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”689643″]
Questions a, b, anc c are the best questions. These questio ns are currently being studied.
Although question d is important and has generated a l ot of political heat, it is not a scientific questi on. Scientists can predict
what will happen if girls are or are not vaccinated, but cannot decide whether disease risk or parental au thority is more
important.
[/hidden-answer]
Graphing Data
Watch this ten-minute video about simple graphing:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=76
You can view the transcript for “A Beginner’s Guide to Graphing Data” here (link opens in new window).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision and adaptation. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BYNC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Scientific Inquiry. Provided by: Open Learning Initiative. Located at: https://oli.cmu.edu/jcourse/workbook/activity/page?
context=434a5c2680020ca6017c03488572e0f8. Project: Introduction to Biology (Open + Free). License: CC BY-NC-SA:
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
All rights reserved content
A Beginner's Guide to Graphing Data. Authored by: Bozeman Science. Located at: https://youtu.be/9BkbYeTC6Mo. License:
All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
3.15: Interpreting Results is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Practice Question

3.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435063.16: Putting It Together- Introduction to Biology
Biology is the study of life. As we’ve learned, this fi eld covers a broad scope of subjects. As you progress thr ough this course,
you’ll gain the knowledge you need to make informed decisions. Let’s think back to the articles Cristina encountered at the
beginning of this module: how could a knowledge of biologic al principle help with her understanding of each article?
Think about It
Cristina read an article about some of the world’s we irdest animals. What biological principle would help her understand why these
animals have the features they do?
[practice-area rows=”4″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”775039″]See Our Thoughts[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”775039″]By learning about evolutio n and natural selection, Cristina could begin to see the different
evolutionary reasons behind the extreme features some animals have. For example, the aye-aye, a mammal native to Madagascar,
has evolved to have an extra long middle finger, whi ch it can use to dig grubs out of trees. We’ll learn more about how these types
of traits are selected for in the module “Theory of Evo lution.”
[/hidden-answer]
The next article Cristina read talked about GMOs (geneti cally modified organisms) and the risks they have. W hat biological
principle would help her understand the potential risks of genetically modified foods?
[practice-area rows=”4″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”781328″]See Our Thoughts[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”781328″]In order to understand pote ntial risks of GMOs, Cristina will need to first underst and the science
behind these foods. How are GMOs created? We’ll learn more ab out this in the module “Modern Biology.”
[/hidden-answer]
Cristina then looked at an article about the paleo diet. What biological principle would help her under stand the pros and cons of an
extreme diet?
[practice-area rows=”4″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”781326″]See Our Thoughts[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”781326″]In order to survive, humans require specific nutrients. While we won’t get into to o much depth about
nutrition in this course, we will learn about differe nt biological macromolecules. These macromolecules i nclude categories you
may recognize, like proteins, lipids (more commonly call ed fats), and carbohydrates. In that module, we’ll l earn about the roles
these molecules play in our bodies—we’ll learn the esse ntial functions they perform. With this knowledge, Cris tina could better
decide what she should or shouldn’t remove from her diet.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Putting It Together: Introduction to Biology. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
3.16: Putting It Together- Introduction to Biology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: Module 2- Chemistry of Life
4.1: Why It Matters- The Chemistry of Life
4.2: Introduction to Atoms and Elements
4.3: Atoms
4.4: The Periodic Table of Elements
4.5: Electrons
4.6: Introduction to Atomic Bonds
4.7: Ionic Bonds
4.8: Covalent Bonds
4.9: Hydrogen Bonds
4.10: Introduction to Functional Groups
4.11: Functional Groups
4.12: Introduction to The pH Scale
4.13: Acids and Bases
4.14: Buffers
4.15: Introduction to Chemical Reactions
4.16: Chemical Reactions and Molecules
4.17: Anabolic and Catabolic Pathways
4.18: Enzymes
4.19: Introduction to Thermodynamics
4.20: Open and Closed Systems
4.21: The First Law of Thermodynamics
4.22: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
4.23: Putting It Together- Chemistry of Life
4.24: Assignment- Biological Astronaut
4.25: Assignment- Interacting with Attributes of Molecules
4: Module 2- Chemistry of Life is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435274.1: Why It Matters- The Chemistry of Life
Why identify the principles of chemistry that are integral to biology?
You may have heard the phrase “carbon-based life” wh en people discuss life on earth. Carbon is an elemen t—one of the basic
substances everything is made up of—but just what it mean to say life is “carbon-based”?
In order to understand this concept, we’ll need to und erstand more about elements, which means learning abou t chemistry. While
chemistry is a separate field, its principles form t he basis of biology. As you learned in the last module, all living things
demonstrate hierarchical organization. You cannot tr uly understand the higher levels of organization (s uch as organisms or
ecosystems) without understanding their component parts (like cells, molecules, and atoms).
Professionals who use this chemistry in their daily work include nutritionists, healthcare workers (especially when prescribing and
administering medications), geneticists, and pharmacol ogists.
Nutritionists are often responsible for planning hea lthy menus and meal plans, for example in schools or daycares. They may
advise individuals on changes in diet in order to ach ieve a particular health goal. Why do you think the y might need to know
about chemistry?
Learning Outcomes
Identify the building blocks of matter
Classify different types of atomic bonds
Categorize molecules according to their functional group
Demonstrate familiarity with the pH scale
Understand basic chemical reactions
Demonstrate familiarity with the first and second laws of thermodynamics
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: The Chemistry of Life. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
4.1: Why It Matters- The Chemistry of Life is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Try It

4.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435344.2: Introduction to Atoms and Elements
Identify the building blocks of matter
At its most fundamental level, life is made up of matte r. Matter is any substance that occupies space and has mass. Elements are
unique forms of matter with specific chemical and phy sical properties that cannot be broken down into sma ller substances by
ordinary chemical reactions. There are 118 elements, b ut only 92 occur naturally. The remaining elements a re synthesized in
laboratories and are unstable.
Each element is designated by its chemical symbol, whi ch is a single capital letter or, when the first lett er is already “taken” by
another element, a combination of two letters. Some e lements follow the English term for the element, such as C for carbon and Ca
for calcium. Other elements’ chemical symbols derive from their Latin names; for example, the symbol for sodium is Na, referring
to natrium, the Latin word for sodium.
The four elements common to all living organisms are oxygen (O), carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and nitrogen (N). I n the non-living
world, elements are found in different proportions, a nd some elements common to living organisms are relat ively rare on the earth
as a whole, as shown in Table 1. For example, the atmosph ere is rich in nitrogen and oxygen but contains lit tle carbon and
hydrogen, while the earth’s crust, although it contains oxygen and a small amount of hydrogen, has little ni trogen and carbon. In
spite of their differences in abundance, all element s and the chemical reactions between them obey the sa me chemical and physical
laws regardless of whether they are a part of the living or non -living world.
Table 1. Approximate Percentage of Elements in Living Organisms (Humans) Compared to the Non-living World
Element Life (Humans) Atmosphere Earth’s Crust
Oxygen (O) 65% 21% 46%
Carbon (C) 18% trace trace
Hydrogen (H) 10% trace 0.1%
Nitrogen (N) 3% 78% trace
What You’ll Learn to Do
Draw a diagram of an atom, according to current scientifi c understanding
Understand the periodic table of elements and how to use it t o understand elements
Describe the behavior and location of electrons, and how these factors influence bond formation between atoms
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Atoms
The Periodic Table of Elements
Electrons
Self Check: Atoms and Elements
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Atoms and Elements. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
4.2: Introduction to Atoms and Elements is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43534

4.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435354.3: Atoms
Structure of the Atom
To understand how elements come together, we must first d iscuss the smallest component or building block of an element, the
atom. An atom is the smallest unit of matter that retains all of the chemical properties of an element. For example, one gold atom
has all of the properties of gold in that it is a sol id metal at room temperature. A gold coin is simply a very large number of gold
atoms molded into the shape of a coin and containin g small amounts of other elements known as impurities. Gold atoms cannot be
broken down into anything smaller while still retaining the properties of gold.
An atom is composed of two regions: the nucleus, which is in the center of the atom and contains pro tons and neutrons, and the
outermost region of the atom which holds its electro ns in orbit around the nucleus, as illustrated in Fi gure 1. Atoms contain
protons, electrons, and neutrons, among other subatomi c particles. The only exception is hydrogen (H), which is made of one
proton and one electron with no neutrons.
Figure 1. Elements, such as helium, depicted here, are made up of atoms. Atoms are made up of protons and neu trons located
within the nucleus, with electrons in orbitals surround ing the nucleus.
Protons and neutrons have approximately the same mass, about 1.67 × 10 grams. Scientists arbitrarily defin e this amount of
mass as one atomic mass unit (amu) or one Dalton, as shown in Table 1. Although similar in mass, protons and ne utrons differ in
their electric charge. A proton is positively charged whereas a neutron is uncharged. Therefore, the number of neutrons in an atom
contributes significantly to its mass, but not to its charge. Electrons are much smaller in mass than protons, weighing only 9.11 ×
10 grams, or about 1/1800 of an atomic mass unit. Hence, they do not contribute much to an element’s overa ll atomic mass.
Therefore, when considering atomic mass, it is custom ary to ignore the mass of any electrons and calcula te the atom’s mass based
on the number of protons and neutrons alone. Although not significant contributors to mass, electrons do co ntribute greatly to the
atom’s charge, as each electron has a negative charge equal to the positive charge of a proton. In unchar ged, neutral atoms, the
number of electrons orbiting the nucleus is equal t o the number of protons inside the nucleus. In these atoms, the positive and
negative charges cancel each other out, leading to an a tom with no net charge.
Accounting for the sizes of protons, neutrons, and el ectrons, most of the volume of an atom—greater than 99 percent—is, in fact,
empty space. With all this empty space, one might as k why so-called solid objects do not just pass through one another. The reason
they do not is that the electrons that surround all atoms are negatively charged and negative charges repel each other.
Table 1. Protons, Neutrons, and Electrons
Charge Mass (amu) Location
Proton +1 1 nucleus
Neutron 0 1 nucleus
Electron –1 0 orbitals
Atomic Number and Mass
Atoms of each element contain a characteristic numbe r of protons and electrons. The number of protons dete rmines an element’s
atomic number and is used to distinguish one element from anothe r. The number of neutrons is variable, resulting in isotopes,–24
–28

4.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43535which are different forms of the same atom that vary only in the number of neutrons they possess. Togethe r, the number of protons
and the number of neutrons determine an element’s m ass number, as illustrated in Figure 2. Note that the small contribution of
mass from electrons is disregarded in calculating the mass number. This approximation of mass can be used to e asily calculate how
many neutrons an element has by simply subtracting th e number of protons from the mass number. Since an el ement’s isotopes will
have slightly different mass numbers, scientists al so determine the atomic mass, which is the calculated mean of the mass number
for its naturally occurring isotopes. Often, the result ing number contains a fraction. For example, the ato mic mass of chlorine (Cl)
is 35.45 because chlorine is composed of several iso topes, some (the majority) with atomic mass 35 (17 pro tons and 18 neutrons)
and some with atomic mass 37 (17 protons and 20 neutrons).
Practice Question
Carbon has an atomic number of six, and two stable isot opes with mass numbers of twelve and thirteen, respectiv ely. Its atomic
mass is 12.11.
Figure 2. Carbon-12 and carbon-13
How many neutrons do carbon-12 and carbon-13 have, respectiv ely?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”912178″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”912178″]Carbon-12 has six neutrons. Car bon-13 has seven neutrons.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
4.3: Atoms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435364.4: The Periodic Table of Elements
The different elements are organized and displayed in the periodic table. Devised by Russian chemist Dmi tri Mendeleev (1834–
1907) in 1869, the table groups elements that, altho ugh unique, share certain chemical properties with ot her elements. The
properties of elements are responsible for their phy sical state at room temperature: they may be gases, solids, or liquids. Elements
also have specific chemical reactivity, the ability to com bine and to chemically bond with each other.
In the periodic table, shown in Figure 1, the elements are organized and displayed according to their atom ic number and are
arranged in a series of rows and columns based on sh ared chemical and physical properties. In addition to providing the atomic
number for each element, the periodic table also di splays the element’s atomic mass. Looking at carbon, for example, its symbol
(C) and name appear, as well as its atomic number of six (in the upper left-hand corner) and its atomic mass of 12.11.
Figure 1. The periodic table shows the atomic mass and a tomic number of each element. The atomic number app ears above the
symbol for the element and the approximate atomic ma ss appears below it.
The periodic table groups elements according to chem ical properties. The differences in chemical reactivi ty between the elements
are based on the number and spatial distribution of a n atom’s electrons. Atoms that chemically react and bon d to each other form
molecules. Molecules are simply two or more atoms chem ically bonded together. Logically, when two atoms chem ically bond to
form a molecule, their electrons, which form the out ermost region of each atom, come together first as t he atoms form a chemical
bond.
Watch this video for a more in-depth introduction to the periodic table:

4.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43536
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=88
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
The Periodic Table: Crash Course Chemistry #4. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at: https://youtu.be/0RRVV4Diomg.
License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
4.4: The Periodic Table of Elements is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435374.5: Electrons
Electron Shells and the Bohr Model
Figure 1. The Bohr model.
It should be stressed that there is a connection be tween the number of protons in an element, the atomic number that distinguishes
one element from another, and the number of electro ns it has. In all electrically neutral atoms, the numb er of electrons is the same
as the number of protons. Thus, each element, at leas t when electrically neutral, has a characteristic num ber of electrons equal to its
atomic number.
An early model of the atom was developed in 1913 by Dan ish scientist Niels Bohr (1885–1962). In this model, e lectrons exist
within principal shells. An electron normally exists in the lowest energy shell available, which is the one closest to the nucleus.
Energy from a photon of light can bump it up to a h igher energy shell, but this situation is unstable, an d the electron quickly decays
back to the ground state. In the process, a photon of lig ht is released.
The Bohr model shows the atom as a central nucleus co ntaining protons and neutrons, with the electrons in c ircular orbitals at
specific distances from the nucleus, as illustrated in Figure 1. These orbits form electron shells or energy levels, which are a way of
visualizing the number of electrons in the outermost shells. These energy levels are designated by a numbe r and the symbol “n.”
For example, 1n represents the first energy level located c losest to the nucleus.
Electrons fill orbitals in a consistent order: they f irst fill the orbitals closest to the nucleus, then th ey continue to fill orbitals of
increasing energy further from the nucleus. If there are multiple orbitals of equal energy, they will be f illed with one electron in
each energy level before a second electron is added. The electrons of the outermost energy level determi ne the energetic stability of
the atom and its tendency to form chemical bonds with other atoms to form molecules.
Under standard conditions, atoms fill the inner shell s first, often resulting in a variable number of elect rons in the outermost shell.
The innermost shell has a maximum of two electrons bu t the next two electron shells can each have a maximu m of eight electrons.
This is known as the octet rule, which states, with the exception of the innermost she ll, that atoms are more stable energetically
when they have eight electrons in their valence shell, the outermost electron shell. Examples of some neutr al atoms and their
electron configurations are shown in Figure 2. Notice t hat in this figure, helium has a complete outer elect ron shell, with two
electrons filling its first and only shell. Similarly, neon has a complete outer 2n shell containing eight electrons. In contrast,
chlorine and sodium have seven and one in their out er shells, respectively, but theoretically they woul d be more energetically stable
if they followed the octet rule and had eight.
Practice Question

4.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43537
Figure 2. Bohr diagrams for hydrogen, helium, lithium, carbon, fluorine, neon, sodium, silicon, chlorine, and argon.
Bohr diagrams indicate how many electrons fill each p rincipal shell. Group 18 elements (helium, neon, and argon are shown in
Figure 2) have a full outer, or valence, shell. A fu ll valence shell is the most stable electron configur ation. Elements in other groups
have partially filled valence shells and gain or lose elect rons to achieve a stable electron configuration.
An atom may give, take, or share electrons with another atom to achieve a full valence shell, the most stable electron configuration.
Looking at this figure, how many electrons do elements in group 1 need to lose in order to achieve a stable electron configuration?
How many electrons do elements in groups 14 and 17 need to gain t o achieve a stable configuration?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”766153″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”766153″]Elements in group 1 need t o lose one electron to achieve a stable electron con figuration. Elements in
groups 14 and 17 need to gain four and one electrons, re spectively, to achieve a stable configuration.[/hidden-a nswer]
Understanding that the organization of the periodic table is based on the total number of protons (and e lectrons) helps us know how
electrons are distributed among the outer shell. The p eriodic table is arranged in columns and rows based on the number of
electrons and where these electrons are located. Take a closer look at the some of the elements in the per iodic table’s far right
column in Figure 3.

4.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43537
Figure 3. The periodic table shows the atomic mass and a tomic number of each element. The atomic number app ears above the
symbol for the element and the approximate atomic ma ss appears below it.
The group 18 atoms helium (He), neon (Ne), and argon (Ar) all have filled outer electron shells, making it u nnecessary for them to
share electrons with other atoms to attain stability; they are highly stable as single atoms. Their non-re activity has resulted in their
being named the inert gases (or noble gases). Compare this to the group 1 elements in the left-h and column. These elements,
including hydrogen (H), lithium (Li), and sodium (Na), all have one electron in their outermost shells. Th at means that they can
achieve a stable configuration and a filled outer she ll by donating or sharing one electron with another atom or a molecule such as
water. Hydrogen will donate or share its electron to ac hieve this configuration, while lithium and sodium will donate their electron
to become stable. As a result of losing a negatively charged electron, they become positively charged ions. Group 17 elements,
including fluorine and chlorine, have seven electro ns in their outmost shells, so they tend to fill this s hell with an electron from
other atoms or molecules, making them negatively char ged ions. Group 14 elements, of which carbon is the most important to
living systems, have four electrons in their outer shel l allowing them to make several covalent bonds (disc ussed below) with other
atoms. Thus, the columns of the periodic table repr esent the potential shared state of these elements’ o uter electron shells that is
responsible for their similar chemical characteristic s.
Electron Orbitals
Although useful to explain the reactivity and chemic al bonding of certain elements, the Bohr model of t he atom does not accurately
reflect how electrons are spatially distributed surround ing the nucleus. They do not circle the nucleus like the earth orbits the sun,
but are found in electron orbitals. These relatively complex shapes result from the fac t that electrons behave not just like particles,
but also like waves. Mathematical equations from quantum mechanics known as wave functions can predict within a certain level
of probability where an electron might be at any giv en time. The area where an electron is most likely t o be found is called its
orbital.

4.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43537
Figure 4. Click for a larger image. The s subshells are shaped like spheres. Both the 1n
and 2n principal shells have an s orbital, but the size of the sphere is larger in the 2n
orbital. Each sphere is a single orbital. p subshells are made up of three dumbbellshaped orbitals. Principal shell 2n has a p subshell, but shell 1 does not.
Recall that the Bohr model depicts an atom’s electr on shell configuration. Within each electron shell ar e subshells, and each
subshell has a specified number of orbitals containin g electrons. While it is impossible to calculate exac tly where an electron is
located, scientists know that it is most probably loc ated within its orbital path. Subshells are designated by the letters s, p, d, and f.
The s subshell is spherical in shape and has one orbital. Pr incipal shell 1n has only a single s orbital, which can hold two electrons.
Principal shell 2n has one s and one p subshell, and can hold a total of eight electrons. T he p subshell has three dumbbell-shaped
orbitals, as illustrated in Figure 4. Subshells d and f have more complex shapes and contain five and seven orbitals, respectively.
These are not shown in the illustration. Principal shel l 3n has s, p, and d subshells and can hold 18 electrons. Principal shell 4n has
s, p, d and f orbitals and can hold 32 electrons. Moving away from the nucleus, the number of electrons and orbitals foun d in the
energy levels increases. Progressing from one atom to t he next in the periodic table, the electron structu re can be worked out by
fitting an extra electron into the next available orbita l.
The closest orbital to the nucleus, called the 1 s orbital, can hold up to two electrons. This orbital i s equivalent to the innermost
electron shell of the Bohr model of the atom. It is c alled the 1 s orbital because it is spherical around the nucleus. The 1 s orbital is
the closest orbital to the nucleus, and it is always fill ed first, before any other orbital can be filled. Hydro gen has one electron;
therefore, it has only one spot within the 1 s orbital occupied. This is designated as 1 s, where the superscripted 1 refers to the one
electron within the 1 s orbital. Helium has two electrons; therefore, it can c ompletely fill the 1 s orbital with its two electrons. This is
designated as 1 s, referring to the two electrons of helium in the 1 s orbital. On the periodic table Figure 4, hydrogen an d helium are
the only two elements in the first row (period); this is because they only have electrons in their first sh ell, the 1 s orbital. Hydrogen
and helium are the only two elements that have the 1 s and no other electron orbitals in the electrically neutr al state.
The second electron shell may contain eight electro ns. This shell contains another spherical s orbital and three “dumbbell” shaped p
orbitals, each of which can hold two electrons, as sho wn in Figure 4. After the 1 s orbital is filled, the second electron shell is fill ed,
first filling its 2 s orbital and then its three p orbitals. When filling the p orbitals, each takes a single electron; once each p orbital
has an electron, a second may be added. Lithium (Li) contains three electrons that occupy the first and s econd shells. Two electrons
fill the 1 s orbital, and the third electron then fills the 2 s orbital. Its electron configuration is 1s2s. Neon (Ne), on the other hand,
has a total of ten electrons: two are in its innermos t 1s orbital and eight fill its second shell (two each i n the 2 s and three p orbitals);
thus, it is an inert gas and energetically stable as a single atom that will rarely form a chemical bond with other atoms. Larger
elements have additional orbitals, making up the thi rd electron shell. While the concepts of electron s hells and orbitals are closely
related, orbitals provide a more accurate depiction of the electron configuration of an atom because t he orbital model specifies the
different shapes and special orientations of all the pl aces that electrons may occupy.
Watch this visual animation to see the spatial arrangemen t of the p and s orbitals. Note that this video has no audio.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the audio description text for “Atomic Orbitals – Ele ctron Configuration of Scandium” here (opens in new window).1
2 1

4.5.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43537This video gives another overview of the electron:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this versio n of the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.o rg/biom1/?p=90
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Atomic orbitals - electron configuration of Scandium (Z=2 1). Authored by: Manuel Moreirea Baptista. Located at:
https://youtu.be/sMt5Dcex0kg. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
The Electron: Crash Course Chemistry #5. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at: https://youtu.be/rcKilE9CdaA. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
4.5: Electrons is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

4.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435384.6: Introduction to Atomic Bonds
Classify different types of atomic bonds
When atoms bond together, they create elements. The different types of bonds (ionic and covalent, polar a nd non-polar) have an
impact on the elements they create. Understanding the types of bonds that create things can help us understa nd those things
themselves.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe the characteristics of ionic bonds and identify common ions
Describe the characteristics of covalent bonds and differe ntiate between polar and non-polar bonds
Model a Hydrogen bond and identify its unique qualities
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Ionic Bonds
Covalent Bonds
Hydrogen Bonds
Self Check: Atomic Bonds
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Atomic Bonds. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC
BY: Attribution
4.6: Introduction to Atomic Bonds is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435394.7: Ionic Bonds
Some atoms are more stable when they gain or lose an electron (or possibly two) and form ions. This fills t heir outermost electron
shell and makes them energetically more stable. Beca use the number of electrons does not equal the numbe r of protons, each ion
has a net charge. Cations are positive ions that are formed by losing electro ns. Negative ions are formed by gaining electrons and
are called anions. Anions are designated by their elemental name being alter ed to end in “-ide”: the anion of chlorine is calle d
chloride, and the anion of sulfur is called sulfide, fo r example.
This movement of electrons from one element to anoth er is referred to as electron transfer. As Figure 1 illustrates, sodium (Na)
only has one electron in its outer electron shell. It takes less energy for sodium to donate that one elec tron than it does to accept
seven more electrons to fill the outer shell. If sodi um loses an electron, it now has 11 protons, 11 neutrons, and only 10 electrons,
leaving it with an overall charge of +1. It is now ref erred to as a sodium ion. Chlorine (Cl) in its lowes t energy state (called the
ground state) has seven electrons in its outer shell. Again, it is more energy-efficient for chlorine to gai n one electron than to lose
seven. Therefore, it tends to gain an electron to cre ate an ion with 17 protons, 17 neutrons, and 18 electro ns, giving it a net negative
(–1) charge. It is now referred to as a chloride ion. In this example, sodium will donate its one electron to empty its shell, and
chlorine will accept that electron to fill its shell. Both ions now satisfy the octet rule and have complet e outermost shells. Because
the number of electrons is no longer equal to the n umber of protons, each is now an ion and has a +1 (s odium cation) or –1
(chloride anion) charge. Note that these transactions can normally only take place simultaneously: in ord er for a sodium atom to
lose an electron, it must be in the presence of a suitable recipient like a chlorine atom.
Figure 1. In the formation of an ionic compound, met als lose electrons and nonmetals gain electrons to achie ve an octet. Ionic
bonds are formed between ions with opposite charges. Fo r instance, positively charged sodium ions and negative ly charged
chloride ions bond together to make crystals of sodium chloride, or table salt, creating a crystalline molec ule with zero net charge.
Ionic bonds are formed between ions with opposite charges. For insta nce, positively charged sodium ions and negatively charged
chloride ions bond together to make crystals of sodium chl oride, or table salt, creating a crystalline molecule with z ero net charge.
Certain salts are referred to in physiology as electrolytes (including sodium, potassium, and calcium), ions nec essary for nerve
impulse conduction, muscle contractions and water bal ance. Many sports drinks and dietary supplements provi de these ions to
replace those lost from the body via sweating during exerc ise.
Video Review
This video shows how ionic compounds form from anions and cat ions.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=94

4.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43539Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Ionic Bonding. Authored by: Bozeman Science. Located at: https://youtu.be/hiyTfhjeF_U. License: All Rights Reserved.
License Terms: Standard YouTube License
4.7: Ionic Bonds is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435404.8: Covalent Bonds
Another way the octet rule can be satisfied is by the sharing of electrons between atoms to form covalent bonds. These bonds
much more common than ionic bonds in the molecules o f living organisms. Covalent bonds are commonly foun d in carbon-based
organic molecules, such as our DNA and proteins. Covalen t bonds are also found in inorganic molecules like H O, CO, and O.
One, two, or three pairs of electrons may be shared, ma king single, double, and triple bonds, respectively. The more covalent bonds
between two atoms, the stronger their connection. Thus, tri ple bonds are the strongest.
The strength of different levels of covalent bondin g is one of the main reasons living organisms have a difficult time in acquiring
nitrogen for use in constructing their molecules, even though molecular nitrogen, N, is the most abundant g as in the atmosphere.
Molecular nitrogen consists of two nitrogen atoms triple bonded to each other and, as with all molecules, th e sharing of these three
pairs of electrons between the two nitrogen atoms allo ws for the filling of their outer electron shells, m aking the molecule more
stable than the individual nitrogen atoms. This stro ng triple bond makes it difficult for living systems to break apart this nitrogen in
order to use it as constituents of proteins and DNA.
The formation of water molecules provides an example o f covalent bonding. The hydrogen and oxygen atoms t hat combine to form
water molecules are bound together by covalent bonds. The electron from the hydrogen splits its time betwee n the incomplete outer
shell of the hydrogen atoms and the incomplete oute r shell of the oxygen atoms. To completely fill the o uter shell of oxygen, which
has six electrons in its outer shell but which would b e more stable with eight, two electrons (one from each hydrogen atom) are
needed: hence the well-known formula H O. The electrons are shared between the two elements to fill the outer shell of each,
making both elements more stable.
View this short video to see an animation of ionic and cov alent bonding.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the transcript of “Ionic and Covalent Bonding Animati on” here (opens in new window).
Polar Covalent Bonds
There are two types of covalent bonds: polar and non polar. In a polar covalent bond, shown in Figure 1, the electrons are
unequally shared by the atoms and are attracted more to one nucleus than the other. Because of the unequ al distribution of electrons
between the atoms of different elements, a slightly po sitive (δ+) or slightly negative (δ–) charge develops. This partial charge is an
important property of water and accounts for many of it s characteristics.
Water is a polar molecule, with the hydrogen atoms ac quiring a partial positive charge and the oxygen a p artial negative charge.
This occurs because the nucleus of the oxygen atom is more attractive to the electrons of the hydrogen ato ms than the hydrogen
nucleus is to the oxygen’s electrons. Thus oxygen has a higher electronegativity than hydrogen and the shared electrons spend
more time in the vicinity of the oxygen nucleus tha n they do near the nucleus of the hydrogen atoms, g iving the atoms of oxygen
and hydrogen slightly negative and positive charges, respectively. Another way of stating this is that th e probability of finding a
shared electron near an oxygen nucleus is more likel y than finding it near a hydrogen nucleus. Either wa y, the atom’s relative
electronegativity contributes to the development of partial charges whenever one element is significantl y more electronegative than
the other, and the charges generated by these polar bonds may then be used for the formation of hydrogen b onds based on the
attraction of opposite partial charges. (Hydrogen bond s, which are discussed in detail below, are weak bonds between slightly
positively charged hydrogen atoms to slightly negat ively charged atoms in other molecules.) Since macromo lecules often have
atoms within them that differ in electronegativity, polar bonds are often present in organic molecules.2 2 2

4.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43540Nonpolar Covalent Bonds
Figure 1. Whether a molecule is polar or nonpolar dep ends both on bond type and molecular shape. Both wate r and carbon dioxide
have polar covalent bonds, but carbon dioxide is line ar, so the partial charges on the molecule cancel eac h other out.
Nonpolar covalent bonds form between two atoms of the same element or between different elements that share electrons equally.
For example, molecular oxygen (O) is nonpolar because t he electrons will be equally distributed between the two oxy gen atoms.
Another example of a nonpolar covalent bond is methan e (CH), also shown in Figure 1. Carbon has four electron s in its outermost
shell and needs four more to fill it. It gets these f our from four hydrogen atoms, each atom providing one, making a stable outer
shell of eight electrons. Carbon and hydrogen do no t have the same electronegativity but are similar; t hus, nonpolar bonds form.
The hydrogen atoms each need one electron for their outermost shell, which is filled when it contains two e lectrons. These
elements share the electrons equally among the carbo ns and the hydrogen atoms, creating a nonpolar coval ent molecule.
Watch this video for another explanation of covalent bon ds and how they form:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=962

4.8.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43540Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Ionic and covalent bonding animation. Authored by: Edu2000.org. Located at: https://youtu.be/QqjcCvzWwww. License: All
Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
Covalent Bonding. Authored by: Bozeman Science. Located at: https://youtu.be/Mo4Vfqt5v2A. License: All Rights Reserved.
License Terms: Standard YouTube License
4.8: Covalent Bonds is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435414.9: Hydrogen Bonds
Ionic and covalent bonds between elements require ene rgy to break. Iconic bonds are not as strong as cov alent, which determines
their behavior in biological systems. However, not all bonds are ionic or covalent bonds. Weaker bonds can also form between
molecules. Two weak bonds that occur frequently are hy drogen bonds and van der Waals interactions. Without these two types of
bonds, life as we know it would not exist. Hydrogen bond s provide many of the critical, life-sustaining prop erties of water and also
stabilize the structures of proteins and DNA, the building blo ck of cells.
When polar covalent bonds containing hydrogen form, t he hydrogen in that bond has a slightly positive cha rge because hydrogen’s
electron is pulled more strongly toward the other elem ent and away from the hydrogen. Because the hydrogen i s slightly positive, it
will be attracted to neighboring negative charges. W hen this happens, a weak interaction occurs between th e δ+ of the hydrogen
from one molecule and the δ– charge on the more electronegative atoms of anoth er molecule, usually oxygen or nitrogen, or within
the same molecule. This interaction is called a hydrogen bond. This type of bond is common and occurs regularly be tween water
molecules. Individual hydrogen bonds are weak and eas ily broken; however, they occur in very large number s in water and in
organic polymers, creating a major force in combinati on. Hydrogen bonds are also responsible for zipping t ogether the DNA
double helix.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=98
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Water: A Polar Molecule. Authored by: Bozeman Science. Located at: https://youtu.be/iOOvX0jmhJ4. License: All Rights
Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
4.9: Hydrogen Bonds is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435174.10: Introduction to Functional Groups
Categorize molecules according to their functional group
In this outcome, we’ll learn about functional groups and the effects they have on the molecules they are bonded to.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify the attributes of molecules with hydroxyl groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with carboxyl groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with amino groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with phosphate groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with methyl groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with carbonyl groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with sulfhydryl groups
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Functional Groups
Self Check: Functional Groups
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Functional Groups. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License:
CC BY: Attribution
4.10: Introduction to Functional Groups is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435184.11: Functional Groups
Functional groups are groups of atoms that occur withi n organic molecules and confer specific chemical pro perties to those
molecules. When functional groups are shown, the organ ic molecule is sometimes denoted as “R.” For example, et hanol is
typically drawn like this:
In order to condense the structure and focus on the hydroxyl group (the oxygen and hydrogen bound to t he second carbon),
everything besides the hydroxyl group would replaced with an R, as follows:
Note: R doesn’t always stand for the same organic molecule. It can stand in for an infinite variety of molecules.
Functional groups are found along the “carbon backbo ne” of macromolecules which is formed by chains and/o r rings of carbon
atoms with the occasional substitution of an element su ch as nitrogen or oxygen. Molecules with other elements in their carbon
backbone are substituted hydrocarbons. Each of the four types of macromolecules—proteins, lipids, carboh ydrates, and nucleic
acids—has its own characteristic set of functional gr oups that contributes greatly to its differing chemic al properties and its
function in living organisms.
Properties of Functional Groups
A functional group can participate in specific chem ical reactions. Some of the important functional gro ups in biological molecules
include: hydroxyl, methyl, carbonyl, carboxyl, amino, phosphate, and sulfhydryl groups. These groups play an important role in the
formation of molecules like DNA, proteins, carbohydrates, an d lipids.
Classifying Functional Groups
Functional groups are usually classified as hydrophob ic or hydrophilic depending on their charge or pola rity. An example of a
hydrophobic group is the non-polar methane molecule. Among the hydrophilic functional groups is the carbox yl group found in
amino acids, some amino acid side chains, and the fatty acid heads that form triglycerides and phospholipi ds. This carboxyl group
ionizes to release hydrogen ions (H) from the —COOH gr oup resulting in the negatively charged —COO group; t his contributes
to the hydrophilic nature of whatever molecule it is found on. Other functional groups, such as the carbo nyl group, have a partially
negatively charged oxygen atom that may form hydrog en bonds with water molecules, again making the molec ule more
hydrophilic.+ –

4.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43518Table 1. Important Functional Groups in Biology
Functional Group Structure Properties General Features
Hydroxyl
Polar
HydrophilicCharacterized by presence of H
and O
Simple structure
Sulfhydryl
PolarCharacterized by presence of S
Simple branched structure
Methyl NonpolarCharacterized by presence of H
and C
Simple structure
Carbonyl
PolarCharacterized by central C and
O
Bound to 2 organic side groups
Double bond to oxygen
increases the polarity
Carboxyl
Charged, ionized to release H.
Since carboxyl groups can
release H ions into a solution,
they are considered acidic.Characterized by central C
bound to O and OH
Acidic
Amino
Charged, accepts H to form
NH. Since amino groups can
remove H from solution, they
are considered basic.Characterized by presence of N
Branched structure
Phosphate
Charged, ionizes to release H.
Since phosphate groups can
release H ions into solution,
they are considered acidic.
AcidicCharacterized by presence of P
Complex structure
Fructose is a common sugar that you’ve probably come into contact with in your life. What functional gro ups can be found in a
fructose molecule?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”860203″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]+
3+
Practice Questions

4.11.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43518[hidden-answer a=”860203″]Fructose has hydroxyl and c arbonyl groups. The hydroxyl groups are circled in r ed, and the
carbonyl group is circled in purple:
[/hidden-answer]
Leucine is an amino acid that plays an important rol e in muscle development. What functional groups can be found in a leucine
molecule?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”516947″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”516947″]Leucine has carboxyl, amino, and methyl groups. The carboxyl group is circled in blue, the amnio
group is circled in green, and the methyl group is circled in purple.
[/hidden-answer]
Hydrogen Bonds between Functional Groups
Hydrogen bonds between functional groups (within the sa me molecule or between different molecules) are impo rtant to the
function of many macromolecules and help them to fo ld properly into and maintain the appropriate shape for functioning.

4.11.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43518Hydrogen bonds are also involved in various recognitio n processes, such as DNA complementary base pairing and t he binding of
an enzyme to its substrate, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Hydrogen bonds connect two strands of DNA tog ether to create the double-helix structure.
The unique properties of carbon make it a central p art of biological molecules. Carbon binds to oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen
covalently to form the many molecules important for cellular function. Carbon has four electrons in its outermost shell and can
form four bonds. Carbon and hydrogen can form hydroca rbon chains or rings. Functional groups are groups of a toms that
confer specific properties to hydrocarbon (or substi tuted hydrocarbon) chains or rings that define thei r overall chemical
characteristics and function.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision and Adaptation. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Functional Groups. Provided by: Boundless. Located at: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-biology/. License: CC
BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
4.11: Functional Groups is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

4.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435194.12: Introduction to The pH Scale
Demonstrate familiarity with the pH scale
In this outcome we’ll learn about the pH scale and the importance of acids and bases.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify the characteristics of acids
Identify the characteristics of bases
Define “buffers” and discuss the role they play in human biology
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Acids and Bases
Buffers
Self Check: The pH Scale
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to The pH Scale. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC
BY: Attribution
4.12: Introduction to The pH Scale is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435204.13: Acids and Bases
The pH of a solution indicates its acidity or alkalinity.
\text{H}_2\text{O}\left(\text{I}\right)\longleftrig htarrow\text{H}^{+}\left(aq\right)+\text{OH}^{-}\le ft(aq\right)
Litmus or pH paper is filter paper that has been treated wi th a natural water-soluble dye so it can be used as a pH indicator, to test
how much acid (acidity) or base (alkalinity) exists in a solution. You might have even used some to test whether the water in a
swimming pool is properly treated. In both cases, the pH test m easures the concentration of hydrogen ions in a given solution.
Hydrogen ions are spontaneously generated in pure wate r by the dissociation (ionization) of a small perce ntage of water molecules
into equal numbers of hydrogen (H) ions and hydroxi de (OH) ions. While the hydroxide ions are kept in so lution by their
hydrogen bonding with other water molecules, the hydro gen ions, consisting of naked protons, are immediat ely attracted to unionized water molecules, forming hydronium ions (H O). Still, by convention, scientists refer to hydrogen io ns and their
concentration as if they were free in this state in liqui d water.
The concentration of hydrogen ions dissociating fro m pure water is 1 × 10 moles H ions per liter of wate r. Moles (mol) are a
way to express the amount of a substance (which can be atoms, molecules, ions, etc), with one mole being equa l to 6.02 x 1023
particles of the substance. Therefore, 1 mole of water is equal to 6.02 x 10 water molecules. The pH is calculat ed as the negative
of the base 10 logarithm of this concentration. The l og10 of 1 × 10 is –7.0, and the negative of this num ber (indicated by the “p”
of “pH”) yields a pH of 7.0, which is also known as neutr al pH. The pH inside of human cells and blood are exam ples of two areas
of the body where near-neutral pH is maintained.
Non-neutral pH readings result from dissolving acids o r bases in water. Using the negative logarithm to genera te positive integers,
high concentrations of hydrogen ions yield a low pH n umber, whereas low levels of hydrogen ions result in a high pH. An acid is a
substance that increases the concentration of hydrog en ions (H) in a solution, usually by having one of its hydrogen atoms
dissociate. A base provides either hydroxide ions (OH) or other negative ly charged ions that combine with hydrogen ions,
reducing their concentration in the solution and the reby raising the pH. In cases where the base releases h ydroxide ions, these ions
bind to free hydrogen ions, generating new water molecules.
Figure 1. The pH scale measures the concentration of hy drogen ions (H) in a solution.
The stronger the acid, the more readily it donates H. For example, hydrochloric acid (HCl) completely disso ciates into hydrogen
and chloride ions and is highly acidic, whereas the a cids in tomato juice or vinegar do not completely d issociate and are considered
weak acids.+ –
3+
–7 +
–7

4.13.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43520Conversely, strong bases are those substances that re adily donate OH or take up hydrogen ions. Sodium hydr oxide (NaOH) and
many household cleaners are highly alkaline and give up OH rapidly when placed in water, thereby raising th e pH. An example of
a weak basic solution is seawater, which has a pH near 8. 0, close enough to neutral pH that marine organisms ad apted to this saline
environment are able to thrive in it.
The pH scale is, as previously mentioned, an inverse logarithm an d ranges from 0 to 14 (Figure 1). Anything below 7.0 (r anging
from 0.0 to 6.9) is acidic, and anything above 7.0 (from 7.1 to 14.0) is alkaline. Extremes in pH in either direction from 7.0 are
usually considered inhospitable to life. The pH inside ce lls (6.8) and the pH in the blood (7.4) are both very c lose to neutral.
However, the environment in the stomach is highly acidi c, with a pH of 1 to 2. So how do the cells of the stoma ch survive in such
an acidic environment? How do they homeostatically ma intain the near neutral pH inside them? The answer is t hat they cannot do
it and are constantly dying. New stomach cells are consta ntly produced to replace dead ones, which are digested by the stomach
acids. It is estimated that the lining of the human stoma ch is completely replaced every seven to ten days.
Watch this video for a straightforward explanation of pH an d its logarithmic scale.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the transcript for “MediCastExtra pH Scale” here (opens in new window).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
PH Scale. Authored by: Edward Stevens. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PH_Scale.svg. License: CC
BY: Attribution
All rights reserved content
MedicCastExtra - pH Scale. Authored by: MedicCast TV EMS Weekly Tips. Located at: https://youtu.be/u837KYKyr9c.
License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
4.13: Acids and Bases is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.–

4.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435214.14: Buffers
So how can organisms whose bodies require a near-neutr al pH ingest acidic and basic substances (a human dr inking orange juice,
for example) and survive? Buffers are the key. Buffers readily absorb excess H or OH, keeping the pH of the body carefully
maintained in the narrow range required for survival. Maintaining a constant blood pH is critical to a per son’s well-being. The
buffer maintaining the pH of human blood involves car bonic acid (H CO), bicarbonate ion (HCO), and carbon diox ide (CO).
When bicarbonate ions combine with free hydrogen ion s and become carbonic acid, hydrogen ions are remove d, moderating pH
changes. Similarly, as shown in Figure 1, excess carbon ic acid can be converted to carbon dioxide gas and exhaled through the
lungs. This prevents too many free hydrogen ions from building up in the blood and dangerously reducing the blood’s pH.
Likewise, if too much OH is introduced into the system, carbonic acid will combine with it to create bicarbona te, lowering the pH.
Without this buffer system, the body’s pH would fluctuate eno ugh to put survival in jeopardy.
Figure 1. This diagram shows the body’s buffering of blo od pH levels. The blue arrows show the process of raising pH as more
CO is made. The purple arrows indicate the reverse pro cess: the lowering of pH as more bicarbonate is created.
Other examples of buffers are antacids used to combat excess stomach acid. Many of these over-the-counter medications work in
the same way as blood buffers, usually with at least one i on capable of absorbing hydrogen and moderating pH, bringing relief to
those that suffer “heartburn” after eating. The uni que properties of water that contribute to this capa city to balance pH—as well as
water’s other characteristics—are essential to sustaining life on Earth.
In Summary: Buffers
The pH scale is a measure of acidity/alkalinity and provides information about how substances tend to act in aqueous solutions. All
living processes occur in an ideal pH range. Buffers act together to keep the pH within a certain range, b ased off the release or
absorption of hydrogen ions.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
4.14: Buffers is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.+ –
2 3 3–2

4.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435224.15: Introduction to Chemical Reactions
Understand basic chemical reactions
In this outcome, we will discuss chemical bonds and reactions.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify the components of simple chemical reactions
Differentiate between catabolic and anabolic reactions
Identify enzymes and their role in chemical reactions
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Chemical Reactions and Molecules
Anabolic and Catabolic Pathways
Enzymes
Self Check: Chemical Reactions
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Chemical Reactions. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License:
CC BY: Attribution
4.15: Introduction to Chemical Reactions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435234.16: Chemical Reactions and Molecules
All elements are most stable when their outermost shell is filled with electrons according to the octet rule. This is because it is
energetically favorable for atoms to be in that con figuration and it makes them stable. However, since not all elements have enough
electrons to fill their outermost shells, atoms form chemical bonds with other atoms thereby obtaining the electrons th ey need to
attain a stable electron configuration. When two or mo re atoms chemically bond with each other, the resulta nt chemical structure is
a molecule. The familiar water molecule, H O, consists of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom; these bond to gether to form
water, as illustrated in Figure 1. Atoms can form molecule s by donating, accepting, or sharing electrons to fill the ir outer shells.
Figure 1. Two or more atoms may bond with each other to form a molecule. When two hydrogens and an oxygen share electrons
via covalent bonds, a water molecule is formed.
Chemical reactions occur when two or more atoms bond together to form mo lecules or when bonded atoms are broken apart. The
substances used in the beginning of a chemical reactio n are called the reactants (usually found on the left side of a chemical
equation), and the substances found at the end of th e reaction are known as the products (usually found on the right side of a
chemical equation). An arrow is typically drawn between the reactants and products to indicate the direction of the chemical
reaction; this direction is not always a “one-way stre et.” For the creation of the water molecule shown above, the chemical equation
would be:
2H + O → H O
An example of a simple chemical reaction is the break ing down of hydrogen peroxide molecules, each of whic h consists of two
hydrogen atoms bonded to two oxygen atoms (H O). The r eactant hydrogen peroxide is broken down into water, co ntaining one
oxygen atom bound to two hydrogen atoms (H O), and oxy gen, which consists of two bonded oxygen atoms (O). In the equation
below, the reaction includes two hydrogen peroxide mo lecules and two water molecules. This is an example of a balanced
chemical equation, wherein the number of atoms of each element is the same on each side of the equation. According to the l aw of
conservation of matter, the number of atoms before and after a chemical reaction should be equal, such that no atoms are, under
normal circumstances, created or destroyed.
H O (hydrogen peroxide) → H O(water) + O (oxygen)
Even though all of the reactants and products of th is reaction are molecules (each atom remains bonded to at least one other atom),
in this reaction only hydrogen peroxide and water ar e representative of a subclass of molecules known as compounds: they contain
atoms of more than one type of element. Molecular oxy gen, on the other hand, as shown in Figure 2, consists of two doubly bonded
oxygen atoms and is not classified as a compound but as an element.2
2 2
2 2
2 2 2 2

4.16.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43523
Figure 2. The oxygen atoms in an O molecule are joine d by a double bond.
Some chemical reactions, such as the one shown above, c an proceed in one direction until the reactants are all used up. The
equations that describe these reactions contain a un idirectional arrow and are irreversible. Reversible reactions are those that can
go in either direction. In reversible reactions, react ants are turned into products, but when the concentr ation of product goes beyond
a certain threshold (characteristic of the particula r reaction), some of these products will be converte d back into reactants; at this
point, the designations of products and reactants ar e reversed. This back and forth continues until a ce rtain relative balance between
reactants and products occurs—a state called equilibrium. These situations of reversible reactions are often denoted by a chemical
equation with a double headed arrow pointing towards both th e reactants and products.
For example, in human blood, excess hydrogen ions (H) bind to bicarbonate ions (HCO) forming an equilibriu m state with
carbonic acid (H CO). If carbonic acid were added to this system, some of it would be converted to bicarbona te and hydrogen
ions.
HCO + H ↔ H CO
In biological reactions, however, equilibrium is rarely obtained because the concentrations of the reactan ts or products or both are
constantly changing, often with a product of one reac tion being a reactant for another. To return to the e xample of excess hydrogen
ions in the blood, the formation of carbonic acid wil l be the major direction of the reaction. However, the carbonic acid can also
leave the body as carbon dioxide gas (via exhalatio n) instead of being converted back to bicarbonate i on, thus driving the reaction
to the right by the chemical law known as law of mass action. These reactions are important for maintaining the homeostasis of
our blood.
CO ↔ CO + H O
In Summary: Chemical Reactions and Molecules
The outer electron shell dictates how readily and wha t type of chemical bonds a particular atom will form. The formation of
compounds is often visually outlined in chemical equ ations which show the reactants participating in chemi cal reactions to form
products.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
4.16: Chemical Reactions and Molecules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
3–
2 3
3– +2 3
3 2 2

4.17.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435244.17: Anabolic and Catabolic Pathways
Anabolic pathways require an input of energy to synthe size complex molecules from simpler ones. Synthesizi ng sugar from CO is
one example. Other examples are the synthesis of large proteins from amino acid building blocks, and the sy nthesis of new DNA
strands from nucleic acid building blocks. These bio synthetic processes are critical to the life of the cell, take place constantly, and
demand energy provided by ATP and other high-energy molecules like NADH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and NADPH
(Figure 1).
ATP is an important molecule for cells to have in su fficient supply at all times. The breakdown of sugars illustrates how a single
molecule of glucose can store enough energy to make a great deal of ATP, 36 to 38 molecules. This is a ca tabolic pathway.
Catabolic pathways involve the degradation (or break down) of complex molecules into simpler ones. Molecular energy stored in
the bonds of complex molecules is released in catabo lic pathways and harvested in such a way that it can be used to produce ATP.
Other energy-storing molecules, such as fats, are also b roken down through similar catabolic reactions to rel ease energy and make
ATP (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Anabolic pathways are those that require ene rgy to synthesize larger molecules. Catabolic pathways are those that
generate energy by breaking down larger molecules. B oth types of pathways are required for maintaining th e cell’s energy balance.
It is important to know that the chemical reactions of metabolic pathways don’t take place spontaneously. Each reaction step is
facilitated, or catalyzed, by a protein called an enz yme. Enzymes are important for catalyzing all types of biological reactions—
those that require energy as well as those that release ene rgy.
Remember: Anabolic pathways assemble large molecules form smaller ones. Catabolic pathways break large molecules into small
pieces.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
4.17: Anabolic and Catabolic Pathways is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

4.18.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435254.18: Enzymes
Enzymes are proteins that have the ability to bind substrate in their active site and then chemically m odify the bound substrate,
converting it to a different molecule — the product of the reaction. Substrates bind to enzymes just like ligands bind to proteins.
However, when substrates bind to enzymes, they undergo an enz yme-induced chemical change, and are converted to pr oducts.
Figure 1. Compare the protein-ligand interaction to the enzyme-substrate interaction. Notice that both bi nding proteins and
enzymes have binding sites for their ligands (L) and sub strates (S), respectively. This area of the enzyme is ca lled the active site
because it also contains amino acids that are important for the conversion of substrate to product.
The substrate binds to the enzyme by interacting with amino acids in the binding site. The binding site on enzymes is often referred
to as the active site because it contains amino acids that both bind the subst rate and aid in its conversion to product.
You can often recognize that a protein is an enzyme by its name. Many enzyme names end with – ase. For example, the enzyme
lactase is used to break down the sugar lactose, found in mammalian milk. Other enzymes are known by a commo n name, such as
pepsin, which is an enzyme that aids in the digestion of prote ins in your stomach by breaking the peptide bonds in the pro teins.
Enzymes are catalysts, meaning that they make a reacti on go faster, but the enzymes themselves are not alt ered by the overall
reaction. Examine this image to see how enzymes work.
Figure 2. Simplified enzymatic reaction. The substrate reversibly binds to the active site of the enzyme, fo rming the enzymesubstrate (ES) complex. The bound substrate is converted to product by catalytic groups in the active site, fo rming the enzymeproduct complex (EP). The bound products are released, returning the enzyme to its unbound form, ready to catalyze another round
of converting substrate to product.
The amino acids in the active site of enzymes play t wo roles, and sometimes those roles overlap. Some of th e amino acids in the
active site are responsible for binding of the substra te and others are responsible for facilitating the c hemical reaction. Enzymes are
generally quite specific for their substrates. Althoug h lactase and pepsin both catalyze the same type of reaction, breaking a bond
using water (hydrolysis: “hydro” means “water” and “l ysis” means “to break”), lactase only functions when la ctose is its substrate
and pepsin can only break peptide bonds.
Practice Question
Two substrates—lactose and a short protein—are shown on t he left. Two enzymes are shown on the right, labeled A and B. Which
of the two enzymes is lactase?

4.18.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43525
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”551250″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”551250″]Enzyme A. The active site o n this enzyme is the same shape as lactose. The hexag onal shape on the
lactose is a poor fit for the rectangular shaped active site on enzyme B.[/hidden-answer]
How Enzymes Work
Figure 3. Diagram of a catalytic reaction showing dif ference in activation energy in uncatalysed and cata lysed reaction. The
enzyme reduces the energy barrier required to activa te the substrate, allowing more substrates to become act ivated, which increases
the rate of product formation. Note that the energy difference between the substrate and the product is n ot changed by the enzyme.
In all chemical reactions, there is an initial input of energy that is required before the reaction can occur. If this initial energy
requirement (called the activation energy or energy barrier) is small, then the reaction will happen qui ckly and easily. If the
activation energy is large, then the reaction will ta ke longer to occur. Enzymes function to reduce the activation energy required for
a chemical reaction to occur.
First, the enzyme binds to the substrate and slightly di storts its shape. The change in shape activates the s ubstrate molecule and
decreases the total activation energy required for the substrate to be turned into product. As the number of activated substrate
molecules increases, so does the conversion of substra te to product. An analogy for this effect is a ski hil l, with skiers at the bottom
of one side of the hill representing substrates, ski ers on the top of the hill representing activated su bstrates, and the products being
the number of skiers that ski down the other side. If the height of the hill is lowered (due to the presen ce of the enzyme), then more
skiers can make it to the top, increasing the number that ski down to become products.
Fill in the blank: When an enzyme catalyzes a reaction, ________.
a. it raises the activation energy of the reaction.
b. it is used once and discarded.
c. it becomes a product.
d. it acts as a reactant.
e. it lowers the activation energy of the reaction.
[reveal-answer q=”101995″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”101995″]Answer e. When an enzyme cata lyzes a reaction, it lowers the activation energy of the reaction;
lowering the activation energy of a reaction makes it m ore likely to occur.Practice Questions

4.18.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43525[/hidden-answer]
What will happen to the rate at which a chemical reaction proc eeds if the activation energy is increased?
a. The reaction will happen faster (at a higher rate).
b. The reaction will happen slower (at a lower rate).
c. The reaction rate will not change.
[reveal-answer q=”42089″] Show Answers [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”42089″]Answer b. If the activation en ergy goes up, then more energy is required for the r eaction to occur,
so it will happen less often.[/hidden-answer]
Enzymes are proteins that speed up reactions by reduc ing the activation energy. Each enzyme typically bin ds only one
substrate. Enzymes are not consumed during a reaction; instead they are available to bind new substrates and catalyze the same
reaction repeatedly.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
How Enzymes Work. Provided by: Open Learning Initiative. Located at: https://oli.cmu.edu/jcourse/workbook/activity/page?
context=434a5d6380020ca600f6190aedc2f27b. Project: Introduction to Biology (Open + Free). License: CC BY-NC-SA:
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
Induced fit diagram. Authored by: TimVickers; vectorized by Fvasconcellos. Located at:
https://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Induced_fit_diagram. svg. License: CC0: No Rights Reserved
Activation2 updated. Authored by: Jerry Crimson Mann, vectorized by Tutmosis, corrected b y Fvasconcellos. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Activation2_update d.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
4.18: Enzymes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

4.19.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435264.19: Introduction to Thermodynamics
Demonstrate familiarity with the first and second laws of thermodynamics
There are four laws of thermodynamics; however, for this co urse only the first two are relevant:
1. Energy may be transferred from place to place or tran sformed into different forms, but it cannot be created or de stroyed.
2. In any given system, the entropy (the amount of energy) will either increase or stay the same.
In this outcome, we will learn exactly how these laws are im portant to understanding biology.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Distinguish between an open and a closed system
Understand how the first law of thermodynamics applies to bi ological systems
Understand how the second law of thermodynamics applies to biological systems
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Open and Closed Systems
The First Law of Thermodynamics
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Self Check: Thermodynamics
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Thermodynamics. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License:
CC BY: Attribution
4.19: Introduction to Thermodynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.20.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435284.20: Open and Closed Systems
Thermodynamics refers to the study of energy and ener gy transfer involving physical matter. The matter an d its environment
relevant to a particular case of energy transfer ar e classified as a system, and everything outside of th at system is called the
surroundings. For instance, when heating a pot of water on the stove, the system includes the stove, the pot, a nd the water. Energy
is transferred within the system (between the stove, po t, and water). There are two types of systems: open and closed. An open
system is one in which energy can be transferred betwee n the system and its surroundings. The stovetop system is open because
heat can be lost into the air. A closed system is one that ca nnot transfer energy to its surroundings.
Biological organisms are open systems. Energy is exch anged between them and their surroundings, as they co nsume energy-storing
molecules and release energy to the environment by d oing work. Like all things in the physical world, ener gy is subject to the laws
of physics. The laws of thermodynamics govern the trans fer of energy in and among all systems in the universe.
In studying energy, scientists use the term “system” t o refer to the matter and its environment involved in energy transfers.
Everything outside of the system is called the surr oundings. Single cells are biological systems. Systems ca n be thought of as
having a certain amount of order. It takes energy t o make a system more ordered. The more ordered a sy stem is, the lower its
entropy. Entropy is a measure of the disorder of a system. As a system becomes more disordered, the lower its energy and the
higher its entropy become.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
4.20: Open and Closed Systems is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.21.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435294.21: The First Law of Thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics deals with the total amount of energy in the universe. It states that this t otal amount of energy is
constant. In other words, there has always been, and al ways will be, exactly the same amount of energy in the universe. Energy
exists in many different forms. According to the first law of thermodynamics, energy may be transferred fro m place to place or
transformed into different forms, but it cannot be c reated or destroyed. The transfers and transformations of energy take place
around us all the time. Light bulbs transform electr ical energy into light energy. Gas stoves transform c hemical energy from natural
gas into heat energy. Plants perform one of the most b iologically useful energy transformations on earth: that of converting the
energy of sunlight into the chemical energy stored within organic molecules. Some examples of energy transf ormations are shown
in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Shown are two examples of energy being transf erred from one system to another and transformed from one form to
another. Humans can convert the chemical energy in f ood, like this ice cream cone, into kinetic energy (the energy of movement to
ride a bicycle). Plants can convert electromagnetic radiation (light energy) from the sun into chemical energy. (credit “ice cream”:
modification of work by D. Sharon Pruitt; credit “ki ds on bikes”: modification of work by Michelle Riggen -Ransom; credit “leaf”:
modification of work by Cory Zanker)
The challenge for all living organisms is to obtain e nergy from their surroundings in forms that they ca n transfer or transform into
usable energy to do work. Living cells have evolved t o meet this challenge very well. Chemical energy sto red within organic
molecules such as sugars and fats is transformed throug h a series of cellular chemical reactions into energ y within molecules of
ATP. Energy in ATP molecules is easily accessible to d o work. Examples of the types of work that cells need to do include building
complex molecules, transporting materials, powering t he beating motion of cilia or flagella, contracting muscle fibers to create
movement, and reproduction.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
4.21: The First Law of Thermodynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.22.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435304.22: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
A living cell’s primary tasks of obtaining, transform ing, and using energy to do work may seem simple. Howeve r, the second law
of thermodynamics explains why these tasks are harder than they appear. None of the energy transfers we’ve d iscussed, along with
all energy transfers and transformations in the uni verse, is completely efficient. In every energy tra nsfer, some amount of energy is
lost in a form that is unusable. In most cases, thi s form is heat energy. Thermodynamically, heat energ y is defined as the energy
transferred from one system to another that is not d oing work. For example, when an airplane flies through t he air, some of the
energy of the flying plane is lost as heat energy du e to friction with the surrounding air. This friction actually heats the air by
temporarily increasing the speed of air molecules. Lik ewise, some energy is lost as heat energy during cellu lar metabolic reactions.
This is good for warm-blooded creatures like us, beca use heat energy helps to maintain our body temperatur e. Strictly speaking, no
energy transfer is completely efficient, because some ene rgy is lost in an unusable form.
Figure 1. Entropy is a measure of randomness or disorder in a system. Gases have higher entropy than liquids, and liquids have
higher entropy than solids.
An important concept in physical systems is that of or der and disorder (also known as randomness). The more e nergy that is lost by
a system to its surroundings, the less ordered and mor e random the system is. Scientists refer to the meas ure of randomness or
disorder within a system as entropy. High entropy mean s high disorder and low energy (Figure 1). To better u nderstand entropy,
think of a student’s bedroom. If no energy or work we re put into it, the room would quickly become messy. I t would exist in a very
disordered state, one of high entropy. Energy must b e put into the system, in the form of the student do ing work and putting
everything away, in order to bring the room back to a state of cleanliness and order. This state is one o f low entropy. Similarly, a car
or house must be constantly maintained with work in or der to keep it in an ordered state. Left alone, the e ntropy of the house or car
gradually increases through rust and degradation. Molec ules and chemical reactions have varying amounts of entropy as well. For
example, as chemical reactions reach a state of equil ibrium, entropy increases, and as molecules at a hig h concentration in one
place diffuse and spread out, entropy also increases.
Try It Yourself
Set up a simple experiment to understand how energy is tran sferred and how a change in entropy results.
1. Take a block of ice. This is water in solid form, so it has a high structural order. This means that the molecules can not move
very much and are in a fixed position. The temperature of the ice is 0°C. As a result, the entropy of the system is lo w.
2. Allow the ice to melt at room temperature. What is the state of molecules in the liquid water now? How did the ener gy transfer
take place? Is the entropy of the system higher or lower? Wh y?
3. Heat the water to its boiling point. What happens to th e entropy of the system when the water is heated?
All physical systems can be thought of in this way: L iving things are highly ordered, requiring constant energy input to be
maintained in a state of low entropy. As living system s take in energy-storing molecules and transform them through chemical
reactions, they lose some amount of usable energy in th e process, because no reaction is completely efficient. They also produce
waste and by-products that aren’t useful energy sour ces. This process increases the entropy of the system’ s surroundings. Since all
energy transfers result in the loss of some usable e nergy, the second law of thermodynamics states that every energy transfer or

4.22.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43530transformation increases the entropy of the universe. Even though living things are highly ordered and ma intain a state of low
entropy, the entropy of the universe in total is con stantly increasing due to the loss of usable energy wi th each energy transfer that
occurs. Essentially, living things are in a continuous uphill battle against this constant increase in universal entrop y.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
4.22: The Second Law of Thermodynamics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.23.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435314.23: Putting It Together- Chemistry of Life
As we’ve just learned, chemistry is essential to life: we are all made of compounds and molecules. Think back to the beginning of
this module, where we briefly discussed the term carbon-basedlife. In the video below, we’ll learn about why carbon is so essential
to life:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=126
Occupation Spotlight: Nutritionists
Let’s look back to our earlier occupation spotlight on the nutritionist. You should now be able see how an understanding of
chemistry is essential to this job: a nutritionist nee ds to understand how the body builds complex molecules from the food a person
ingests. A nutritionist also should understand how energ y is used and moved about in the body. All this requi res a basic
understanding of elements, their structures, and how th ey interact.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
All rights reserved content
That's Why Carbon Is A Tramp: Crash Course Biology #1. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at:
https://youtu.be/QnQe0xW_JY4. Project: Crash Course Biology. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard
YouTube License
4.23: Putting It Together- Chemistry of Life is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.24.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435324.24: Assignment- Biological Astronaut
Imagine you are an exploratory astronaut looking for life throughout the universe. One day you encounter a planet that has no
carbon present on its surface. However, your instruments register movement and a variety of other signs that make you think life
exists on the surface.
Part 1: Before taking a potentially dangerous trip to the sur face, you must outline a theoretical framework in which anot her
element can serve as a backbone for macromolecules. (Hint: look for an element on the periodic table that would act similarly
to carbon.) Begin by describing this new backbone, including how compounds and macromolecules would form. Detail at least
2 chemical reactions forming macromolecules with this bac kbone. You may wish add supporting diagrams (created or
obtained). Be sure to include references as appropriate.
Part 2: Your theoretical framework is deemed strong enough t o justify a trip landside. Once there, you are authorize d to collect
a simple “organism” for experimental use. Collect your specimen(s) and then design a full experiment that will test at least two
characteristics that define biological life on Earth. Be sure to include all the relevant parts of an experim ent and describe how
you would analyze and present the data, results and con clusions.
Take a look at this breakdown for hints on completing thi s assignment.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment has been proofread and does not contain any majo r spelling or grammatical errors
Assignment includes appropriate references
Rubric
Outcomes: Define biology and apply its principles. Identify t he principles of chemistry that are integral to biolo gy.
Rubric for Biological Astronaut Assignment

4.24.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43532Criteria RatingsMax
Points
Define atoms and
elements through the
identification of an
element capable of
replacing carbon as the
backbone atom in
macromolecules.
Illustrations are
encouraged here.Submission identified
element that can replace
carbon as a backbone
element. Illustrations and
descriptions included that
directly compare the two
elements.
5.0 ptsSubmission identifies
element that can replace
carbon as a backbone
element. Description directly
compares two elements.
4.0 ptsNo or wrong element chosen
or justification provided is
inaccurate/insufficient for
identifying replacement
backbone element.
0.0 pts5 pts
Discuss the role electrons
play in enabling chosen
element to replace carbon.Electrons are discussed in
terms of atomic bonding
behaviors. Direct comparison
is provided between carbon
and new element.
Illustrations are included to
show similarities in bonding
activity.
5.0 ptsElectrons are discussed in
terms of atomic bonding
behaviors. Direct comparison
is provided between carbon
and new element.
4.0 ptsElectrons are not discussed or
are discussed inaccurately in
terms of bonding behaviors.
0.0 pts5 pts
Identify the components
of two macromolecule
formation reactions and
the macromolecules
formed.
Illustrations/diagrams are
encouraged here.Two macromolecules
discussed with the new
backbone element; all
components in the formation
of these molecules are
correctly identified.
Illustrations are included.
There is a direct comparison
between new
macromolecules and
traditional macromolecules.
5.0 ptsTwo macromolecules
discussed with the new
backbone element; all
components in the formation
of these molecules are
correctly identified.
Illustrations may be included.
4.0 ptsLess than two formation
reactions are included or all
the components are not
properly identified.
0.0 pts5 pts
Identify at least 4 altered
functional groups formed
without the use of carbon.At least 4 functional groups
identified that would form
without carbon. Descriptions
are detailed and well
diagrammed images/figures
included to illustrate these
groups.
5.0 ptsAt least 4 new functional
groups identified that would
form without carbon.
Descriptions are adequate or
basic illustrations included.
4.0 ptsLess than 4 functional groups
identified/discussed or new
functional groups are
inaccurate.
0.0 pts5 pts
Demonstrate the critical
thinking required to
conduct a scientific
experiment by designing a
full experiment to test if
an organism is ‘alive’.
This experiment contains
all the requiredAll components of an
experiment are included and
clearly discussed. At least 3
standardized variables
included. Hypothesis is clear
and testable. Potential
compounding factors or areas
of uncertainty identified.
5.0 ptsAll components of an
experiment are included. At
least 3 standardized variables
included. Hypothesis is clear
and testable.
4.0 ptsExperiment does not include
all the required components
of an experiment or
components are inaccurately
identified/labeled.
Hypothesis is not testable.
0.0 pts5 pts

4.24.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43532Criteria RatingsMax
Points
components of an
experiment.
The designed experiment
tests at least one
characteristic that defines
biological life.Experiment tests at least one
characteristic of biological
life and the way this is tested
is clearly explained.
5.0 ptsExperiment tests at least one
characteristic of biological
life.
4.0 ptsExperiment does not test
characteristic of biological
life.
0.0 pts5 pts
Possible results from the
experiment are discussed,
and how it would be
concluded this organism
is living or not. Organism
is also identified as
analogous to either
prokaryotic or eukaryotic
organism.Potential results are
discussed and the discussed
results logically follow from
outlined experiment.
Nuances of possible
conclusions discussed.
Organism identified by cell
type.
5.0 ptsPotential results are
discussed and the discussed
results logically follow from
outlined experiment.
Organism identified by cell
type.
4.0 ptsPotential results are not
discussed or the discussed
results do not logically
follow from outlined
experiment. Organism not
identified by cell type.
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 35
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Performance Assessment: Biological Astronaut. Authored by: Shelli Carter. Provided by: Columbia Basin College. Located
at: https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
4.24: Assignment- Biological Astronaut is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.25.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435334.25: Assignment- Interacting with Attributes of Molecules
Open Pedagogy Assignments are assignments in which stude nts use their agency and creativity to create knowled ge artifacts that
can support their own learning, their classmates’ learn ing, and the learning of students around the world. (S ee this peer-reviewed
article for more details.) The assignment on this page is alig ned to a learning outcome of Biology for Majors I and we’ve identified
the module where the reading appears. The assignment c an be created with basic web and computing tools, a ce ll phone camera or
any video recording device, Google or Word documents, and your learning management system.
Categorize molecules according to their functional group
Identify the attributes of molecules with hydroxyl groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with carboxyl groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with amino groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with phosphate groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with methyl groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with carbonyl groups
Identify the attributes of molecules with sulfhydryl groups
One topic that is important to learn about the chemist ry of life is functional groups and the effects the y have one the molecules they
are bonded to. For this assignment, you are going to create an interactive, or a short learning activity, about a functional group. The
purpose of the interactive is to provide yourself an d others the opportunity to better understand concep ts from the content in order
to make it more approachable and interesting. The best interactives may be eligible to be incorporated int o the course for future
students!
Instructions:
STEP 1: Research functional groups. Use the content in the Chemistry of Life module for starters, but also re view current research
and journal articles related to the topic. You are r equired to include at least one reference to an out side source in the interactive.
Any and all content you use inside of the interactive ne eds to be written in your own words and appropriately cite d.
STEP 2: Write out your plan for the interactive. It wo rks well to storyboard it first on a document so you know what you’ll want to
include on each slide. Here’s an example:
Slide 1: Introduction paragraph on the topic. Introduct ory example.
Slide 2: Multiple-choice question about the example, with f eedback.
Slide 3: Introductory text. Picture.
Slide 4: Matching activity.
Slide 5: Conclusion.
STEP 3: Go to H5P.org and create a free account. Click “Create New Content.”
Learning Objectives

4.25.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43533Read through the tutorial on creating a course presentation. Select the type of content you want to create, and get start ed.
STEP 4: Create your interactive! Read through this brief tutorial on adding attributions or use the guides within H5P to help you
create the type of content you need.
STEP 5: Copy and paste the URL of your interactive to share it with your instructor. Include a short descri ption (about 100 words)
of what you learned from the assignment. You may include how you made the interactive and the additional resource s you found.
A Note To Teachers: This assignment can be readily adapted to align wit h any learning outcome or topic in the course. Iden tify an
area that your students struggle with most and point your st udents there.
Additonally, you may want to offer some scaffold for th e assignment by asking students to submit their pla n from Step 3. This will
offer you the cha
The first time your students complete this assignment, choose the best ones and ask students for permission to include them in
future sections. In the first term, students will creat e interactives, and with their permission, you can p ost links to them in your
course in order to show examples for the next term. T he idea is to have students generate content that ot her students can learn from
in this assignment.
About the tools:
You will make these interactives using H5P, using the course presentation tool. The presentat ion should have a minimum of 4 slides
and a maximum of 10. The course presentation feature in H5P wo rks like this:
H5P Course presentation
The other types of H5P tools you’ll likely to include wit hin the H5P presentation are:
H5P Image Sequencing
H5P Drag the words (this is best for matching)
H5P Fill in the blanks
H5P Multiple choice
The goal is not to simply duplicate the multiple-ch oice practice questions that you already see in cour se, but to create an activity
that provides a deeper review or an opportunity to el aborate upon important concepts. You could also pull in current research or
other engaging articles to expound upon a topic.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: William Carr and Lumen Learning. Provided by: William Carr, Associate Professor of Biology at Medgar Eva rs
College. License: CC BY: Attribution
4.25: Assignment- Interacting with Attributes of Molec ules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Module 3- Important Biological Macromolecules
5.1: Why It Matters- Important Biological Macromolecu les
5.2: Introduction to Proteins
5.3: Amino Acids
5.4: Protein Structure
5.5: Function of Proteins
5.6: Introduction to Lipids
5.7: Lipids
5.8: Introduction to Carbohydrates
5.9: Structure and Function of Carbohydrates
5.10: Introduction to Nucleic Acids
5.11: Structure of Nucleic Acids
5.12: DNA and RNA
5.13: Introduction to Comparing Biological Macromolec ules
5.14: Different Types of Biological Macromolecules
5.15: Putting It Together- Important Biological Macrom olecules
5.16: Assignment- Nutritionist for a Day
5: Module 3- Important Biological Macromolecules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

5.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435505.1: Why It Matters- Important Biological Macromolecules
Why identify and describe the main features of the four main classes of important biological
macromolecules?
Fad diets: we’ve all heard about them and maybe followe d one or two in our lives. These diets have strict rule s, and often have
restrictions on eating a certain thing like fats or car bs (carbohydrates).
There are several things to critically consider abou t this type of diet. First off, is it even possible fo r a person to cut all carbs out of
his or her diet? More importantly, is it actually he althy to remove an entire class of molecules from the diet? Fats aren’t really
important right? Certainly cholesterol is bad—right?
Before you decide to swear off carbs or fats, you shoul d know that these types of foods are named after the kind of molecules that
build them. Then you should learn what they actually do in cells.
Biological macromolecules are large molecules, necess ary for life, that are built from smaller organic mo lecules. There are four
major classes of biological macromolecules: carbohydra tes, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids (found in DNA and RNA). We’ll
discuss each class and how they compare to each other.
Learning Outcomes
Describe the structure and function proteins
Illustrate different types of lipids and relate their str ucture to their role in biological systems
Summarize the roles carbohydrates play in biological systems
Discuss nucleic acids and the role they play in DNA and RNA
Discuss macromolecules and the differences between the f our classes
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: Important Biological Macromolecules. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen
Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
5.1: Why It Matters- Important Biological Macromolec ules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

5.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435515.2: Introduction to Proteins
Describe the structure and function proteins
Proteins are polymers of amino acids. Each amino acid contains a central carbon, a hydrogen, a carboxyl gro up, an amino group,
and a variable R group. The R group specifies which c lass of amino acids it belongs to: electrically charg ed hydrophilic side chains,
polar but uncharged side chains, nonpolar hydrophobic sid e chains, and special cases.
Proteins have different “layers” of structure: primary, secondary, tertiary, quaternary.
Proteins have a variety of function in cells. Major fu nctions include acting as enzymes, receptors, transpo rt molecules, regulatory
proteins for gene expression, and so on. Enzymes are bi ological catalysts that speed up a chemical reactio n without being
permanently altered. They have “active sites” where t he substrate/reactant binds, and they can be either ac tivated or inhibited
(competitive and/or noncompetitive inhibitors).
What You’ll Learn to Do
Demonstrate familiarity with monomeric units of protein s: amino acids
Define the different layers of protein structure
Identify several major functions of proteins
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Amino Acids
Protein Structure
Function of Proteins
Self Check: Proteins
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Proteins. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY:
Attribution
5.2: Introduction to Proteins is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435525.3: Amino Acids
Proteins are one of the most abundant organic molecules in living systems and have the most diverse range of funct ions of all
macromolecules. Proteins may be structural, regulatory, contractile, or protective; they may serve in tran sport, storage, or
membranes; or they may be toxins or enzymes. Each cell in a living system may contain thousands of proteins, each with a unique
function. Their structures, like their functions, vary greatly. They are all, however, polymers of amino acids, arranged in a linear
sequence.
Figure 1. Amino acids have a central asymmetric carbon to which an amino group, a carboxyl group, a hydro gen atom, and a side
chain (R group) are attached.
Amino acids are the monomers that make up proteins. Each amino a cid has the same fundamental structure, which consists of a
central carbon atom, also known as the alpha (α) carbon, bonded to an amino group (NH2), a carboxyl g roup (COOH), and to a
hydrogen atom. Every amino acid also has another at om or group of atoms bonded to the central atom kno wn as the R group
(Figure 1).
The name “amino acid” is derived from the fact that they contain both amino group and carboxyl-acid-gro up in their basic
structure. As mentioned, there are 20 amino acids prese nt in proteins. Ten of these are considered essential a mino acids in humans
because the human body cannot produce them and they are ob tained from the diet.
For each amino acid, the R group (or side chain) is diffe rent (Figure 2).

5.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43552Practice Question
Figure 2. There are 20 common amino acids commonly fo und in proteins, each with a different R group (vari ant group) that
determines its chemical nature.
Which categories of amino acid would you expect to fi nd on the surface of a soluble protein, and which woul d you expect to find in
the interior? What distribution of amino acids would yo u expect to find in a protein embedded in a lipid bilayer?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”539127″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”539127″]Polar and charged amino aci d residues (the remainder after peptide bond formati on) are more likely to
be found on the surface of soluble proteins where the y can interact with water, and nonpolar (e.g., amino aci d side chains) are more
likely to be found in the interior where they are seq uestered from water. In membrane proteins, nonpolar an d hydrophobic amino
acid side chains associate with the hydrophobic tail s of phospholipids, while polar and charged amino acid side chains interact with
the polar head groups or with the aqueous solution. Howe ver, there are exceptions. Sometimes, positively and n egatively charged
amino acid side chains interact with one another in t he interior of a protein, and polar or charged amino acid side chains that
interact with a ligand can be found in the ligand bindi ng pocket.[/hidden-answer]
The chemical nature of the side chain determines th e nature of the amino acid (that is, whether it is aci dic, basic, polar, or
nonpolar). For example, the amino acid glycine has a hydrogen atom as the R group. Amino acids such as va line, methionine, and
alanine are nonpolar or hydrophobic in nature, while amino acids such as serine, threonine, and cysteine a re polar and have
hydrophilic side chains. The side chains of lysine an d arginine are positively charged, and therefore the se amino acids are also
known as basic amino acids. Proline has an R group th at is linked to the amino group, forming a ring-lik e structure. Proline is an
exception to the standard structure of an animo acid sin ce its amino group is not separate from the side chain (Fi gure 2).
Amino acids are represented by a single upper case le tter or a three-letter abbreviation. For example, val ine is known by the letter
V or the three-letter symbol val. Just as some fatty a cids are essential to a diet, some amino acids are ne cessary as well. They are
known as essential amino acids, and in humans they inc lude isoleucine, leucine, and cysteine. Essential ami no acids refer to those
necessary for construction of proteins in the body, a lthough not produced by the body; which amino acids are essential varies from
organism to organism.

5.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43552
Figure 3. Peptide bond formation is a dehydration synt hesis reaction. The carboxyl group of one amino acid is linked to the amino
group of the incoming amino acid. In the process, a m olecule of water is released.
The sequence and the number of amino acids ultimatel y determine the protein’s shape, size, and function. Each amino acid is
attached to another amino acid by a covalent bond, k nown as a peptide bond, which is formed by a dehydrat ion reaction. The
carboxyl group of one amino acid and the amino grou p of the incoming amino acid combine, releasing a mo lecule of water. The
resulting bond is the peptide bond (Figure 3).
The products formed by such linkages are called pepti des. As more amino acids join to this growing chain, the resulting chain is
known as a polypeptide. Each polypeptide has a free a mino group at one end. This end is called the N termi nal, or the amino
terminal, and the other end has a free carboxyl grou p, also known as the C or carboxyl terminal. While th e terms polypeptide and
protein are sometimes used interchangeably, a polype ptide is technically a polymer of amino acids, where as the term protein is
used for a polypeptide or polypeptides that have co mbined together, often have bound non-peptide prost hetic groups, have a
distinct shape, and have a unique function. After pro tein synthesis (translation), most proteins are modif ied. These are known as
post-translational modifications. They may undergo cle avage, phosphorylation, or may require the addition o f other chemical
groups. Only after these modifications is the protein com pletely functional.
The Evolutionary Significance of Cytochrome c
Cytochrome c is an important component of the elect ron transport chain, a part of cellular respiration, and it is normally found in
the cellular organelle, the mitochondrion. This pro tein has a heme prosthetic group, and the central io n of the heme gets alternately
reduced and oxidized during electron transfer. Becau se this essential protein’s role in producing cellul ar energy is crucial, it has
changed very little over millions of years. Protein s equencing has shown that there is a considerable amou nt of cytochrome c amino
acid sequence homology among different species; in o ther words, evolutionary kinship can be assessed by mea suring the
similarities or differences among various species’ DNA or pro tein sequences.
Scientists have determined that human cytochrome c c ontains 104 amino acids. For each cytochrome c molecu le from different
organisms that has been sequenced to date, 37 of these amino acids appear in the same position in all samp les of cytochrome c.
This indicates that there may have been a common anc estor. On comparing the human and chimpanzee protein sequences, no
sequence difference was found. When human and rhesus mo nkey sequences were compared, the single difference fou nd was in one
amino acid. In another comparison, human to yeast sequenci ng shows a difference in the 44th position.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
5.3: Amino Acids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435535.4: Protein Structure
As discussed earlier, the shape of a protein is critical to its function. For example, an enzyme can bind to a s pecific substrate at a
site known as the active site. If this active site i s altered because of local changes or changes in overa ll protein structure, the
enzyme may be unable to bind to the substrate. To u nderstand how the protein gets its final shape or con formation, we need to
understand the four levels of protein structure: primar y, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary.
Primary Structure
The unique sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide chain is its primary structure. For example, the pancre atic hormone insulin
has two polypeptide chains, A and B, and they are linke d together by disulfide bonds. The N terminal amino ac id of the A chain is
glycine, whereas the C terminal amino acid is asparagi ne (Figure 1). The sequences of amino acids in the A and B chains are
unique to insulin.
Figure 1. Bovine serum insulin is a protein hormone mad e of two peptide chains, A (21 amino acids long) and B (30 amino acids
long). In each chain, primary structure is indicated by three-letter abbreviations that represent the name s of the amino acids in the
order they are present. The amino acid cysteine (cys) has a sulfhydryl (SH) group as a side chain. Two sulfhydr yl groups can react
in the presence of oxygen to form a disulfide (S-S) bo nd. Two disulfide bonds connect the A and B chains tog ether, and a third
helps the A chain fold into the correct shape. Note t hat all disulfide bonds are the same length, but are d rawn different sizes for
clarity.
Figure 2. The beta chain of hemoglobin is 147 residues in length, yet a single amino acid substitution leads t o sickle cell anemia. In
normal hemoglobin, the amino acid at position seven i s glutamate. In sickle cell hemoglobin, this glutamate is replaced by a valine.
The unique sequence for every protein is ultimately determined by the gene encoding the protein. A chan ge in nucleotide sequence
of the gene’s coding region may lead to a different amino acid being added to the growing polypeptide ch ain, causing a change in

5.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43553protein structure and function. In sickle cell anem ia, the hemoglobin β chain (a small portion of which is shown in Figure 2) h as a
single amino acid substitution, causing a change in prot ein structure and function.
Specifically, the amino acid glutamic acid is substit uted by valine in the β chain. What is most remarkable to consider is that a
hemoglobin molecule is made up of two alpha chains an d two beta chains that each consist of about 150 amin o acids. The
molecule, therefore, has about 600 amino acids. The st ructural difference between a normal hemoglobin mole cule and a sickle cell
molecule—which dramatically decreases life expectanc y—is a single amino acid of the 600. What is even mo re remarkable is that
those 600 amino acids are encoded by three nucleoti des each, and the mutation is caused by a single bas e change (point mutation),
1 in 1800 bases.
Figure 3. In this blood smear, visualized at 535x magni fication using bright field microscopy, sickle cells ar e crescent shaped, while
normal cells are disc-shaped. (credit: modification of work by Ed Uthman; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Because of this change of one amino acid in the cha in, hemoglobin molecules form long fibers that disto rt the biconcave, or discshaped, red blood cells and assume a crescent or “sic kle” shape, which clogs arteries (Figure 3). This can le ad to myriad serious
health problems such as breathlessness, dizziness, headach es, and abdominal pain for those affected by this disease.
Secondary Structure
The local folding of the polypeptide in some region s gives rise to the secondary structure of the protei n. The most common are the
α-helix and β-pleated sheet structures (Figure 4). Both structures are the α-helix structure—the helix held in shape by hydroge n
bonds. The hydrogen bonds form between the oxygen at om in the carbonyl group in one amino acid and anot her amino acid that is
four amino acids farther along the chain.
Figure 4. The α-helix and β-pleated sheet are secondar y structures of proteins that form because of hydrogen bonding between
carbonyl and amino groups in the peptide backbone. C ertain amino acids have a propensity to form an α-hel ix, while others have a
propensity to form a β-pleated sheet.

5.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43553Every helical turn in an alpha helix has 3.6 amino a cid residues. The R groups (the variant groups) of the polypeptide protrude out
from the α-helix chain. In the β-pleated sheet, the “pleats” are formed by hydrogen b onding between atoms on the backbone of the
polypeptide chain. The R groups are attached to the carbons and extend above and below the folds of the pleat. The pleated
segments align parallel or antiparallel to each oth er, and hydrogen bonds form between the partially posit ive nitrogen atom in the
amino group and the partially negative oxygen atom in the carbonyl group of the peptide backbone. The α-helix and β-pleated sheet
structures are found in most globular and fibrous prote ins and they play an important structural role.
Tertiary Structure
The unique three-dimensional structure of a polypept ide is its tertiary structure (Figure 5). This structur e is in part due to chemical
interactions at work on the polypeptide chain. Primar ily, the interactions among R groups creates the comp lex three-dimensional
tertiary structure of a protein. The nature of the R groups found in the amino acids involved can count eract the formation of the
hydrogen bonds described for standard secondary stru ctures. For example, R groups with like charges are repel led by each other
and those with unlike charges are attracted to each o ther (ionic bonds). When protein folding takes place, the hydrophobic R groups
of nonpolar amino acids lay in the interior of the protein, whereas the hydrophilic R groups lay on the o utside. The former types of
interactions are also known as hydrophobic interaction s. Interaction between cysteine side chains forms disu lfide linkages in the
presence of oxygen, the only covalent bond forming duri ng protein folding.
Figure 5. The tertiary structure of proteins is determi ned by a variety of chemical interactions. These incl ude hydrophobic
interactions, ionic bonding, hydrogen bonding and di sulfide linkages.
All of these interactions, weak and strong, determine t he final three-dimensional shape of the protein. Wh en a protein loses its
three-dimensional shape, it may no longer be functional.
Quaternary Structure
In nature, some proteins are formed from several pol ypeptides, also known as subunits, and the interaction o f these subunits forms
the quaternary structure. Weak interactions between th e subunits help to stabilize the overall structure. For example, insulin (a
globular protein) has a combination of hydrogen bon ds and disulfide bonds that cause it to be mostly cl umped into a ball shape.
Insulin starts out as a single polypeptide and loses some internal sequences in the presence of post-tran slational modification after
the formation of the disulfide linkages that hold t he remaining chains together. Silk (a fibrous protein), however, has a β-pleated
sheet structure that is the result of hydrogen bonding be tween different chains.
The four levels of protein structure (primary, secondar y, tertiary, and quaternary) are illustrated in Figure 6.

5.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43553
Figure 6. The four levels of protein structure can be observed in these illustrations. (credit: modification of work by National
Human Genome Research Institute)
Denaturation and Protein Folding
Each protein has its own unique sequence and shape t hat are held together by chemical interactions. If the protein is subject to
changes in temperature, pH, or exposure to chemicals, the protein structure may change, losing its shape with out losing its primary
sequence in what is known as denaturation. Denaturation is often reversible because the primary structure o f the polypeptide is
conserved in the process if the denaturing agent is removed, allowing the protein to resume its function. Sometimes denaturation is
irreversible, leading to loss of function. One exampl e of irreversible protein denaturation is when an egg is fried. The albumin
protein in the liquid egg white is denatured when pla ced in a hot pan. Not all proteins are denatured at high temperatures; for
instance, bacteria that survive in hot springs have p roteins that function at temperatures close to boili ng. The stomach is also very
acidic, has a low pH, and denatures proteins as part of the digestion process; however, the digestive enzymes of the stomach retain
their activity under these conditions.
Protein folding is critical to its function. It was ori ginally thought that the proteins themselves were re sponsible for the folding
process. Only recently was it found that often they rece ive assistance in the folding process from protein h elpers known as
chaperones (or chaperonins) that associate with the ta rget protein during the folding process. They act by preventing aggregation of
polypeptides that make up the complete protein structure, and they disassociate from the protein once the target pro tein is folded.
For an additional perspective on proteins, view this animation called “Biomolecules: The Proteins.”
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
5.4: Protein Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435545.5: Function of Proteins
The primary types and functions of proteins are listed i n Table 1.
Table 1. Protein Types and Functions
Type Examples Functions
Digestive Enzymes Amylase, lipase, pepsin, trypsinHelp in digestion of food by catabolizing
nutrients into monomeric units
Transport Hemoglobin, albuminCarry substances in the blood or lymph
throughout the body
Structural Actin, tubulin, keratinConstruct different structures, like the
cytoskeleton
Hormones Insulin, thyroxineCoordinate the activity of different body
systems
Defense Immunoglobulins Protect the body from foreign p athogens
Contractile Actin, myosin Effect muscle contraction
StorageLegume storage proteins, egg white
(albumin)Provide nourishment in early development
of the embryo and the seedling
Two special and common types of proteins are enzymes and hormones. Enzymes, which are produced by living cells, are catalysts
in biochemical reactions (like digestion) and are u sually complex or conjugated proteins. Each enzyme is specific for the substrate
(a reactant that binds to an enzyme) it acts on. The enzyme may help in breakdown, rearrangement, or syn thesis reactions. Enzymes
that break down their substrates are called cataboli c enzymes, enzymes that build more complex molecule s from their substrates are
called anabolic enzymes, and enzymes that affect th e rate of reaction are called catalytic enzymes. It should be noted that all
enzymes increase the rate of reaction and, therefore, are considered to be organic catalysts. An example o f an enzyme is salivary
amylase, which hydrolyzes its substrate amylose, a compone nt of starch.
Hormones are chemical-signaling molecules, usually small prote ins or steroids, secreted by endocrine cells that act t o control or
regulate specific physiological processes, including gro wth, development, metabolism, and reproduction. For exa mple, insulin is a
protein hormone that helps to regulate the blood gluc ose level.
Proteins have different shapes and molecular weights; s ome proteins are globular in shape whereas others ar e fibrous in nature. For
example, hemoglobin is a globular protein, but coll agen, found in our skin, is a fibrous protein. Protein shape is critical to its
function, and this shape is maintained by many differ ent types of chemical bonds. Changes in temperature, pH, and exposure to
chemicals may lead to permanent changes in the shape of the protein, leading to loss of function, known as denaturation. All
proteins are made up of different arrangements of the sa me 20 types of amino acids.
In Summary: Function of Proteins
Proteins are a class of macromolecules that perform a diverse range of functions for the cell. They help in metabolism by providing
structural support and by acting as enzymes, carriers, or hormones. The building blocks of proteins (monomer s) are amino acids.
Each amino acid has a central carbon that is linked to an amino group, a carboxyl group, a hydrogen atom, and an R group or side
chain. There are 20 commonly occurring amino acids, e ach of which differs in the R group. Each amino acid i s linked to its
neighbors by a peptide bond. A long chain of amino acids i s known as a polypeptide.
Proteins are organized at four levels: primary, secon dary, tertiary, and (optional) quaternary. The primar y structure is the unique
sequence of amino acids. The local folding of the pol ypeptide to form structures such as the α helix and β-pleated sheet constitutes
the secondary structure. The overall three-dimensiona l structure is the tertiary structure. When two or mor e polypeptides combine
to form the complete protein structure, the configu ration is known as the quaternary structure of a prot ein. Protein shape and

5.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43554function are intricately linked; any change in shap e caused by changes in temperature or pH may lead to protein denaturation and a
loss in function.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision, adaptation, and original content. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
5.5: Function of Proteins is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435555.6: Introduction to Lipids
Illustrate different types of lipids and relate their structure to their role in biological systems
In this outcome, we will discuss lipids, or fats, and the role they plan in our bodies.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Distinguish between the different kinds of lipids
Identify several major functions of lipids
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Lipids
Self Check: Lipids
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Lipids. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY:
Attribution
5.6: Introduction to Lipids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435565.7: Lipids
Figure 1. Hydrophobic lipids in the fur of aquatic ma mmals, such as this river otter, protect them from the elements. (credit: Ken
Bosma)
Lipids include a diverse group of compounds that ar e largely nonpolar in nature. This is because they a re hydrocarbons that include
mostly nonpolar carbon–carbon or carbon–hydrogen bo nds. Non-polar molecules are hydrophobic (“water fearin g”), or insoluble in
water. Lipids perform many different functions in a c ell. Cells store energy for long-term use in the for m of fats. Lipids also
provide insulation from the environment for plants and animals (Figure 1). For example, they help keep aqu atic birds and mammals
dry when forming a protective layer over fur or feat hers because of their water-repellant hydrophobic na ture. Lipids are also the
building blocks of many hormones and are an importan t constituent of all cellular membranes. Lipids incl ude fats, oils, waxes,
phospholipids, and steroids.
Fats and Oils
A fat molecule consists of two main components—glyce rol and fatty acids. Glycerol is an organic compound (alcohol) with three
carbons, five hydrogens, and three hydroxyl (OH) groups. Fatty acids have a long chain of hydrocarbons to which a carboxyl group
is attached, hence the name “fatty acid.” The number of carbons in the fatty acid may range from 4 to 36; most common are those
containing 12–18 carbons. In a fat molecule, the fatty acids are attached to each of the three carbons of the glycerol molecule with
an ester bond through an oxygen atom (Figure 2).

5.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43556
Figure 2. Triacylglycerol is formed by the joining of three fatty acids to a glycerol backbone in a dehyd ration reaction. Three
molecules of water are released in the process.
During this ester bond formation, three water molecule s are released. The three fatty acids in the triacyl glycerol may be similar or
dissimilar. Fats are also called triacylglycerols or triglycerides because of their chemical structure. Some fatty acid s have common
names that specify their origin. For example, palmiti c acid, a saturated fatty acid, is derived from the palm tree. Arachidic acid is
derived from Arachis hypogea, the scientific name for groundnuts or peanuts.
Fatty acids may be saturated or unsaturated. In a fat ty acid chain, if there are only single bonds between neighboring carbons in the
hydrocarbon chain, the fatty acid is said to be sat urated. Saturated fatty acids are saturated with hydro gen; in other words, the
number of hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon skele ton is maximized. Stearic acid is an example of a satu rated fatty acid
(Figure 3)

5.7.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43556
Figure 3. Stearic acid is a common saturated fatty acid.
When the hydrocarbon chain contains a double bond, t he fatty acid is said to be unsaturated. Oleic acid is an example of an
unsaturated fatty acid (Figure 4).
Figure 4. Oleic acid is a common unsaturated fatty aci d.
Most unsaturated fats are liquid at room temperature and are called oils. If there is one double bond in t he molecule, then it is
known as a monounsaturated fat (e.g., olive oil), and i f there is more than one double bond, then it is kn own as a polyunsaturated
fat (e.g., canola oil).
When a fatty acid has no double bonds, it is known as a saturated fatty acid because no more hydrogen may be added to the carbon
atoms of the chain. A fat may contain similar or dif ferent fatty acids attached to glycerol. Long strai ght fatty acids with single
bonds tend to get packed tightly and are solid at ro om temperature. Animal fats with stearic acid and palmi tic acid (common in
meat) and the fat with butyric acid (common in butte r) are examples of saturated fats. Mammals store fats in specialized cells called
adipocytes, where globules of fat occupy most of the c ell’s volume. In plants, fat or oil is stored in man y seeds and is used as a
source of energy during seedling development. Unsaturat ed fats or oils are usually of plant origin and con tain cis unsaturated fatty
acids. Cis and trans indicate the configuration of the molecule around t he double bond. If hydrogens are present in the same p lane,
it is referred to as a cis fat; if the hydrogen ato ms are on two different planes, it is referred to as a trans fat. The cis double bond
causes a bend or a “kink” that prevents the fatty aci ds from packing tightly, keeping them liquid at roo m temperature (Figure 5).
Olive oil, corn oil, canola oil, and cod liver oil are examples of unsaturated fats. Unsaturated fats help to lower blood cholesterol
levels whereas saturated fats contribute to plaque form ation in the arteries.

5.7.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43556
Figure 5. Saturated fatty acids have hydrocarbon chai ns connected by single bonds only. Unsaturated fatty ac ids have one or more
double bonds. Each double bond may be in a cis or tra ns configuration. In the cis configuration, both hydr ogens are on the same
side of the hydrocarbon chain. In the trans configura tion, the hydrogens are on opposite sides. A cis double bond causes a kink in
the chain.
Trans Fats
In the food industry, oils are artificially hydrogen ated to make them semi-solid and of a consistency de sirable for many processed
food products. Simply speaking, hydrogen gas is bubble d through oils to solidify them. During this hydrogen ation process, double
bonds of the cis– conformation in the hydrocarbon chain may be converted t o double bonds in the trans – conformation.
Margarine, some types of peanut butter, and shortening are examples of artificially hydrogenated trans fats. Recent studies have
shown that an increase in trans fats in the human diet may lead to an increase in l evels of low-density lipoproteins (LDL), or “bad”
cholesterol, which in turn may lead to plaque deposit ion in the arteries, resulting in heart disease. Many fa st food restaurants have
recently banned the use of trans fats, and food labels are required to display the trans fat content.

5.7.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43556Omega Fatty Acids
Figure 6. Alpha-linolenic acid is an example of an om ega-3 fatty acid. It has three cis double bonds and, a s a result, a curved shape.
For clarity, the carbons are not shown. Each singly bon ded carbon has two hydrogens associated with it, also no t shown.
Essential fatty acids are fatty acids required but n ot synthesized by the human body. Consequently, they have to be supplemented
through ingestion via the diet. Omega-3 fatty acids (like that shown in Figure 6) fall into this category a nd are one of only two
known for humans (the other being omega-6 fatty acid). These are polyunsaturated fatty acids and are cal led omega-3 because the
third carbon from the end of the hydrocarbon chain is connected to its neighboring carbon by a double bond.
The farthest carbon away from the carboxyl group is numbered as the omega (ω) carbon, and if the double bond is between the
third and fourth carbon from that end, it is known as an omega-3 fatty acid. Nutritionally important becau se the body does not
make them, omega-3 fatty acids include alpha-linoleic acid (ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahex aenoic acid
(DHA), all of which are polyunsaturated. Salmon, trout, and tuna are good sources of omega-3 fatty acids. Resear ch indicates that
omega-3 fatty acids reduce the risk of sudden death from heart attacks, reduce triglycerides in the blo od, lower blood pressure, and
prevent thrombosis by inhibiting blood clotting. They also reduce inflammation, and may help reduce the r isk of some cancers in
animals.
Like carbohydrates, fats have received a lot of bad publicity. It is true that eating an excess of fried f oods and other “fatty” foods
leads to weight gain. However, fats do have important fun ctions. Many vitamins are fat soluble, and fats serve as a long-term
storage form of fatty acids: a source of energy. The y also provide insulation for the body. Therefore, “he althy” fats in moderate
amounts should be consumed on a regular basis.
Waxes
Figure 7. Waxy coverings on some leaves are made of lip ids. (credit: Roger Griffith)
Wax covers the feathers of some aquatic birds and the l eaf surfaces of some plants. Because of the hydrophobi c nature of waxes,
they prevent water from sticking on the surface (Figu re 7). Waxes are made up of long fatty acid chains e sterified to long-chain
alcohols.
Phospholipids
Phospholipids are major constituents of the plasma membrane, the o utermost layer of animal cells. Like fats, they are com posed of
fatty acid chains attached to a glycerol or sphingo sine backbone. Instead of three fatty acids attache d as in triglycerides, however,
there are two fatty acids forming diacylglycerol, and the third carbon of the glycerol backbone is occup ied by a modified phosphate
group (Figure 8).

5.7.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43556
Figure 8. A phospholipid is a molecule with two fatty acids and a modified phosphate group attached to a gl ycerol backbone. The
phosphate may be modified by the addition of charged or polar chemical groups. Two chemical groups that m ay modify the
phosphate, choline and serine, are shown here. Both ch oline and serine attach to the phosphate group at the position labeled R.
A phosphate group alone attached to a diaglycerol d oes not qualify as a phospholipid; it is phosphatida te (diacylglycerol 3phosphate), the precursor of phospholipids. The pho sphate group is modified by an alcohol. Phosphatidylch oline and
phosphatidylserine are two important phospholipids th at are found in plasma membranes.A phospholipid is an amphipathic
molecule, meaning it has a hydrophobic and a hydroph ilic part. The fatty acid chains are hydrophobic and cannot interact with
water, whereas the phosphate-containing group is hydrophili c and interacts with water (Figure 9).
Figure 9. The phospholipid bilayer is the major compon ent of all cellular membranes. The hydrophilic head groups of the
phospholipids face the aqueous solution. The hydrophobi c tails are sequestered in the middle of the bilayer.
The head is the hydrophilic part, and the tail conta ins the hydrophobic fatty acids. In a membrane, a b ilayer of phospholipids forms
the matrix of the structure, the fatty acid tails of phospholipids face inside, away from water, whereas the phosphate group faces the
outside, aqueous side (Figure 9).
Phospholipids are responsible for the dynamic nature o f the plasma membrane. If a drop of phospholipids is p laced in water, it
spontaneously forms a structure known as a micelle, wher e the hydrophilic phosphate heads face the outside and the fatty acids
face the interior of this structure.
Steroids
Unlike the phospholipids and fats discussed earlier, ster oids have a fused ring structure. Although they do no t resemble the other
lipids, they are grouped with them because they are also hydrophobic and insoluble in water. All steroids h ave four linked carbon
rings and several of them, like cholesterol, have a sho rt tail (Figure 10). Many steroids also have the –OH func tional group, which
puts them in the alcohol classification (sterols).

5.7.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43556
Figure 10. Steroids such as cholesterol and cortisol are c omposed of four fused hydrocarbon rings.
Cholesterol is the most common steroid. Cholesterol is mainly synthesized in the liver and is the precursor to many steroid
hormones such as testosterone and estradiol, which are se creted by the gonads and endocrine glands. It is also t he precursor to
Vitamin D. Cholesterol is also the precursor of bile s alts, which help in the emulsification of fats and the ir subsequent absorption
by cells. Although cholesterol is often spoken of in n egative terms by lay people, it is necessary for pr oper functioning of the body.
It is a component of the plasma membrane of animal c ells and is found within the phospholipid bilayer. Be ing the outermost
structure in animal cells, the plasma membrane is re sponsible for the transport of materials and cellula r recognition and it is
involved in cell-to-cell communication.
For an additional perspective on lipids, explore this interactive animation.
Lipids are a class of macromolecules that are nonpol ar and hydrophobic in nature. Major types include fat s and oils, waxes,
phospholipids, and steroids. Fats are a stored form of e nergy and are also known as triacylglycerols or trig lycerides. Fats are
made up of fatty acids and either glycerol or sphing osine. Fatty acids may be unsaturated or saturated, depe nding on the
presence or absence of double bonds in the hydrocar bon chain. If only single bonds are present, they are known as saturated
fatty acids. Unsaturated fatty acids may have one or mo re double bonds in the hydrocarbon chain. Phospholipi ds make up the
matrix of membranes. They have a glycerol or sphingos ine backbone to which two fatty acid chains and a pho sphatecontaining group are attached. Steroids are another c lass of lipids. Their basic structure has four fused carbon rings.
Cholesterol is a type of steroid and is an important constituent of the plasma membrane, where it helps to maintain the fluid
nature of the membrane. It is also the precursor of ste roid hormones such as testosterone.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
5.7: Lipids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

5.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435575.8: Introduction to Carbohydrates
Summarize the roles carbohydrates play in biological systems
Are carbohydrates good for you? People who wish to lose weight are often told that carbohydrates are bad for them and should be
avoided. Some diets completely forbid carbohydrate co nsumption, claiming that a low-carbohydrate diet helps people to lose
weight faster. However, carbohydrates have been an impo rtant part of the human diet for thousands of years; artifacts from ancient
civilizations show the presence of wheat, rice, and corn i n our ancestors’ storage areas.
Carbohydrates should be supplemented with proteins, vitamins, and fats to be parts of a well-balanced die t. Calorie-wise, a gram of
carbohydrate provides 4.3 Kcal. For comparison, fats provi de 9 Kcal/g, a less desirable ratio. Carbohydrates conta in soluble and
insoluble elements; the insoluble part is known as fi ber, which is mostly cellulose. Fiber has many uses; it promotes regular bowel
movement by adding bulk, and it regulates the rate of consumption of blood glucose. Fiber also helps to r emove excess cholesterol
from the body. In addition, a meal containing whole grains and vegetables gives a feeling of fullness. As an immediate source of
energy, glucose is broken down during the process of ce llular respiration, which produces ATP, the energy cu rrency of the cell.
Without the consumption of carbohydrates, the availabil ity of “instant energy” would be reduced.
Eliminating carbohydrates from the diet is not the be st way to lose weight. A low-calorie diet that is rich in whole grains, fruits,
vegetables, and lean meat, together with plenty of exerc ise and plenty of water, is the more sensible way to lose weig ht.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Distinguish between monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polys accharides
Identify several major functions of carbohydrates
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Structure and Function of Carbohydrates
Self Check: Carbohydrates
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Carbohydrates. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC
BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
5.8: Introduction to Carbohydrates is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435585.9: Structure and Function of Carbohydrates
Most people are familiar with carbohydrates, one type of macromolecule, especially when it comes to what we e at. To lose weight,
some individuals adhere to “low-carb” diets. Athletes, in contrast, often “carb-load” before important com petitions to ensure that
they have enough energy to compete at a high level. Carbohydrates are, in fact, an essential part of our d iet; grains, fruits, and
vegetables are all natural sources of carbohydrates. Carbohydrates provide energy to the body, particul arly through glucose, a
simple sugar that is a component of starch and an in gredient in many staple foods. Carbohydrates also have other important
functions in humans, animals, and plants.
Carbohydrates can be represented by the stoichiometric formula (C H O) n, where n is the number of carbons in the molecule. In
other words, the ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxyg en is 1:2:1 in carbohydrate molecules. This formula also explains the origin of
the term “carbohydrate”: the components are carbon (“carbo”) and the components of water (hence, “hydrate ”). Carbohydrates are
classified into three subtypes: monosaccharides, disacchari des, and polysaccharides.
Monosaccharides
Monosaccharides (mono – = “one”; sacchar – = “sweet”) are simple sugars, the most common of whic h is glucose. In
monosaccharides, the number of carbons usually range s from three to seven. Most monosaccharide names end wit h the suffix – ose.
If the sugar has an aldehyde group (the functional g roup with the structure R-CHO), it is known as an aldose, and if it has a ketone
group (the functional group with the structure RC(=O)R ′), it is known as a ketose. Depending on the number of carbons in the
sugar, they also may be known as trioses (three carbon s), pentoses (five carbons), and or hexoses (six carbons). See Figure 1 for an
illustration of the monosaccharides.2

5.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43558
Figure 1. Monosaccharides are classified based on the posi tion of their carbonyl group and the number of carb ons in the backbone.
Aldoses have a carbonyl group (indicated in green) at the end of the carbon chain, and ketoses have a carb onyl group in the middle
of the carbon chain. Trioses, pentoses, and hexoses have three, five, and six carbon backbones, respectively.
The chemical formula for glucose is C H O. In humans, g lucose is an important source of energy. During cellu lar respiration,
energy is released from glucose, and that energy is used to help make adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Plant s synthesize glucose
using carbon dioxide and water, and glucose in turn is used for energy requirements for the plant. Excess glu cose is often stored as
starch that is catabolized (the breakdown of larger molec ules by cells) by humans and other animals that feed on plants.
Galactose and fructose are other common monosaccharid es — galactose is found in milk sugars and fructose i s found in fruit
sugars. Although glucose, galactose, and fructose all have the same chemical formula (C H O), they differ st ructurally and
chemically (and are known as isomers) because of the d ifferent arrangement of functional groups around th e asymmetric carbon;
all of these monosaccharides have more than one asymmetri c carbon (Figure 2).6 12 6
6 12 6

5.9.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43558Practice Question
Figure 2. Glucose, galactose, and fructose are all hexo ses. They are structural isomers, meaning they have the same chemical
formula (C6H12O6) but a different arrangement of at oms.
What kind of sugars are these, aldose or ketose?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”972235″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”972235″]Glucose and galactose are ald oses. Fructose is a ketose.[/hidden-answer]
Monosaccharides can exist as a linear chain or as ring- shaped molecules; in aqueous solutions they are usua lly found in ring forms
(Figure 3). Glucose in a ring form can have two differe nt arrangements of the hydroxyl group (−OH) around the anomeric carbon
(carbon 1 that becomes asymmetric in the process of ri ng formation). If the hydroxyl group is below carbon n umber 1 in the sugar,
it is said to be in the alpha (α) position, and if it is above the plane, it is said to be in the beta (β) position.

5.9.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43558
Figure 3. Five and six carbon monosaccharides exist in eq uilibrium between linear and ring forms. When the ri ng forms, the side
chain it closes on is locked into an α or β position. Fr uctose and ribose also form rings, although they form f ive-membered rings as
opposed to the six-membered ring of glucose.
Disaccharides
Disaccharides (di– = “two”) form when two monosaccharides undergo a deh ydration reaction (also known as a condensation
reaction or dehydration synthesis). During this proce ss, the hydroxyl group of one monosaccharide combine s with the hydrogen of
another monosaccharide, releasing a molecule of wate r and forming a covalent bond. A covalent bond form ed between a
carbohydrate molecule and another molecule (in this case, between two monosaccharides) is known as a glycosidic bond (Figure
4). Glycosidic bonds (also called glycosidic linkages) can be of the alpha or the beta type.

5.9.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43558
Figure 4. Sucrose is formed when a monomer of glucose a nd a monomer of fructose are joined in a dehydration reaction to form a
glycosidic bond. In the process, a water molecule is lo st. By convention, the carbon atoms in a monosaccharid e are numbered from
the terminal carbon closest to the carbonyl group. In sucrose, a glycosidic linkage is formed between carbon 1 in glucose and
carbon 2 in fructose.
Common disaccharides include lactose, maltose, and suc rose (Figure 5). Lactose is a disaccharide consisting of the monomers
glucose and galactose. It is found naturally in milk. Maltose, or malt sugar, is a disaccharide formed by a dehydration reaction
between two glucose molecules. The most common disacch aride is sucrose, or table sugar, which is composed of the monomers
glucose and fructose.

5.9.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43558
Figure 5. Common disaccharides include maltose (grain su gar), lactose (milk sugar), and sucrose (table sugar).
Polysaccharides
A long chain of monosaccharides linked by glycosidic bonds is known as a polysaccharide (poly– = “many”). The chain may be
branched or unbranched, and it may contain different types of monosaccharides. The molecular weight may be 100,000 daltons or
more depending on the number of monomers joined. Star ch, glycogen, cellulose, and chitin are primary examp les of
polysaccharides.
Starch is the stored form of sugars in plants and is made up of a mixture of amylose and amylopectin (bot h polymers of glucose).
Plants are able to synthesize glucose, and the excess gl ucose, beyond the plant’s immediate energy needs, is stored as starch in
different plant parts, including roots and seeds. The starch in the seeds provides food for the embryo as it germinates and can also
act as a source of food for humans and animals. The starch that is consumed by humans is broken down by enzymes, such as
salivary amylases, into smaller molecules, such as maltose and glucose. The cells can then absorb the glucose.
Starch is made up of glucose monomers that are joined by α 1-4 or α 1-6 glycosidic bonds. The numbers 1-4 and 1-6 refer to the
carbon number of the two residues that have joined to form the bond. As illustrated in Figure 6, amylose is starch formed by
unbranched chains of glucose monomers (only α 1-4 linkages), whereas amylopectin is a branched po lysaccharide (α 1-6 linkages
at the branch points).

5.9.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43558
Figure 6. Amylose and amylopectin are two different f orms of starch. Amylose is composed of unbranched chains of glucose
monomers connected by α 1,4 glycosidic linkages. Amylo pectin is composed of branched chains of glucose monome rs connected
by α 1,4 and α 1,6 glycosidic linkages. Because of the way the subunits are joined, the glucose chains have a helical structure.
Glycogen (not shown) is similar in structure to amylope ctin but more highly branched.
Glycogen is the storage form of glucose in humans and other v ertebrates and is made up of monomers of glucose. Gl ycogen is the
animal equivalent of starch and is a highly branched molecule usually stored in liver and muscle cells. Whenever blood glucose
levels decrease, glycogen is broken down to release glucose in a process known as glycogenolysis.
Cellulose is the most abundant natural biopolymer. The cell wal l of plants is mostly made of cellulose; this provide s structural
support to the cell. Wood and paper are mostly cellu losic in nature. Cellulose is made up of glucose mon omers that are linked by β
1-4 glycosidic bonds (Figure 7).

5.9.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43558
Figure 7. In cellulose, glucose monomers are linked in unbranched chains by β 1-4 glycosidic linkages. Because of the way the
glucose subunits are joined, every glucose monomer is fl ipped relative to the next one resulting in a linear, fibrous structure.
As shown in Figure 7, every other glucose monomer in cell ulose is flipped over, and the monomers are packed tigh tly as extended
long chains. This gives cellulose its rigidity and high tensile strength—which is so important to plant cells. While the β 1-4 linkage
cannot be broken down by human digestive enzymes, herb ivores such as cows, koalas, buffalos, and horses are able, with the help
of the specialized flora in their stomach, to digest plant material that is rich in cellulose and use it a s a food source. In these
animals, certain species of bacteria and protists reside in the rumen (part of the digestive system of herbiv ores) and secrete the
enzyme cellulase. The appendix of grazing animals al so contains bacteria that digest cellulose, giving it an important role in the
digestive systems of ruminants. Cellulases can break down cellulose into glucose monomers that can be used as an energy source
by the animal. Termites are also able to break down c ellulose because of the presence of other organisms in their bodies that secrete
cellulases.
Figure 8. Insects have a hard outer exoskeleton made of chitin, a type of polysaccharide.
Carbohydrates serve various functions in different a nimals. Arthropods (insects, crustaceans, and others) h ave an outer skeleton,
called the exoskeleton, which protects their internal bo dy parts (as seen in the bee in Figure 8).
This exoskeleton is made of the biological macromole cule chitin, which is a polysaccharide-containing nitr ogen. It is made of
repeating units of N-acetyl- β-d-glucosamine, a modified sugar. Chitin is also a maj or component of fungal cell walls; fungi are
neither animals nor plants and form a kingdom of their o wn in the domain Eukarya.
Carbohydrates are a group of macromolecules that ar e a vital energy source for the cell and provide str uctural support to plant
cells, fungi, and all of the arthropods that include lobsters, crabs, shrimp, insects, and spiders. Carbohyd rates are classified as
monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polysaccharides d epending on the number of monomers in the molecule.
Monosaccharides are linked by glycosidic bonds that a re formed as a result of dehydration reactions, formin g disaccharides
and polysaccharides with the elimination of a water m olecule for each bond formed. Glucose, galactose, and fructose are
common monosaccharides, whereas common disaccharides include lactose, maltose, and sucrose. Starch and glyc ogen,
examples of polysaccharides, are the storage forms of g lucose in plants and animals, respectively. The long po lysaccharideLearning Objectives

5.9.9 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43558chains may be branched or unbranched. Cellulose is a n example of an unbranched polysaccharide, whereas amy lopectin, a
constituent of starch, is a highly branched molecule. Storage of glucose, in the form of polymers like starc h of glycogen, makes
it slightly less accessible for metabolism; however, t his prevents it from leaking out of the cell or crea ting a high osmotic
pressure that could cause excessive water uptake by the c ell.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Public domain content
Bee On Flowers. Authored by: Larisa Koshkina. Located at: http://www.publicdomainpictures.net/view-image.php?
image=22204. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
5.9: Structure and Function of Carbohydrates is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435435.10: Introduction to Nucleic Acids
Discuss nucleic acids and the role they play in DNA and RNA
DNA is the set of instructions for our cells. Our DNA determin es who and what we are.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe the basic structure of nucleic acids
Compare and contrast the structure of DNA and RNA
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Structure of Nucleic Acids
DNA and RNA
Self Check: Nucleic Acids
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Nucleic Acids. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC
BY: Attribution
5.10: Introduction to Nucleic Acids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435445.11: Structure of Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acids are the most important macromolecules for the conti nuity of life. They carry the genetic blueprint of a cell and carry
instructions for the functioning of the cell.
The two main types of nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). DNA is the genetic material
found in all living organisms, ranging from single- celled bacteria to multicellular mammals. It is found in the nucleus of eukaryotes
and in the organelles, chloroplasts, and mitochondria. In pro karyotes, the DNA is not enclosed in a membranous envelope.
The entire genetic content of a cell is known as its genome, and the study of genomes is genomics. In euk aryotic cells but not in
prokaryotes, DNA forms a complex with histone proteins to form chromatin, the substance of eukaryotic chrom osomes. A
chromosome may contain tens of thousands of genes. Many genes contain the information to make protein produ cts; other genes
code for RNA products. DNA controls all of the cellular activ ities by turning the genes “on” or “off.”
The other type of nucleic acid, RNA, is mostly involved in protein synthesis. The DNA molecules never leave the nucleus but
instead use an intermediary to communicate with the rest of the cell. This intermediary is the messenger RNA (mRNA). Other
types of RNA—like rRNA, tRNA, and microRNA—are involved in prote in synthesis and its regulation.
DNA and RNA are made up of monomers known as nucleotide s. The nucleotides combine with each other to form a
polynucleotide, DNA or RNA. Each nucleotide is made up o f three components: a nitrogenous base, a pentose (fi ve-carbon) sugar,
and a phosphate group (Figure 1). Each nitrogenous ba se in a nucleotide is attached to a sugar molecule, which is attached to one or
more phosphate groups.

5.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43544
Figure 1. A nucleotide is made up of three components: a nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar, and one or more p hosphate groups.
Carbon residues in the pentose are numbered 1′ through 5′ (the prime distinguishes these residues from those in the base, which are
numbered without using a prime notation). The base is attached to the 1′ position of the ribose, and the ph osphate is attached to the
5′ position. When a polynucleotide is formed, the 5′ phosphate of the incoming nucleotide attaches to the 3′ hydroxyl group at the
end of the growing chain. Two types of pentose are fo und in nucleotides, deoxyribose (found in DNA) and ri bose (found in RNA).
Deoxyribose is similar in structure to ribose, but it ha s an H instead of an OH at the 2′ position. Bases can be divided into two
categories: purines and pyrimidines. Purines have a doub le ring structure, and pyrimidines have a single ring.
The nitrogenous bases, important components of nucle otides, are organic molecules and are so named beca use they contain carbon
and nitrogen. They are bases because they contain a n amino group that has the potential of binding an e xtra hydrogen, and thus,
decreases the hydrogen ion concentration in its envi ronment, making it more basic. Each nucleotide in DNA c ontains one of four
possible nitrogenous bases: adenine (A), guanine (G) c ytosine (C), and thymine (T). RNA nucleotides also con tain one of four
possible bases: adenine, guanine, cytosine, and uracil (U) rather than thymine.
Adenine and guanine are classified as purines. The primary structure of a purine is two carbon-nit rogen rings. Cytosine, thymine,
and uracil are classified as pyrimidines which have a single carbon-nitrogen ring as their p rimary structure (Figure 1). Each of
these basic carbon-nitrogen rings has different funct ional groups attached to it. In molecular biology sho rthand, the nitrogenous
bases are simply known by their symbols A, T, G, C, and U. DNA contai ns A, T, G, and C whereas RNA contains A, U, G, and C.
The pentose sugar in DNA is deoxyribose, and in RNA, the sugar is ribose (Figure 1). The difference between the sugars is the
presence of the hydroxyl group on the second carbon of the ribose and hydrogen on the second carbon of the deoxyribose. The
carbon atoms of the sugar molecule are numbered as 1′, 2′, 3′, 4′, and 5′ (1′ is read as “one prime”). The phosphate residue is
attached to the hydroxyl group of the 5′ carbon of one sugar and the hydroxyl group of the 3′ carbon o f the sugar of the next
nucleotide, which forms a 5′–3′ phosphodiester linkage. The phosphodiester linkage is not formed by simple dehydration reaction
like the other linkages connecting monomers in macrom olecules: its formation involves the removal of two ph osphate groups. A
polynucleotide may have thousands of such phosphodiester linkages.

5.11.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43544DNA Double-Helix Structure
Figure 2. DNA is an antiparallel double helix. The ph osphate backbone (the curvy lines) is on the outside, a nd the bases are on the
inside. Each base interacts with a base from the opposin g strand. (credit: Jerome Walker/Dennis Myts)
DNA has a double-helix structure (Figure 2). The sugar and phosphate lie on the outside of the helix, formin g the backbone of the
DNA. The nitrogenous bases are stacked in the interior, lik e the steps of a staircase, in pairs; the pairs are bound to each other by
hydrogen bonds. Every base pair in the double helix is sepa rated from the next base pair by 0.34 nm.
The two strands of the helix run in opposite directio ns, meaning that the 5′ carbon end of one strand will face the 3′ carbon end of
its matching strand. (This is referred to as antiparall el orientation and is important to DNA replication and in many nucleic acid
interactions.)
Only certain types of base pairing are allowed. For exa mple, a certain purine can only pair with a certain pyrimidine. This means A
can pair with T, and G can pair with C, as shown in Figu re 3. This is known as the base complementary rule. In other words, the
DNA strands are complementary to each other. If the seq uence of one strand is AATTGGCC, the complementary stra nd would have
the sequence TTAACCGG. During DNA replication, each strand is copied, resulting in a daughter DNA double helix conta ining
one parental DNA strand and a newly synthesized strand.
Figure 3. In a double stranded DNA molecule, the two strands run antiparallel to one another so that one str and runs 5′ to 3′ and
the other 3′ to 5′. The phosphate backbone is located on the outside, and the bases are in the middle. Aden ine forms hydrogen
bonds (or base pairs) with thymine, and guanine base pa irs with cytosine.
A mutation occurs, and cytosine is replaced with adenine. What impact do you think this will have on the DNA structu re?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”263813″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”263813″]Adenine is larger than cyto sine and will not be able to base pair properly with the guanine on the
opposing strand. This will cause the DNA to bulge. DNA rep air enzymes may recognize the bulge and replace the incorrect
nucleotide.[/hidden-answer]Practice Question

5.11.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43544RNA
Ribonucleic acid, or RNA, is mainly involved in the pr ocess of protein synthesis under the direction of DNA. RNA is usually
single-stranded and is made of ribonucleotides that a re linked by phosphodiester bonds. A ribonucleotide in the RNA chain contains
ribose (the pentose sugar), one of the four nitrogenous b ases (A, U, G, and C), and the phosphate group.
There are four major types of RNA: messenger RNA (mRNA), r ibosomal RNA (rRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), and microRNA
(miRNA). The first, mRNA, carries the message from DNA, which controls all of the cellular activities in a cell. If a cell requires a
certain protein to be synthesized, the gene for this product is turned “on” and the messenger RNA is synthe sized in the nucleus. The
RNA base sequence is complementary to the coding sequ ence of the DNA from which it has been copied. However, in RNA, the
base T is absent and U is present instead. If the DNA stra nd has a sequence AATTGCGC, the sequence of the compleme ntary RNA
is UUAACGCG. In the cytoplasm, the mRNA interacts with ribosomes and other cellular machinery (Figure 4).
Figure 4. A ribosome has two parts: a large subunit and a small subunit. The mRNA sits in between the two subuni ts. A tRNA
molecule recognizes a codon on the mRNA, binds to it by complementary base pairing, and adds the correct a mino acid to the
growing peptide chain.
The mRNA is read in sets of three bases known as codons. E ach codon codes for a single amino acid. In this way, the mRNA is
read and the protein product is made. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is a major constituent of ribosomes on which the mRNA binds. The
rRNA ensures the proper alignment of the mRNA and the ribosomes; the rRNA of the ribosome also has an enzyma tic activity
(peptidyl transferase) and catalyzes the formation of the peptide bonds between two aligned amino acids. Tran sfer RNA (tRNA) is
one of the smallest of the four types of RNA, usually 70–90 nucleotides long. It carries the correct amino acid to the site of protein
synthesis. It is the base pairing between the tRNA and mRNA that allows for the correct amino acid to be in serted in the
polypeptide chain. microRNAs are the smallest RNA molec ules and their role involves the regulation of gene expression by
interfering with the expression of certain mRNA messages.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
5.11: Structure of Nucleic Acids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435455.12: DNA and RNA
While DNA and RNA are similar, they have very distinct dif ferences. Table 1 summarizes features of DNA and RNA.
Table 1. Features of DNA and RNA
DNA RNA
Function Carries genetic information Involved in protei n synthesis
Location Remains in the nucleus Leaves the nucleus
StructureDNA is double-stranded “ladder”: sugarphosphate backbone, with base rungs.Usually single-stranded
Sugar Deoxyribose Ribose
Pyrimidines Cytosine, thymine Cytosine, uracil
Purines Adenine, guanine Adenine, guanine
One other difference bears mention. There is only one type of DNA. DNA is the heritable information that is pa ssed along to each
generation of cells; its strands can be “unzipped” wi th small amount of energy when DNA needs to replicate, and DNA is
transcribed into RNA. There are mutliple types of RNA: Mess enger RNA is a temporary molecule that transports th e information
necessary to make a protein from the nucleus (where t he DNA remains) to the cytoplasm, where the ribosomes a re. Other kinds of
RNA include ribosomal RNA (rRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), small nucl ear RNA (snRNA), and microRNA.
Even though the RNA is single stranded, most RNA types show extensive intramolecular base pairing between co mplementary
sequences, creating a predictable three-dimensional st ructure essential for their function.
As you have learned, information flow in an organism ta kes place from DNA to RNA to protein. DNA dictates the s tructure of
mRNA in a process known as transcription, and RNA dicta tes the structure of protein in a process known as tran slation. This is
known as the Central Dogma of Life, which holds true for all organisms; however, exceptions to the rule occur in connection with
viral infections.
In Summary: DNA and RNA
Nucleic acids are molecules made up of nucleotides th at direct cellular activities such as cell division and protein synthesis. Each
nucleotide is made up of a pentose sugar, a nitrogeno us base, and a phosphate group. There are two types of nucleic acids: DNA
and RNA. DNA carries the genetic blueprint of the cell and is passed on from parents to offspring (in the for m of chromosomes). It
has a double-helical structure with the two strands run ning in opposite directions, connected by hydrogen bonds, and
complementary to each other. RNA is single-stranded and is made of a pentose sugar (ribose), a nitrogenous b ase, and a phosphate
group. RNA is involved in protein synthesis and its re gulation. Messenger RNA (mRNA) is copied from the DNA, is e xported from
the nucleus to the cytoplasm, and contains informati on for the construction of proteins. Ribosomal RNA (r RNA) is a part of the
ribosmes at the site of protein synthesis, whereas tran sfer RNA (tRNA) carries the amino acid to the site of p rotein synthesis.
microRNA regulates the use of mRNA for protein synthesis.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
5.12: DNA and RNA is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435465.13: Introduction to Comparing Biological Macromolecules
Discuss biological macromolecules and the differences between the four classes
As we’ve learned, there are four major classes of biological mac romolecules:
Proteins (polymers of amino acids)
Carbohydrates (polymers of sugars)
Lipids (polymers of lipid monomers)
Nucleic acids (DNA and RNA; polymers of nucleotides)
Let’s take a closer look at the differences between the dif ference classes.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Define the term “macromolecule”
Distinguish between the 4 classes of macromolecules
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Different Types of Biological Macromolecules
Self Check: Carbohydrates
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Comparing Biological Macromolecules. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen
Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
5.13: Introduction to Comparing Biological Macromol ecules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

5.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435475.14: Different Types of Biological Macromolecules
Now that we’ve discussed the four major classes of bio logical macromolecules (carbohydrates, lipids, protei ns, and nucleic acids),
let’s talk about macromolecules as a whole. Each is an important cell component and performs a wide array of functions.
Combined, these molecules make up the majority of a c ell’s dry mass (recall that water makes up the majori ty of its complete
mass). Biological macromolecules are organic, meaning t hey contain carbon. In addition, they may contain hy drogen, oxygen,
nitrogen, and additional minor elements.
You are What You Eat
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=160
Comparing the Biological Macromolecules
Macromole
culeBasic Formula, key features Monomer Examples Uses
Proteins Amino acids Enzymes, some hormonesStorage; Signals; Structural;
Contractile; Defensive;
Enzyme; Transport;
Receptors
LipidsC:H:O
Greater than 2:1 H:O (carboxyl
group)Fatty acid and glycerolButter, oil, cholesterol,
beeswaxEnergy storage; Protection;
Chemical messengers; Repel
water
Carbohydr
atesC:H:O
1:2:1MonosaccharidesGlucose, Fructose, Starch,
Glycogen, CelluloseEnergy storage; Structure
Nucleic
AcidsCHONP
pentose, nitrogenous base,
phosphateNucleotides DNA, RNA Genetic information
Dehydration Synthesis
Most macromolecules are made from single subunits, or b uilding blocks, called monomers. The monomers combine with each
other using covalent bonds to form larger molecules known as polymers. In doing so, monomers release water molecules as
byproducts. This type of reaction is known as dehydration synthesis, which means “to put together while losing water.”

5.14.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43547
Figure 1. In the dehydration synthesis reaction depicte d above, two molecules of glucose are linked together to form the
disaccharide maltose. In the process, a water molecule is formed.
In a dehydration synthesis reaction (Figure 1), the hy drogen of one monomer combines with the hydroxyl grou p of another
monomer, releasing a molecule of water. At the same tim e, the monomers share electrons and form covalent bo nds. As additional
monomers join, this chain of repeating monomers for ms a polymer. Different types of monomers can combine in many
configurations, giving rise to a diverse group of macr omolecules. Even one kind of monomer can combine in a variety of ways to
form several different polymers: for example, glucose monomers are the constituents of starch, glycogen, and cellulose.
Hydrolysis
Polymers are broken down into monomers in a process kno wn as hydrolysis, which means “to split water,” a reactio n in which a
water molecule is used during the breakdown (Figure 2). During these reactions, the polymer is broken into two components: one
part gains a hydrogen atom (H+) and the other gains a h ydroxyl molecule (OH–) from a split water molecule.
Figure 2. In the hydrolysis reaction shown here, the di saccharide maltose is broken down to form two glucose m onomers with the
addition of a water molecule. Note that this reactio n is the reverse of the synthesis reaction shown in Figur e 1.
Dehydration and hydrolysis reactions are catalyzed, or “sped up,” by specific enzymes; de hydration reactions involve the
formation of new bonds, requiring energy, while hydrolysi s reactions break bonds and release energy. These reacti ons are similar
for most macromolecules, but each monomer and polymer reaction is specific for its class. For example, in ou r bodies, food is
hydrolyzed, or broken down, into smaller molecules by c atalytic enzymes in the digestive system. This allows for easy absorption
of nutrients by cells in the intestine. Each macromol ecule is broken down by a specific enzyme. For instanc e, carbohydrates are
broken down by amylase, sucrase, lactase, or maltase. Pr oteins are broken down by the enzymes pepsin and pept idase, and by
hydrochloric acid. Lipids are broken down by lipases. Br eakdown of these macromolecules provides energy for cellu lar activities.
Visit this site to see visual representations of dehydration sy nthesis and hydrolysis.
Proteins, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and lipids are th e four major classes of biological macromolecules—larg e molecules
necessary for life that are built from smaller organ ic molecules. Macromolecules are made up of single un its known as
monomers that are joined by covalent bonds to form larger polymers. The polymer is more than the sum of i ts parts: it acquires
new characteristics, and leads to an osmotic pressure that is much lower than that formed by its ingredien ts; this is an important
advantage in the maintenance of cellular osmotic con ditions. A monomer joins with another monomer with th e release of a
water molecule, leading to the formation of a covalen t bond. These types of reactions are known as dehydrat ion or
condensation reactions. When polymers are broken down into smaller units (monomers), a molecule of water is u sed for each
bond broken by these reactions; such reactions are k nown as hydrolysis reactions. Dehydration and hydrolysi s reactions are
similar for all macromolecules, but each monomer an d polymer reaction is specific to its class. Dehydration reactions typically
require an investment of energy for new bond formati on, while hydrolysis reactions typically release energ y by breaking
bonds.Learning Objectives

5.14.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43547Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision, adaptation, and original content. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Biological Molecules - You Are What You Eat: Crash Cou rse Biology #3. Authored by: Crash Course. Located at:
https://youtu.be/H8WJ2KENlK0. Project: Crash Course Biology. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard
YouTube License
5.14: Different Types of Biological Macromolecules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

5.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435485.15: Putting It Together- Important Biological Macromolecules
Now that we’ve learned about the different macromolecu les our bodies need and use, let’s return to our the q uestions we asked at
the beginning of the modules about healthy diets:
Think about It
Is it even possible for a person to cut all carbs out of hi s or her diet?
Is it actually healthy to remove an entire class of mole cules from the diet?
Fats and cholesterol are strictly bad—right?
[practice-area rows=”4″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”193414″]See Our Thoughts[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”193414″]
It is, in fact, impossible to have a no carb or no fa t diet. These molecules are in all cells and cells mak es up what we eat. More
importantly though, each of these biological macromo lecules has a very important role to play. If you cu t too much fat from your
diet, for example, it is possible for your fat stores dip lo w enough that your hair will fall out!
Even the much maligned cholesterol is a requirement f or a healthy body and lifestyle: without sufficient cholesterol, your body
doesn’t make enough sex hormones (estrogen or testos terone depending on if you’re male or female). The t rick is to make healthy
choices overall without too much of any biological macrom olecules—after all, there can certainly be too much of a good thing.
[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
5.15: Putting It Together- Important Biological Mac romolecules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by LibreTexts.

5.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435495.16: Assignment- Nutritionist for a Day
You have been hired as a high school nutritionist an d your first big task is to carry out a “Healthy Life styles” nutrition campaign.
You want the students you work with to understand the relationship between the four categories of biological macromolecules and
the food they eat.
Prepare a brochure or flyer that clearly and accurat ely educates your students about lipids, carbohydrat es, proteins, and nucleic
acids. Your flyer should include the following informatio n about each type of macromolecule:
structural makeup
overall function in the body
types of food where each biomolecule can be found
Your flyer should also include an overall theme that emph asizes the importance of a healthy diet.
Take a look at the hints in this worked example for help c ompleting this assessment.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment has been proofread and does not contain any majo r spelling or grammatical errors
Assignment includes appropriate references
Assignment includes a food source for each biomolecule illu strated.
Assignment emphasizes an overall healthy diet.
Rubric
Nutritionist for a Day
Outcome: Identify and describe the main features of t he four main classes of important biomolecules

5.16.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43549Nutritionist for a Day
Criteria Ratings Pts
The role of
carbohydrates in the
body is identified and
their structural makeup
summarized.Carbohydrates and their
role in the body
identified; structural
makeup
discussed/illustrated in
detail in connection to
role in the body.
5.0 ptsCarbohydrates and their
basic role in the body
identified; structural
makeup
summarized/illustrated.
4.0 ptsCarbohydrates are not
discussed sufficiently.
0.0 pts5 pts
The role of lipids in the
body is identified and
the structural makeup of
each type is summarized.Lipids and their role in
the body identified;
structural makeup
discussed/illustrated in
detail in connection to
role in the body.
5.0 ptsLipids and their basic
role in the body
identified; structural
makeup
summarized/illustrated.
4.0 ptsLipids are not discussed
sufficiently.
0.0 pts5 pts
The role of proteins in
the body is identified
and their structural
makeup summarized.Proteins and their role in
the body identified;
structural makeup
discussed/illustrated in
detail in connection to
role in the body.
5.0 ptsProteins and their basic
role in the body
identified; structural
makeup
summarized/illustrated.
4.0 ptsProteins are not
discussed sufficiently.
0.0 pts5 pts
The role of nucleic acids
in the body is identified
and the structural
makeup of DNA and
RNA summarized.Nucleic acids and their
role in the body
identified; structural
makeup
discussed/illustrated in
detail in connection to
role in the body.
5.0 ptsNucleic acids and their
basic role in the body
identified; structural
makeup
summarized/illustrated.
4.0 ptsNucleic acids are not
discussed sufficiently.
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 20
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Performance Assessment: Nutritionist for a Day. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Columbia
Basin College. Located at: https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
5.16: Assignment- Nutritionist for a Day is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: Module 4- Cellular Structure
6.1: Why It Matters- Cellular Structure
6.2: Introduction to Microscopes
6.3: Microscopy
6.4: Introduction to Organelles
6.5: Cytoplasm
6.6: Nucleus
6.7: Ribosomes, Mitochondria, and Peroxisomes
6.8: Endomembrane System
6.9: Vesicles
6.10: Unique Features of Animal and Plant Cells
6.11: Introduction to Cytoskeleton
6.12: Microfilaments
6.13: Intermediate Filaments
6.14: Microtubules
6.15: Introduction to Cell Surface
6.16: Cell Membranes
6.17: Cell Junctions
6.18: The Cell Wall
6.19: Putting It Together- Cellular Structure
6.20: Assignment- Cell Builder
6: Module 4- Cellular Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435706.1: Why It Matters- Cellular Structure
Why identify and explain a variety of cellular components?
The cell is the basic structural, functional, and b iological unit of all known living organisms: all livi ng things are made up of cells
(or a single cell, in some cases). However, it’s important t o remember that cells are simply the smallest unit th at can act by
themselves. Cells are composed of many different subu nits that work in harmony. Each of these different un its—membranes,
organelles, filaments, etc.—performs a unique function tha t facilitates life.
When a specific organelle performs incorrectly, it c an result in various diseases. For example, the following diseases are linked
directly to specific cellular components:
Pompe Disease: characterized by excess accumulation of glycogen in musc le cells
Leigh Disease: progressive disorder of lesions (dead or dying cells) in t he brain
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy: wasting and weakness in muscles of the shoulders, upper arms, a nd calf muscles
What cellular components could each of these be conn ected to? Understanding how cellular components work ca n help you
understand health issues related to cellular functio n.
Learning Outcomes
Understand why and how the light microscope and electron mic roscope are used in biology
Identify membrane-bound organelles found in eukaryotic cells
Demonstrate familiarity with various components of the cytoskeleton, including monomeric units
Demonstrate familiarity with various cell surface speci alizations
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
6.1: Why It Matters- Cellular Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Try It

6.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435726.2: Introduction to Microscopes
Understand why and how the light microscope and electron microscope are used in biology
A cell is the smallest unit of a living thing. A liv ing thing, whether made of one cell (like bacteria) o r many cells (like a human), is
called an organism. Thus, cells are the basic building b locks of all organisms.
Several cells of one kind that interconnect with each other and perform a shared function form tissues, several tissues combine to
form an organ (your stomach, heart, or brain), and se veral organs make up an organ system (such as the dig estive system,
circulatory system, or nervous system). Several systems that function together form an organism (like a hu man being). Here, we
will examine the structure and function of cells.
There are many types of cells, all grouped into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. For example, both animal
and plant cells are classified as eukaryotic cells, wh ereas bacterial cells are classified as prokaryotic. Regardless of the type of cell,
be it a component in a multicelled eukaryotic anima l’s nervous system or a single-celled prokaryotic life form, biologists will use
microscopes to study them.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify the general applications of light microscopes in biology
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of electron micro scopes for biological studies
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Microscopy
Self Check: Microscopes
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.2: Introduction to Microscopes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435736.3: Microscopy
Cells vary in size. With few exceptions, individual c ells cannot be seen with the naked eye, so scientists use microscopes (micro =
“small”; scope = “to look at”) to study them. A microscope is an instrument that magnifies an object. Most phot ographs of cells are
taken with a microscope, and these images can also be cal led micrographs.
The optics of a microscope’s lenses change the orient ation of the image that the user sees. A specimen tha t is right-side up and
facing right on the microscope slide will appear upsi de-down and facing left when viewed through a microscop e, and vice versa.
Similarly, if the slide is moved left while looking t hrough the microscope, it will appear to move right, an d if moved down, it will
seem to move up. This occurs because microscopes use t wo sets of lenses to magnify the image. Because of the manner by which
light travels through the lenses, this system of two lenses produces an inverted image (binocular, or di ssecting microscopes, work
in a similar manner, but include an additional magnificati on system that makes the final image appear to be upright).
Light Microscopes
To give you a sense of cell size, a typical human r ed blood cell is about eight millionths of a meter or eight micrometers
(abbreviated as eight μm) in diameter; the head of a pin of is about two thousandths of a meter (two mm) i n diameter. That means
about 250 red blood cells could fit on the head of a pin.
Most student microscopes are classified as light microscopes (Figure 1a). Visible light passes and is bent through t he lens system
to enable the user to see the specimen. Light micro scopes are advantageous for viewing living organisms, but since individual cells
are generally transparent, their components are not distinguishable unless they are colored with special stains. Staining, however,
usually kills the cells.
Light microscopes commonly used in the undergraduate college laboratory magnify up to approximately 400 times. Two
parameters that are important in microscopy are mag nification and resolving power. Magnification is the process of enlarging an
object in appearance. Resolving power is the ability of a microscope to distinguish two adjacent structur es as separate: the higher
the resolution, the better the clarity and detail o f the image. When oil immersion lenses are used for t he study of small objects,
magnification is usually increased to 1,000 times. In order to gain a better understanding of cellular st ructure and function,
scientists typically use electron microscopes.
Figure 1. (a) Most light microscopes used in a college b iology lab can magnify cells up to approximately 400 times and have a
resolution of about 200 nanometers. (b) Electron micr oscopes provide a much higher magnification, 100,000x, and a have a
resolution of 50 picometers. (credit a: modification of work by “GcG”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modifi cation of work by
Evan Bench)

6.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43573Electron Microscopes
In contrast to light microscopes, electron microscopes (EM) (Figure 1b) use a beam of electrons instead of a beam of light. Not
only does this allow for higher magnification (up to 5 million times with some specialized EMs) and, thus, more detail (Figure 2), it
also provides higher resolving power. The method used t o prepare the specimen for viewing with an electron mi croscope kills the
specimen. Electrons have short wavelengths (shorter th an photons) that move best in a vacuum, so living cells cannot be viewed
with most electron microscopes.
In a scanning electron microscope, a beam of electr ons moves back and forth across a cell’s surface, crea ting details of cell surface
characteristics. In a transmission electron microsc ope, the electron beam penetrates the cell and prov ides details of a cell’s internal
structures. As you might imagine, electron microscopes ar e significantly more bulky and expensive than light mic roscopes.
Figure 2. (a) These Salmonella bacteria appear as tiny purple dots when viewed with a light microscope. (b) This scanning electron
microscope micro graph shows Salmonella bacteria (in red) invading human cells (yellow). Ev en though subfigure (b) shows a
different Salmonella specimen than subfigure (a), you can still observe the comparative increase in magnification and detail. (credit
a: modification of work by CDC/Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Charles N. Farmer, Rocky Mountain Labor atories; credit b:
modification of work by NIAID, NIH; scale-bar data f rom Matt Russell)
For another perspective on cell size, try the HowBig inter active at this site.
Cell Theory
The microscopes we use today are far more complex tha n those used in the 1600s by Antony van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch
shopkeeper who had great skill in crafting lenses. De spite the limitations of his now-ancient lenses, van Leeuwenhoek observed the
movements of protista (a type of single-celled organism) an d sperm, which he collectively termed “animalcules.”
In a 1665 publication called Micrographia, experimental scientist Robert Hooke coined the ter m “cell” for the box-like structures
he observed when viewing cork tissue through a lens. I n the 1670s, van Leeuwenhoek discovered bacteria and p rotozoa. Later
advances in lenses, microscope construction, and staini ng techniques enabled other scientists to see some compo nents inside cells.
By the late 1830s, botanist Matthias Schleiden and zoolo gist Theodor Schwann were studying tissues and proposed th e unified cell
theory, which states that all living things are composed of one or more cells, the cell is the basic unit of li fe, and new cells arise
from existing cells. Rudolf Virchow later made important co ntributions to this theory.

6.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43573Cytotechnologist
Figure 3. These uterine cervix cells, viewed through a light microscope, were obtained from a Pap smear. Nor mal cells are on the
left. The cells on the right are infected with human papillomavirus (HPV). Notice that the infected cell s are larger; also, two of
these cells each have two nuclei instead of one, the n ormal number. (credit: modification of work by Ed U thman, MD; scale-bar
data from Matt Russell)
Have you ever heard of a medical test called a Pap sm ear (shown in Figure 3)? In this test, a doctor takes a small sample of cells
from the uterine cervix of a patient and sends it t o a medical lab where a cytotechnologist stains the c ells and examines them for
any changes that could indicate cervical cancer or a mi crobial infection.
Cytotechnologists (cyto = “cell”) are professionals who study cells via micr oscopic examinations and other laboratory tests. The y
are trained to determine which cellular changes are within normal limits and which are abnormal. Their fo cus is not limited to
cervical cells; they study cellular specimens that c ome from all organs. When they notice abnormalities, they consult a pathologist,
who is a medical doctor who can make a clinical diagnosis.
Cytotechnologists play a vital role in saving peopl e’s lives. When abnormalities are discovered early, a patient’s treatment can
begin sooner, which usually increases the chances of a suc cessful outcome.
A cell is the smallest unit of life. Most cells are s o tiny that they cannot be seen with the naked eye. Therefore, scientists use
microscopes to study cells. Electron microscopes prov ide higher magnification, higher resolution, and mor e detail than light
microscopes. The unified cell theory states that all organisms are composed of one or more cells, the ce ll is the basic unit of
life, and new cells arise from existing cells.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.3: Microscopy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

6.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435746.4: Introduction to Organelles
Identify membrane-bound organelles found in eukaryotic cells
Have you ever heard the phrase “form follows function? ” It’s a philosophy practiced in many industries. In ar chitecture, this means
that buildings should be constructed to support the a ctivities that will be carried out inside them. For ex ample, a skyscraper should
be built with several elevator banks; a hospital should b e built so that its emergency room is easily accessible.
Our natural world originated the principle of form fo llowing function, especially in cell biology, and thi s will become clear as we
explore eukaryotic cells. Unlike prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells have: (1) a membrane-bound nucleus; (2) numerous me mbranebound organelles —such as the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, chl oroplasts, mitochondria, and others; and (3) several,
rod-shaped chromosomes. Because a eukaryotic cell’s n ucleus is surrounded by a membrane, it is often said t o have a “true
nucleus.” The word “organelle” means “little organ,” and, as already mentioned, organelles have speciali zed cellular functions, just
as the organs of your body have specialized functions.
Figure 1. These figures show the major organelles and ot her cell components of (a) a typical animal cell and (b) a typical
eukaryotic plant cell. The plant cell has a cell wal l, chloroplasts, plastids, and a central vacuole—structu res not found in animal
cells. Plant cells do not have lysosomes or centrosomes.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe the basic composition of cytoplasm
Describe the structure and function of the nucleus and nuclear membrane
Describe the structure and function of ribosomes
Describe the structure and function of mitochondria
Describe the structure and function of peroxisomes
Describe the structure, function, and components of the en domembrane system
Describe the structure and functions of vesicles
Identify key organelles present only in animal cells, in cluding centrosomes and lysosomes

6.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43574Identify key organelles present only in plant cells, inc luding chloroplasts and vaculoles
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
Ribosomes, Mitochondria, and Peroxisomes
Endomembrane System
Vesicles
Unique Features of Animal and Plant Cells
Self Check: Organelles
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision, adaptation, and original content. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.4: Introduction to Organelles is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435756.5: Cytoplasm
Before we begin looking at individual organelles, we d o need to briefly address the matrix in which they s it: the cytoplasm. The
part of the cell referred to as cytoplasm is slightl y different in eukaryotes and prokaryotes. In eukar yotic cells, which have a
nucleus, the cytoplasm is everything between the pla sma membrane and the nuclear envelope. In prokaryot es, which lack a
nucleus, cytoplasm simply means everything found inside t he plasma membrane.
One major component of the cytoplasm in both prokaryo tes and eukaryotes is the gel-like cytosol, a water-based solution that
contains ions, small molecules, and macromolecules. I n eukaryotes, the cytoplasm also includes membrane-b ound organelles,
which are suspended in the cytosol. The cytoskeleton, a network of fibers that supports the cell and gives it shape, is also part of the
cytoplasm and helps to organize cellular components.
Even though the cytosol is mostly water, it has a semi- solid, Jello-like consistency because of the many pro teins suspended in it.
The cytosol contains a rich broth of macromolecules and smaller organic molecules, including glucose and other simple sugars,
polysaccharides, amino acids, nucleic acids, and fatt y acids. Ions of sodium, potassium, calcium, and other el ements are also found
in the cytosol. Many metabolic reactions, including prot ein synthesis, take place in this part of the cell.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Plasma membrane and cytoplasm. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at:
https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/structure-of- a-cell/prokaryotic-and-eukaryotic-cells/a/plasma-memb rane-andcytoplasm. Project: Biology. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
6.5: Cytoplasm is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435766.6: Nucleus
Figure 1. The nucleus stores chromatin (DNA plus protein s) in a gel-like substance called the nucleoplasm. The nucleolus is a
condensed region of chromatin where ribosome synthesis o ccurs. The boundary of the nucleus is called the nucle ar envelope. It
consists of two phospholipid bilayers: an outer membrane and an inner membrane. The nuclear membrane is cont inuous with the
endoplasmic reticulum. Nuclear pores allow substances to enter and exit the nucleus.
Typically, the nucleus is the most prominent organelle in a cell. The nucleus (plural = nuclei) houses the cell’s DNA and directs the
synthesis of ribosomes and proteins. Let’s look at it in more detail (Figure 1).
Nuclear Envelope
The nuclear envelope is a double-membrane structure that constitutes the o utermost portion of the nucleus (Figure 1). Both the
inner and outer membranes of the nuclear envelope are ph ospholipid bilayers.
The nuclear envelope is punctuated with pores that c ontrol the passage of ions, molecules, and RNA between th e nucleoplasm and
cytoplasm. The nucleoplasm is the semi-solid fluid inside the nucleus, where we fi nd the chromatin and the nucleolus.
Chromatin and Chromosomes
To understand chromatin, it is helpful to first consid er chromosomes. Chromosomes are structures within the nucleus that are
made up of DNA, the hereditary material. In prokaryotes, DNA is organized into a single circular chromosome. In eukaryotes,
chromosomes are linear structures. Every eukaryotic species has a specific number of chromosomes in the nuclei of its body’s cells.
For example, in humans, the chromosome number is 46, wh ile in fruit flies, it is eight. Chromosomes are onl y visible and
distinguishable from one another when the cell is get ting ready to divide. When the cell is in the growth and maintenance phases of
its life cycle, proteins are attached to chromosomes, and they resemble an unwound, jumbled bunch of threads. These unwound
protein-chromosome complexes are called chromatin (Figure 2); chromatin describes the material that ma kes up the chromosomes
both when condensed and decondensed. We will focus on chrom atin and chromosomes in greater detail later.

6.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43576
Figure 2. (a) This image shows various levels of the orga nization of chromatin (DNA and protein). (b) This im age shows paired
chromosomes. (credit b: modification of work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Nucleolus
We already know that the nucleus directs the synthesis of ribosomes, but how does it do this? Some chromosomes h ave sections of
DNA that encode ribosomal RNA. A darkly staining area wit hin the nucleus called the nucleolus (plural = nucleo li) aggregates the
ribosomal RNA with associated proteins to assemble the ribosomal subunits that are then transported out throu gh the pores in the
nuclear envelope to the cytoplasm.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.6: Nucleus is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435776.7: Ribosomes, Mitochondria, and Peroxisomes
Ribosomes
Figure 1. Ribosomes are made up of a large subunit (top) and a small subunit (bottom). During protein synthesi s, ribosomes
assemble amino acids into proteins.
Ribosomes are the cellular structures responsible for protein synthesis. When viewed through an electron microscope, r ibosomes
appear either as clusters (polyribosomes) or single, tiny dots that float freely in the cytoplasm. They m ay be attached to the
cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane or the cytop lasmic side of the endoplasmic reticulum and the out er membrane of the
nuclear envelope. Electron microscopy has shown us tha t ribosomes, which are large complexes of protein an d RNA, consist of
two subunits, aptly called large and small (Figure 1). R ibosomes receive their “orders” for protein synthesis from the nucleus where
the DNA is transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA t ravels to the ribosomes, which translate the code prov ided by
the sequence of the nitrogenous bases in the mRNA int o a specific order of amino acids in a protein. Amino a cids are the building
blocks of proteins.
Because proteins synthesis is an essential function o f all cells, ribosomes are found in practically every cell. Ribosomes are
particularly abundant in cells that synthesize large amounts of protein. For example, the pancreas is respon sible for creating several
digestive enzymes and the cells that produce these en zymes contain many ribosomes. Thus, we see another examp le of form
following function.
Mitochondria
Mitochondria (singular = mitochondrion) are often called the “powerhouses” or “energy fact ories” of a cell because they are
responsible for making adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the cell’s main energy-carrying molecule. ATP repr esents the short-term
stored energy of the cell. Cellular respiration is t he process of making ATP using the chemical energy fo und in glucose and other
nutrients. In mitochondria, this process uses oxygen and produces carbon dioxide as a waste product. In fact, t he carbon dioxide
that you exhale with every breath comes from the cellular re actions that produce carbon dioxide as a byproduct.
In keeping with our theme of form following function, it is important to point out that muscle cells have a very high concentration
of mitochondria that produce ATP. Your muscle cells need a lot of energy to keep your body moving. When your cells don’t get
enough oxygen, they do not make a lot of ATP. Instead, the small amount of ATP they make in the absence of oxygen is
accompanied by the production of lactic acid.

6.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43577
Figure 2. This electron micrograph shows a mitochondrio n as viewed with a transmission electron microscope. Thi s organelle has
an outer membrane and an inner membrane. The inner membrane contains folds, called cristae, which increase its surface area. The
space between the two membranes is called the intermem brane space, and the space inside the inner membrane i s called the
mitochondrial matrix. ATP synthesis takes place on the inner membrane. (credit: modification of work by Ma tthew Britton; scalebar data from Matt Russell)
Mitochondria are oval-shaped, double membrane organe lles (Figure 2) that have their own DNA and ribosomes (we ’ll talk about
these later!). Each membrane is a phospholipid bilaye r embedded with proteins. The inner layer has folds ca lled cristae. The area
surrounded by the folds is called the mitochondrial matri x. The cristae and the matrix have different roles i n cellular respiration.
Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes are small, round organelles enclosed by singl e membranes. They carry out oxidation reactions that break down fatty
acids and amino acids. They also detoxify many pois ons that may enter the body. Many of these oxidation reactions release
hydrogen peroxide, H O, which would be damaging to cell s; however, when these reactions are confined to peroxis omes, enzymes
safely break down the H O into oxygen and water. For ex ample, alcohol is detoxified by peroxisomes in live r cells. Glyoxysomes,
which are specialized peroxisomes in plants, are respon sible for converting stored fats into sugars.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.7: Ribosomes, Mitochondria, and Peroxisomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2 2
2 2

6.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435786.8: Endomembrane System
Figure 1. Membrane and secretory proteins are synthesize d in the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). The RER’ s membrane also
sometimes modifies proteins. (credit: modification of w ork by Magnus Manske)
The endomembrane system (endo = “within”) is a group of membranes and organelles (Figure 1) in eukaryotic cells that works
together to modify, package, and transport lipids an d proteins. It includes the nuclear envelope, lysos omes, vesicles, and the
endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, which we wil l cover shortly. Although not technically within the cell, the plasma
membrane is included in the endomembrane system bec ause, as you will see, it interacts with the other endom embranous
organelles. The endomembrane system does not include the m embranes of either mitochondria or chloroplasts.
Figure 1 illustrates the connections of the endomembr ane system as a (green) integral membrane protein in the ER is modified by
attachment of a (purple) carbohydrate. Vesicles with the integral protein bud from the ER and fuse with t he cis face of the Golgi
apparatus. As the protein passes along the Golgi’s cister nae, it is further modified by the addition of more carbohydrates. After its
synthesis is complete, it exits as integral membrane protein of the vesicle that bud from the Golgi’s trans face and when the vesicle
fuses with the cell membrane the protein becomes integr al portion of that cell membrane.
Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Figure 1) is a series of interconnected membranous sacs and tubules that collectively modifies
proteins and synthesizes lipids. However, these two fun ctions are performed in separate areas of the ER: th e rough ER and the
smooth ER, respectively.
The hollow portion of the ER tubules is called the l umen or cisternal space. The membrane of the ER, which is a phospholipid
bilayer embedded with proteins, is continuous with the nucle ar envelope.
Rough ER
The rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) is so named be cause the ribosomes attached to its cytoplasmic surfa ce give it a studded
appearance when viewed through an electron microscope (Figure 2).

6.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43578
Figure 2. This transmission electron micrograph shows the rough endoplasmic reticulum and other organelles in a pancreatic cell.
(credit: modification of work by Louisa Howard)
Ribosomes transfer their newly synthesized proteins into the lumen of the RER where they undergo structural mo difications, such
as folding or the acquisition of side chains. These modified proteins will be incorporated into cellular membranes—the membrane
of the ER or those of other organelles—or secreted fr om the cell (such as protein hormones or enzymes). The RER also makes
phospholipids for cellular membranes.
If the phospholipids or modified proteins are not dest ined to stay in the RER, they will reach their destina tions via transport
vesicles that bud from the RER’s membrane (Figure 1).
Since the RER is engaged in modifying proteins (such as enzymes, for example) that will be secreted from the cell, you would be
correct in assuming that the RER is abundant in cells that secrete proteins. This is the case with cells of the liver, for example.
Smooth ER
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) is continuous wi th the RER but has few or no ribosomes on its cytoplas mic surface.
Functions of the SER include synthesis of carbohydrate s, lipids, and steroid hormones; detoxification of me dications and poisons;
and storage of calcium ions.
In muscle cells, a specialized SER called the sarcopl asmic reticulum is responsible for storage of the cal cium ions that are needed
to trigger the coordinated contractions of the muscle ce lls.
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the Uni ted States. This is primarily due to our sedentary lifes tyle and our high
trans-fat diets.
Heart failure is just one of many disabling heart con ditions. Heart failure does not mean that the heart h as stopped working.
Rather, it means that the heart can’t pump with suffic ient force to transport oxygenated blood to all the vital organs. Left
untreated, heart failure can lead to kidney failure and failure of other organs.
The wall of the heart is composed of cardiac muscle ti ssue. Heart failure occurs when the endoplasmic reticul a of cardiac
muscle cells do not function properly. As a result, an insufficient number of calcium ions are available t o trigger a sufficient
contractile force.
Cardiologists (cardi = “heart”; ologist = “one who studies”) are doctors who specialize in tre ating heart diseases, including
heart failure. Cardiologists can make a diagnosis of heart failure via physical examination, results from an electrocardiogram
(ECG, a test that measures the electrical activity of the heart), a chest X-ray to see whether the heart is enlarged, and other
tests. If heart failure is diagnosed, the cardiologist will typically prescribe appropriate medications and recommend a reduction
in table salt intake and a supervised exercise program.Try It

6.8.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43578Golgi Apparatus
Figure 3. The Golgi apparatus in this white blood cell is visible as a stack of semicircular, flattened rings i n the lower portion of the
image. Several vesicles can be seen near the Golgi app aratus. (credit: modification of work by Louisa Howar d)
We have already mentioned that vesicles can bud fro m the ER and transport their contents elsewhere, but wh ere do the vesicles go?
Before reaching their final destination, the lipids o r proteins within the transport vesicles still need to be sorted, packaged, and
tagged so that they wind up in the right place. Sorting, tagging, packaging, and distribution of lipids and proteins takes place in the
Golgi apparatus (also called the Golgi body), a series of fla ttened membranes (Figure 3).
The receiving side of the Golgi apparatus is called th e cis face. The opposite side is called the trans face. The transport vesicles that
formed from the ER travel to the cis face, fuse with it, and empty their contents into the lumen of the Golgi apparatus. As the
proteins and lipids travel through the Golgi, they u ndergo further modifications that allow them to be s orted. The most frequent
modification is the addition of short chains of suga r molecules. These newly modified proteins and lipid s are then tagged with
phosphate groups or other small molecules so that they ca n be routed to their proper destinations.
Finally, the modified and tagged proteins are package d into secretory vesicles that bud from the trans face of the Golgi. While
some of these vesicles deposit their contents into other parts of the cell where they will be used, other secretory vesicles fuse with
the plasma membrane and release their contents outside t he cell.
In another example of form following function, cells that engage in a great deal of secretory activity (such as cells of the salivary
glands that secrete digestive enzymes or cells of the immu ne system that secrete antibodies) have an abundance of Gol gi.
In plant cells, the Golgi apparatus has the additional role of synthesizing polysaccharides, some of which ar e incorporated into the
cell wall and some of which are used in other parts of the ce ll.
Many diseases arise from genetic mutations that preve nt the synthesis of critical proteins. One such dise ase is Lowe disease
(also called oculocerebrorenal syndrome, because it affects the eyes, brain, and kidneys). In Lowe disease, t here is a deficiency
in an enzyme localized to the Golgi apparatus. Child ren with Lowe disease are born with cataracts, typicall y develop kidney
disease after the first year of life, and may have impaire d mental abilities.
Lowe disease is a genetic disease caused by a mutation on the X chromosome. The X chromosome is one of the two human sex
chromosome, as these chromosomes determine a person’s se x. Females possess two X chromosomes while males possess one
X and one Y chromosome. In females, the genes on only o ne of the two X chromosomes are expressed. Therefore, fe males
who carry the Lowe disease gene on one of their X chrom osomes have a 50/50 chance of having the disease. Howeve r, males
only have one X chromosome and the genes on this chro mosome are always expressed. Therefore, males will alway s have
Lowe disease if their X chromosome carries the Lowe dise ase gene. The location of the mutated gene, as well as the locations
of many other mutations that cause genetic diseases, has now been identified. Through prenatal testing, a woman can find out
if the fetus she is carrying may be afflicted with one of sev eral genetic diseases.
Geneticists analyze the results of prenatal genetic tes ts and may counsel pregnant women on available optio ns. They may also
conduct genetic research that leads to new drugs or foods, or perform DNA analyses that are used in forensic investiga tions.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8Try It

6.8.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435786.8: Endomembrane System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435796.9: Vesicles
Vesicles, like vacuoles (which we will address soon), are membran e-bound sacs that function in storage and transport. Other than
the fact that vacuoles are somewhat larger than vesic les, there is a very subtle distinction between them: the membranes of vesicles
can fuse with either the plasma membrane or other me mbrane systems within the cell. The membrane of a vacu ole does not fuse
with the membranes of other cellular components.
A vesicle consists of fluid enclosed by a lipid bil ayer. Vesicles form naturally during the processes o f secretion (exocytosis), uptake
(phagocytosis) and transport of materials within the cytoplasm. Alternatively, they may be prepared arti ficially, in which case they
are called liposomes. Vesicles can fuse with the plasma membrane to release their contents outside the cell. Vesicles can also fuse
with other organelles within the cell.
Vesicles perform a variety of functions. Because th ey are separated from the cytosol, the inside of a ve sicle can be different from
the cytosolic environment. For this reason, vesicles are a basic tool used by the cell for organizing cellul ar substances. Vesicles are
involved in metabolism, transport, buoyancy control, an d enzyme storage. They can also act as chemical reac tion chambers.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision and adaptation. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Vesicles and Vacuoles. Provided by: Boundless. Located at: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-biology/. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
6.9: Vesicles is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435606.10: Unique Features of Animal and Plant Cells
At this point, you know that each eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, a nucleus, ribosomes, mitoc hondria,
peroxisomes, and in some, vacuoles, but there are some striking differences between animal and plant cells. Wh ile both animal and
plant cells have microtubule organizing centers (MTOC s), animal cells also have centrioles associated with t he MTOC: a complex
called the centrosome. Animal cells each have a centro some and lysosomes, whereas plant cells do not. Plant c ells have a cell wall,
chloroplasts and other specialized plastids, and a large c entral vacuole, whereas animal cells do not.
Properties of Animal Cells
Figure 1. The centrosome consists of two centrioles that lie at right angles to each other. Each centriole is a cylinder made up of
nine triplets of microtubules. Nontubulin proteins (in dicated by the green lines) hold the microtubule tri plets together.
Centrosome
The centrosome is a microtubule-organizing center f ound near the nuclei of animal cells. It contains a p air of centrioles, two
structures that lie perpendicular to each other (Figure 1). Each centriole is a cylinder of nine triplets of micro tubules.
The centrosome (the organelle where all microtubules originate) replicates itself before a cell divides, and the centrioles appear to
have some role in pulling the duplicated chromosome s to opposite ends of the dividing cell. However, the e xact function of the
centrioles in cell division isn’t clear, because cells that have had the centrosome removed can still divid e, and plant cells, which
lack centrosomes, are capable of cell division.
Lysosomes
Figure 2. A macrophage has engulfed (phagocytized) a potentially pathogenic bacterium and then fuses with a lysosomes within the
cell to destroy the pathogen. Other organelles are pr esent in the cell but for simplicity are not shown.
In addition to their role as the digestive componen t and organelle-recycling facility of animal cells, lysosomes are considered to be
parts of the endomembrane system.
Lysosomes also use their hydrolytic enzymes to dest roy pathogens (disease-causing organisms) that might en ter the cell. A good
example of this occurs in a group of white blood cell s called macrophages, which are part of your body’s im mune system. In a
process known as phagocytosis or endocytosis, a sectio n of the plasma membrane of the macrophage invagina tes (folds in) and
engulfs a pathogen. The invaginated section, with the p athogen inside, then pinches itself off from the plasm a membrane and
becomes a vesicle. The vesicle fuses with a lysosome. The lysosome’s hydrolytic enzymes then destroy the pathogen (Figure 2).

6.10.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43560Properties of Plant Cells
Chloroplasts
Figure 3. The chloroplast has an outer membrane, an in ner membrane, and membrane structures called thylakoi ds that are stacked
into grana. The space inside the thylakoid membranes i s called the thylakoid space. The light harvesting rea ctions take place in the
thylakoid membranes, and the synthesis of sugar takes pla ce in the fluid inside the inner membrane, which is c alled the stroma.
Chloroplasts also have their own genome, which is conta ined on a single circular chromosome.
Like the mitochondria, chloroplasts have their own DNA and ribosomes (we’ll talk about these later!), but chl oroplasts have an
entirely different function. Chloroplasts are plant ce ll organelles that carry out photosynthesis. Photosy nthesis is the series of
reactions that use carbon dioxide, water, and light ene rgy to make glucose and oxygen. This is a major differ ence between plants
and animals; plants (autotrophs) are able to make their own food, like sugars, while animals (heterotrophs) must i ngest their food.
Like mitochondria, chloroplasts have outer and inne r membranes, but within the space enclosed by a chlor oplast’s inner membrane
is a set of interconnected and stacked fluid-filled membrane sacs called thylakoids (Figure 3). Each stac k of thylakoids is called a
granum (plural = grana). The fluid enclosed by the inner membrane that surrounds the grana is called the stroma.
The chloroplasts contain a green pigment called chl orophyll, which captures the light energy that drives the reactions of
photosynthesis. Like plant cells, photosynthetic protist s also have chloroplasts. Some bacteria perform photosynt hesis, but their
chlorophyll is not relegated to an organelle.
Click through this activity to learn more about chlorop lasts and how they work.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
We have mentioned that both mitochondria and chloro plasts contain DNA and ribosomes. Have you wondered why? Strong
evidence points to endosymbiosis as the explanation.
Symbiosis is a relationship in which organisms from two separate species depend on each other for their surv ival.
Endosymbiosis (endo – = “within”) is a mutually beneficial relationship i n which one organism lives inside the other.
Endosymbiotic relationships abound in nature. We hav e already mentioned that microbes that produce vita min K live inside the
human gut. This relationship is beneficial for us beca use we are unable to synthesize vitamin K. It is also be neficial for the
microbes because they are protected from other organ isms and from drying out, and they receive abundant f ood from the
environment of the large intestine.
Scientists have long noticed that bacteria, mitochon dria, and chloroplasts are similar in size. We also know that bacteria have
DNA and ribosomes, just as mitochondria and chloroplast s do. Scientists believe that host cells and bacteria formed an
endosymbiotic relationship when the host cells inges ted both aerobic and autotrophic bacteria (cyanobac teria) but did not
destroy them. Through many millions of years of evol ution, these ingested bacteria became more specialize d in their functions,
with the aerobic bacteria becoming mitochondria and the autotrophic bacteria becoming chloroplasts.Try It
Try It

6.10.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43560Vacuoles
Vacuoles are membrane-bound sacs that function in storage a nd transport. The membrane of a vacuole does not fuse with the
membranes of other cellular components. Additionally, so me agents such as enzymes within plant vacuoles break down
macromolecules.
If you look at Figure 4b, you will see that plant cel ls each have a large central vacuole that occupies most of the area of the cell.
The central vacuole plays a key role in regulating the cell’s concentr ation of water in changing environmental conditions. Ha ve
you ever noticed that if you forget to water a plant for a few days, it wilts? That’s because as the water co ncentration in the soil
becomes lower than the water concentration in the pla nt, water moves out of the central vacuoles and cytopl asm. As the central
vacuole shrinks, it leaves the cell wall unsupported. This loss of support to the cell walls of plant cells r esults in the wilted
appearance of the plant.
The central vacuole also supports the expansion of the cell. When the central vacuole holds more water, the cell gets larger without
having to invest a lot of energy in synthesizing new cytoplasm. You can rescue wilted celery in your refrig erator using this process.
Simply cut the end off the stalks and place them in a cu p of water. Soon the celery will be stiff and crunchy again.
Figure 4. These figures show the major organelles and ot her cell components of (a) a typical animal cell and (b) a typical
eukaryotic plant cell. The plant cell has a cell wal l, chloroplasts, plastids, and a central vacuole—structu res not found in animal
cells. Plant cells do not have lysosomes or centrosomes.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Interacting with Plant Organelles. Authored by: Ting Chen and Lumen Learning. Project: This interactive was originally
authored by TIng Chen as a student in Dr. William Carr's Biology for Majors I course at Medgar Evers College in fal l 2019,
revised by Lumen Learning in Spring 2020.. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.10: Unique Features of Animal and Plant Cells is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435616.11: Introduction to Cytoskeleton
Demonstrate familiarity with various components of the cytoskeleton, including monomeric units
If you were to remove all the organelles from a cell, would the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm be the o nly components left?
No. Within the cytoplasm, there would still be ions an d organic molecules, plus a network of protein fibers that help maintain the
shape of the cell, secure some organelles in specific positions, allow cytoplasm and vesicles to move with in the cell, and enable
cells within multicellular organisms to move. Collect ively, this network of protein fibers is known as the cytoskeleton. There are
three types of fibers within the cytoskeleton: micro filaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules (Figure 1). In this outcome,
we will examine each.
Figure 1. Microfilaments thicken the cortex around th e inner edge of a cell; like rubber bands, they resist tension. Microtubules are
found in the interior of the cell where they mainta in cell shape by resisting compressive forces. Intermedia te filaments are found
throughout the cell and hold organelles in place.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe the structure and function of microfilaments
Describe the structure and function of intermediate fil aments
Describe the structure and function of microtubules
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Reading: Microfilaments
Reading: Intermediate Filaments
Reading: Microtubules
Self Check: Cytoskeleton
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.11: Introduction to Cytoskeleton is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435626.12: Microfilaments
Figure 1. Microfilaments are made of two intertwined strands of actin.
Of the three types of protein fibers in the cytoskelet on, microfilaments are the narrowest. They function in cellular movemen t,
have a diameter of about 7 nm, and are made of two i ntertwined strands of a globular protein called acti n (Figure 1). For this
reason, microfilaments are also known as actin filaments.
Actin is powered by ATP to assemble its filamentous for m, which serves as a track for the movement of a motor protein called
myosin. This enables actin to engage in cellular eve nts requiring motion, such as cell division in animal cells and cytoplasmic
streaming, which is the circular movement of the cell cytoplasm in plant cells. Actin and myosin are plent iful in muscle cells. When
your actin and myosin filaments slide past each other, your muscles contract.
Microfilaments also provide some rigidity and shape to the cell. They can depolymerize (disassemble) and reform quickly, thus
enabling a cell to change its shape and move. White blood cells (your body’s infection-fighting cells) ma ke good use of this ability.
They can move to the site of an infection and phagocyti ze the pathogen.
Look below see an example of a white blood cell in ac tion. Watch this short time-lapse video of the cell ca pturing two bacteria. It
engulfs one and then moves on to the other. Note that this vi deo has no audio.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the audio description text for “White Blood Cell Ch ases Bacteria” here (link opens in new window).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
white blood cell chases bacteria. Authored by: Brad Cameron. Located at: https://youtu.be/AUih856vaQY. License: All Rights
Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
6.12: Microfilaments is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435636.13: Intermediate Filaments
Intermediate filaments are made of several strands o f fibrous proteins that are wound together (Figure 1). These elements of the
cytoskeleton get their name from the fact that their di ameter, 8 to 10 nm, is between those of microfilaments and microtubules.
Figure 1. Intermediate filaments consist of several inte rtwined strands of fibrous proteins.
Intermediate filaments have no role in cell movemen t. Their function is purely structural. They bear tens ion, thus maintaining the
shape of the cell, and anchor the nucleus and other o rganelles in place. Figure 2 shows how intermediate fila ments create a
supportive scaffolding inside the cell.
The intermediate filaments are the most diverse gro up of cytoskeletal elements. Several types of fibrou s proteins are found in the
intermediate filaments. You are probably most familia r with keratin, the fibrous protein that strengthens y our hair, nails, and the
epidermis of the skin.
Figure 2. Microfilaments thicken the cortex around th e inner edge of a cell; like rubber bands, they resist tension. Microtubules are
found in the interior of the cell where they mainta in cell shape by resisting compressive forces. Intermedia te filaments are found
throughout the cell and hold organelles in place.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.13: Intermediate Filaments is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435646.14: Microtubules
As their name implies, microtubules are small hollow tub es. The walls of the microtubule are made of polymeriz ed dimers of αtubulin and β-tubulin, two globular proteins (Figure 1). With a diam eter of about 25 nm, microtubules are the widest comp onents of
the cytoskeleton. They help the cell resist compressi on, provide a track along which vesicles move throug h the cell, and pull
replicated chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing ce ll. Like microfilaments, microtubules can dissolve and refor m quickly.
Figure 1. Microtubules are hollow. Their walls consist o f 13 polymerized dimers of α-tubulin and β-tubulin (right image). The left
image shows the molecular structure of the tube.
Microtubules are also the structural elements of fla gella, cilia, and centrioles (the latter are the two perpendicular bodies of the
centrosome). In fact, in animal cells, the centrosome is the microtubule-organizing center. In eukaryotic cells, flagella and cilia are
quite different structurally from their counterparts i n prokaryotes, as discussed below.
Flagella and Cilia
Figure 2. This transmission electron micrograph of two f lagella shows the 9 + 2 array of microtubules (credit: modification of work
by Dartmouth Electron Microscope Facility, Dartmouth College; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
To refresh your memory, flagella (singular = flagellum) are long, hair-like structures that extend from the plasma membrane and are
used to move an entire cell (for example, sperm, Euglena). When present, the cell has just one flagellum or a few flagella. When
cilia (singular = cilium) are present, however, many of them extend along the entire surface of the plasma membrane. They are
short, hair-like structures that are used to move ent ire cells (such as paramecia) or substances along th e outer surface of the cell (for
example, the cilia of cells lining the Fallopian tub es that move the ovum toward the uterus, or cilia li ning the cells of the respiratory
tract that trap particulate matter and move it toward y our nostrils.)
Despite their differences in length and number, flag ella and cilia share a common structural arrangemen t of microtubules called a
“9 + 2 array.” This is an appropriate name because a single flagellum or cilium is made of a ring of nine microtubule doublets,
surrounding a single microtubule doublet in the center (Fi gure 2).

6.14.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43564Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.14: Microtubules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435656.15: Introduction to Cell Surface
Demonstrate familiarity with various cell surface specializations
In this outcome, we’ll learn about the cell surface includ ing the cell membrane, cell junctions, and the cell wall.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Explain the structure and function of cell membranes
Describe cell junctions found in plant cells (plasmodes mata) and animal cells (tight junctions, desmosomes, gap junctions)
Describe the structure and function of the cell wall
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Cell Membranes
Cell Junctions
The Cell Wall
Self Check: Cell Surface
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
6.15: Introduction to Cell Surface is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435666.16: Cell Membranes
Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells have a plasma membrane (Figure 1), a phospholipid bilayer with embedded prote ins, that
separates the internal contents of the cell from it s surrounding environment. A phospholipid is a lipid molecule with two fatty acid
chains and a phosphate-containing group. The plasma m embrane controls the passage of organic molecules, ions, water, and
oxygen into and out of the cell. Wastes (such as carb on dioxide and ammonia) also leave the cell by pass ing through the plasma
membrane. We will cover the plasma membrane in more de tail in a later unit but here is an overview of this ce ll surface structure.
Figure 1. The eukaryotic plasma membrane is a phospholi pid bilayer with proteins and cholesterol embedded in it.
The plasma membranes of cells that specialize in abs orption are folded into fingerlike projections calle d microvilli (singular =
microvillus); (Figure 2). Such cells are typically found lining t he small intestine, the organ that absorbs nutrients from digested
food. This is an excellent example of form following function. People with celiac disease have an immune r esponse to gluten,
which is a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye. Th e immune response damages microvilli, and thus, afflicte d individuals cannot
absorb nutrients. This leads to malnutrition, crampi ng, and diarrhea. Patients suffering from celiac disea se must follow a gluten-free
diet.
Figure 2. Microvilli, shown here as they appear on cel ls lining the small intestine, increase the surface area available for absorption.
These microvilli are only found on the area of the p lasma membrane that faces the cavity from which substan ces will be absorbed.
(credit “micrograph”: modification of work by Louisa Howard)
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.16: Cell Membranes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.17.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435676.17: Cell Junctions
Extracellular Matrix of Animal Cells
Most animal cells release materials into the extracel lular space. The primary components of these material s are proteins, and the
most abundant protein is collagen. Collagen fibers ar e interwoven with carbohydrate-containing protein mol ecules called
proteoglycans. Collectively, these materials are called the extracellular matrix (Figure 1). Not only does the extracellular matrix
hold the cells together to form a tissue, but it also allows the cells within the tissue to communicate with each other. How can this
happen?
Figure 1. The extracellular matrix consists of a networ k of proteins and carbohydrates.
Cells have protein receptors on the extracellular s urfaces of their plasma membranes. When a molecule within the matrix binds to
the receptor, it changes the molecular structure of the receptor. The receptor, in turn, changes the con formation of the
microfilaments positioned just inside the plasma me mbrane. These conformational changes induce chemical signals inside the cell
that reach the nucleus and turn “on” or “off” the t ranscription of specific sections of DNA, which affects t he production of
associated proteins, thus changing the activities within t he cell.
Blood clotting provides an example of the role of th e extracellular matrix in cell communication. When the cells lining a blood
vessel are damaged, they display a protein receptor called tissue factor. When tissue factor binds with a nother factor in the
extracellular matrix, it causes platelets to adhere to the wall of the damaged blood vessel, stimulates th e adjacent smooth muscle
cells in the blood vessel to contract (thus constricti ng the blood vessel), and initiates a series of steps that stimulate the platelets to
produce clotting factors.
Intercellular Junctions
Cells can also communicate with each other via direc t contact, referred to as intercellular junctions. Th ere are some differences in
the ways that plant and animal cells do this. Plasmodesma ta are junctions between plant cells, whereas animal c ell contacts include
tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes.
Plasmodesmata
In general, long stretches of the plasma membranes of neighboring plant cells cannot touch one another b ecause they are separated
by the cell wall that surrounds each cell. How then, can a plant transfer water and other soil nutrients from its roots, through its
stems, and to its leaves? Such transport uses the vascula r tissues (xylem and phloem) primarily. There also exist structural
modifications called plasmodesmata (singular = plasmod esma), numerous channels that pass between cell walls of adjacent plant
cells, connect their cytoplasm, and enable materials to b e transported from cell to cell, and thus throughout th e plant (Figure 2).

6.17.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43567
Figure 2. A plasmodesma is a channel between the cell w alls of two adjacent plant cells. Plasmodesmata allow ma terials to pass
from the cytoplasm of one plant cell to the cytoplasm of an adjacent cell.
Tight Junctions
A tight junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cell s (Figure 3). The cells are held tightly against eac h other by
proteins (predominantly two proteins called claudins an d occludins).
Figure 3. Tight junctions form watertight connections between adjacent animal cells. Proteins create tight j unction adherence.
(credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villa real)
This tight adherence prevents materials from leaking b etween the cells; tight junctions are typically found in epithelial tissues that
line internal organs and cavities, and comprise most o f the skin. For example, the tight junctions of the ep ithelial cells lining your
urinary bladder prevent urine from leaking out into t he extracellular space.
Desmosomes
Also found only in animal cells are desmosomes, which act like spot welds between adjacent epithelial cells (Figure 4). Short
proteins called cadherins in the plasma membrane co nnect to intermediate filaments to create desmosomes. The cadherins join two
adjacent cells together and maintain the cells in a s heet-like formation in organs and tissues that stre tch, like the skin, heart, and
muscles.

6.17.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43567
Figure 4. A desmosome forms a very strong spot weld betwe en cells. It is created by the linkage of cadherins an d intermediate
filaments. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Gap Junctions
Gap junctions in animal cells are like plasmodesmata in plant cel ls in that they are channels between adjacent cells th at allow for
the transport of ions, nutrients, and other substances tha t enable cells to communicate (Figure 5). Structurall y, however, gap
junctions and plasmodesmata differ.
Figure 5. A gap junction is a protein-lined pore that allows water and small molecules to pass between adjace nt animal cells.
(credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villa real)
Gap junctions develop when a set of six proteins (call ed connexins) in the plasma membrane arrange themse lves in an elongated
donut-like configuration called a connexon. When th e pores (“doughnut holes”) of connexons in adjacent animal cells align, a
channel between the two cells forms. Gap junctions are particularly important in cardiac muscle: The elect rical signal for the
muscle to contract is passed efficiently through gap junc tions, allowing the heart muscle cells to contract in ta ndem.
To conduct a virtual microscopy lab and review the parts of a cell, work through the steps of this interactive ass ignment.
Animal cells communicate via their extracellular matr ices and are connected to each other via tight junct ions, desmosomes,
and gap junctions. Plant cells are connected and communicat e with each other via plasmodesmata.
When protein receptors on the surface of the plasma membrane of an animal cell bind to a substance in th e extracellular matrix,
a chain of reactions begins that changes activities taking place within the cell. Plasmodesmata are channe ls between adjacent
plant cells, while gap junctions are channels between adjacent animal cells. However, their structures are q uite different. A tight
junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent cells, whi le a desmosome acts like a spot weld.Learning Objectives

6.17.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43567Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.17: Cell Junctions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.18.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435686.18: The Cell Wall
Plant cells have a cell wall, chloroplasts and other specia lized plastids, and a large central vacuole, whereas anima l cells do not.
Figure 1. These figures show the major organelles and ot her cell components of (a) a typical animal cell and (b) a typical
eukaryotic plant cell. The plant cell has a cell wal l, chloroplasts, plastids, and a central vacuole—structu res not found in animal
cells. Plant cells do not have lysosomes or centrosomes.
If you examine Figure 1b, the diagram of a plant cell, you will see a structure external to the plasma membr ane called the cell wall.
The cell wall is a rigid covering that protects the cell, provide s structural support, and gives shape to the cell. Fung al and protistan
cells also have cell walls, as do some prokaryotic c ells. While the chief component of prokaryotic cell walls is peptidoglycan, the
major organic molecule in the plant cell wall is cel lulose (Figure 2), a polysaccharide made up of glucose units. Have you ever
noticed that when you bite into a raw vegetable, like celery, it crunches? That’s because you are tearing the rigid cell walls of the
celery cells with your teeth.
Figure 2. Cellulose is a long chain of β-glucose molecu les connected by a 1-4 linkage. The dashed lines at ea ch end of the figure
indicate a series of many more glucose units. The size o f the page makes it impossible to portray an entire ce llulose molecule.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8

6.18.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435686.18: The Cell Wall is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.19.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435696.19: Putting It Together- Cellular Structure
In this module, we’ve learned about several different cell components. Table 1 provides a summary of all the components we
covered, as well as their functions and locations.

6.19.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43569Table 1. Components of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cel ls
Cell Component Function Present in Prokaryotes? Present in An imal Cells? Present in Plant Cells?
CytoplasmProvides turgor pressure
to plant cells as fluid
inside the central
vacuole; site of many
metabolic reactions;
medium in which
organelles are foundYes Yes Yes
NucleusCell organelle that
houses DNA and directs
synthesis of ribosomes
and proteinsNo Yes Yes
NucleolusDarkened area within the
nucleus where ribosomal
subunits are synthesized.No Yes Yes
Ribosomes Protein synthesis Yes Yes Yes
MitochondriaATP production/cellular
respirationNo Yes Yes
PeroxisomesOxidizes and thus breaks
down fatty acids and
amino acids, and
detoxifies poisonsNo Yes Yes
Endoplasmic reticulumModifies proteins and
synthesizes lipidsNo Yes Yes
Golgi apparatusModifies, sorts, tags,
packages, and distributes
lipids and proteinsNo Yes Yes
Vesicles and vacuolesStorage and transport;
digestive function in
plant cellsNo Yes Yes
CentrosomeUnspecified role in cell
division in animal cells;
source of microtubules
in animal cellsNo Yes No
LysosomesDigestion of
macromolecules;
recycling of worn-out
organellesNo Yes No
Chloroplasts Photosynthesis No No Yes
Cytoskeleton Maintains cell’s shape,
secures organelles in
specific positions, allows
cytoplasm and vesiclesYes Yes Yes

6.19.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43569Table 1. Components of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cel ls
Cell Component Function Present in Prokaryotes? Present in An imal Cells? Present in Plant Cells?
to move within cell, and
enables unicellular
organisms to move
independently
Flagella Cellular locomotion Some SomeNo, except for some
plant sperm cells.
CiliaCellular locomotion,
movement of particles
along extracellular
surface of plasma
membrane, and filtrationSome Some No
Plasma membraneSeparates cell from
external environment;
controls passage of
organic molecules, ions,
water, oxygen, and
wastes into and out of
cellYes Yes Yes
Cell wallProtection, structural
support and maintenance
of cell shapeYes, primarily
peptidoglycanNo Yes, primarily cellulose
INHERITED DISEASES
Let’s look back to our earlier disease list:
Pompe Disease: characterized by excess accumulation of glycogen in musc le cells
Leigh Disease: progressive disorder of lesions (dead or dying cells) in th e brain
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy: wasting and weakness in muscles of the shoulders, upper arms, a nd calf muscles
The following organelles are what cause the each disor der. As you explore the different websites that highli ght each disease, think
about how the function of these organelles directly relat es to the disease symptoms.
Pompe disease: lysosomes
Leigh’s Disease: mitochondria
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy: nuclear envelope
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
6.19: Putting It Together- Cellular Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.20.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435716.20: Assignment- Cell Builder
Create a model of a eukaryotic cell using any mater ial of your choice. In your model be sure to include all the organelles
appropriate to your cell (either plant or animal). Once complete, take multiple photographs of your mod el from all angles. Include
these images in a document that also contains the following in table format:
A detailed key/legend that matches the model;
Each organelle or part with its basic function;
A disease or disorder that is associated with the malfunctio n of each cellular component
How this organelle is visualized microscopically
References
Note for the disease information, you can list a dise ase in either animals or plants, regardless of what typ e of cell you are modeling.
In other words, its okay to discuss a “human” disease e ven if you are making a plant model, provided the o rganelle is present in
both types of cells.
Some suggestions for 3D models include Legos, a decorat ed cake with candy toppings, or standard Styrofoam bas e with
appropriate pieces attached. You can also draw or illus trate a model. Here is an example of what you might make.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment has been proofread and does not contain any majo r spelling or grammatical errors
Assignment includes appropriate references
Assignment includes photographs or images of created mode l from all angles.
Assignment includes a key documenting how each organelle is represented in the model.
Assignment includes a completed table such as the one illust rated in the example document.
Assignment includes a disease caused by malfunction of each identified component in the model.
Assignment includes at least 7 organelles in the model and tab le.
Rubric
Cell Builder
Outcome: Identify and explain a variety of cellular components

6.20.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43571Cell Builder
Criteria Ratings Pts
At least 7 membranebound organelles found
in eukaryotic cells are
contained in the model
and their functions
identified in the table.Organelles and functions
are outlined in detail.
5.0 ptsOrganelles and functions
are outlined in minimal
but accurate terms.
4.0 ptsOrganelles and functions
are mismatched in the
table or insufficiently
discussed.
0.0 pts5 pts
The structure and
function of cell
membranes is included
in the model and table.Cell membranes are
illustrated in detail in
model and discussed in
detail.
5.0 ptsCell membranes are
included and explained
in the table/model in
minimal but accurate
terms.
4.0 ptsCell membranes are
inaccurately discussed.
0.0 pts5 pts
At least 2 components of
the cytoskeleton are
identified by form and
function in the model
and table.Components of the
cytoskeleton and
functions are outlined in
detail.
5.0 ptsComponents of the
cytoskeleton and
functions are outlined in
minimal but accurate
terms.
4.0 ptsComponents of the
cytoskeleton are
mismatched in the table
or insufficiently
discussed.
0.0 pts5 pts
At least one cell surface
specialization is included
in the model and table.Cell surface
specialization(s) is/are
illustrated in detail in
model and discussed in
detail.
5.0 ptsCell surface
specialization(s) is/are
included and explained
in the table/model in
minimal but accurate
terms.
4.0 ptsCell surface
specialization(s) is/are
inaccurately discussed.
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 20
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Performance Assessments: Cell Builder. Authored by: Shelli Carter. Provided by: Columbia Basin College. Located at:
https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
6.20: Assignment- Cell Builder is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Module 5- Cell Membranes
7.1: Why It Matters- Cell Membranes
7.2: Introduction to Structure of the Membrane
7.3: Structure of the Cell Membrane
7.4: Phospholipids
7.5: Introduction to Kinds of Transport
7.6: Passive Transport
7.7: Active Transport
7.8: Membranes and Transport
7.9: Introduction to Endocytosis and Exocytosis
7.10: Endocytosis
7.11: Exocytosis
7.12: Putting It Together- Cell Membranes
7.13: Assignment- Membranes Alive!
7: Module 5- Cell Membranes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435857.1: Why It Matters- Cell Membranes
Why describe and explain the structure and function of membranes?
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder that prim arily affects the lungs, as well as the pancreas, liver, a nd intestine. CF is
characterized by abnormal transport of chloride and sodium across body tissues, leading to thick, viscous sec retions. The hallmark
symptoms of cystic fibrosis are salty tasting skin, po or growth, poor weight gain despite a normal food inta ke, accumulation of
thick, sticky mucus, frequent chest infections, and cou ghing or shortness of breath. Symptoms often appear in infancy and
childhood, such as bowel obstruction in newborn babies.
The most serious symptoms of CF are difficulty breathi ng and frequent lung infections. Often, lung transplan tation is ultimately
necessary as CF worsens. Other symptoms, including sinus infection s, poor growth, and infertility affect other parts of the body.
Cystic fibrosis results from the malfunctioning of a single membrane transporter. How could this error in membrane transport result
in such a disease?
Learning Outcomes
Describe the structure and function of membranes, especia lly the phospholipid bilayer
Distinguish between passive and active transport; explain how substances are directly transported across a membra ne
Describe the primary mechanisms by which cells import and export macromolecules
Identify the main components of a signal transduction p athway
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Cystic Fibrosis. Provided by: Boundless. Located at: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-biology/. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
7.1: Why It Matters- Cell Membranes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435867.2: Introduction to Structure of the Membrane
Describe the structure and function of membranes, especially the phospholipid bilayer
In this outcome, we’ll learn about the structure of membra nes.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe the structure of cell membranes
Identify components of the cell membrane, including phos pholipids, cholesterol, proteins, and carbohydrates
Explain why hydrophilic substances cannot pass through the in terior of the cell membrane
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Structure of the Cell Membrane
Phospholipids
Self Check: Structure of the Membrane
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
7.2: Introduction to Structure of the Membrane is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435877.3: Structure of the Cell Membrane
A cell’s plasma membrane defines the boundary of the cell and determines the nature of its contact with the environment. Cells
exclude some substances, take in others, and excrete st ill others, all in controlled quantities. Plasma membran es enclose the borders
of cells, but rather than being a static bag, they are dynamic and constantly in flux. The plasma membr ane must be sufficiently
flexible to allow certain cells, such as red blood cel ls and white blood cells, to change shape as they pass through narrow
capillaries. These are the more obvious functions of a plasma membrane. In addition, the surface of the pla sma membrane carries
markers that allow cells to recognize one another, whi ch is vital as tissues and organs form during early d evelopment, and which
later plays a role in the “self” versus “non-self” distinctio n of the immune response.
The plasma membrane also carries receptors, which are at tachment sites for specific substances that interact with the cell. Each
receptor is structured to bind with a specific substa nce. For example, surface receptors of the membrane c reate changes in the
interior, such as changes in enzymes of metabolic pat hways. These metabolic pathways might be vital for prov iding the cell with
energy, making specific substances for the cell, or br eaking down cellular waste or toxins for disposal. Rece ptors on the plasma
membrane’s exterior surface interact with hormones or neurotransmitters, and allow their messages to be tra nsmitted into the cell.
Some recognition sites are used by viruses as attachment points. Although they are highly specific, pathogens like viruses may
evolve to exploit receptors to gain entry to a cell by mimicking the specific substance that the recept or is meant to bind. This
specificity helps to explain why human immunodeficie ncy virus (HIV) or any of the five types of hepatitis viruses invade only
specific cells.
Fluid Mosaic Model
In 1972, S. J. Singer and Garth L. Nicolson proposed a new m odel of the plasma membrane that, compared to earlier
understanding, better explained both microscopic obse rvations and the function of the plasma membrane. Thi s was called the fluid
mosaic model. The model has evolved somewhat over time, but still best accounts for the structure and functions of the plasma
membrane as we now understand them. The fluid mosaic mo del describes the structure of the plasma membrane a s a mosaic of
components—including phospholipids, cholesterol, pr oteins, and carbohydrates—in which the components are able to flow and
change position, while maintaining the basic integrity of the membrane. Both phospholipid molecules and emb edded proteins are
able to diffuse rapidly and laterally in the membra ne (Figure 1). The fluidity of the plasma membrane is necessary for the activities
of certain enzymes and transport molecules within the membrane. Plasma membranes range from 5–10 nm thick. As a comparison,
human red blood cells, visible via light microscopy, are approximately 8 µm thick, or approximately 1,00 0 times thicker than a
plasma membrane.
Figure 1. The fluid mosaic model of the plasma membran e structure describes the plasma membrane as a fluid com bination of
phospholipids, cholesterol, proteins, and carbohydrates.
The plasma membrane is made up primarily of a bilayer of phospholipids with embedded proteins, carbohydrat es, glycolipids, and
glycoproteins, and, in animal cells, cholesterol. The amou nt of cholesterol in animal plasma membranes regula tes the fluidity of the

7.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43587membrane and changes based on the temperature of the cell’s environment. In other words, cholesterol act s as antifreeze in the cell
membrane and is more abundant in animals that live in cold climates.
The main fabric of the membrane is composed of two la yers of phospholipid molecules, and the polar ends o f these molecules
(which look like a collection of balls in an artist’s r endition of the model) (Figure 1) are in contact with aqueous fluid both inside
and outside the cell. Thus, both surfaces of the plasm a membrane are hydrophilic (“water-loving”). In contr ast, the interior of the
membrane, between its two surfaces, is a hydrophobic (“ water-hating”) or nonpolar region because of the fat ty acid tails. This
region has no attraction for water or other polar molecule s (we will discuss this further in the next page).
Proteins make up the second major chemical component o f plasma membranes. Integral proteins are embedded in the plasma
membrane and may span all or part of the membrane. I ntegral proteins may serve as channels or pumps to mo ve materials into or
out of the cell. Peripheral proteins are found on the exterior or interior surfaces of membranes, attached either to integral proteins or
to phospholipid molecules. Both integral and periph eral proteins may serve as enzymes, as structural at tachments for the fibers of
the cytoskeleton, or as part of the cell’s recognition sites.
Carbohydrates are the third major component of plasm a membranes. They are always found on the exterior sur face of cells and are
bound either to proteins (forming glycoproteins) or to lipids (forming glycolipids). These carbohydrate chains may consist of 2–60
monosaccharide units and may be either straight or branched. Along with peripheral proteins, carbohydrate s form specialized sites
on the cell surface that allow cells to recognize each oth er.
How Viruses Infect Specific Organs
Figure 2. HIV docks at and binds to the CD4 receptor, a glycoprotein on the surface of T cells, before ente ring, or infecting, the
cell. (credit: modification of work by US National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases)
Specific glycoprotein molecules exposed on the surfac e of the cell membranes of host cells are exploited by many viruses to infect
specific organs. For example, HIV is able to penetrate th e plasma membranes of specific kinds of white blood cells called T-helper
cells and monocytes, as well as some cells of the central ne rvous system. The hepatitis virus attacks only liver cells.
These viruses are able to invade these cells, because t he cells have binding sites on their surfaces that the viruses have exploited
with equally specific glycoproteins in their coats. (Fi gure 2). The cell is tricked by the mimicry of the v irus coat molecules, and the
virus is able to enter the cell. Other recognition si tes on the virus’s surface interact with the human im mune system, prompting the
body to produce antibodies. Antibodies are made in r esponse to the antigens (or proteins associated with invasive pathogens).
These same sites serve as places for antibodies to at tach, and either destroy or inhibit the activity of t he virus. Unfortunately, these
sites on HIV are encoded by genes that change quickly, making the production of an effective vaccine agai nst the virus very
difficult. The virus population within an infected i ndividual quickly evolves through mutation into diff erent populations, or
variants, distinguished by differences in these recogn ition sites. This rapid change of viral surface marke rs decreases the
effectiveness of the person’s immune system in atta cking the virus, because the antibodies will not reco gnize the new variations of
the surface patterns.
The modern understanding of the plasma membrane is referred to as the fluid mosaic model. The plasma m embrane is
composed of a bilayer of phospholipids, with their hydr ophobic, fatty acid tails in contact with each other. The landscape of the
membrane is studded with proteins, some of which span th e membrane. Some of these proteins serve to transport materials into
or out of the cell. Carbohydrates are attached to so me of the proteins and lipids on the outward-facing s urface of theLearning Objectives

7.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43587membrane. These form complexes that function to ide ntify the cell to other cells. The fluid nature of the membrane owes itself
to the configuration of the fatty acid tails, the pr esence of cholesterol embedded in the membrane (in a nimal cells), and the
mosaic nature of the proteins and protein-carbohydr ate complexes, which are not firmly fixed in place. Pla sma membranes
enclose the borders of cells, but rather than being a stati c bag, they are dynamic and constantly in flux.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
7.3: Structure of the Cell Membrane is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435887.4: Phospholipids
As we just learned, the main fabric of the membrane is composed of two layers of phospholipid molecules. The h ydrophilic or
“water-loving” areas of these molecules (which looks li ke a collection of balls in an artist’s rendition of the model) (Figure 1) are in
contact with the aqueous fluid both inside and outside the cell. Thus, both surfaces of the plasma membrane are hydrophilic. In
contrast, the interior of the membrane, between its two surfaces, is a hydrophobic or nonpolar region becau se of the fatty acid tails.
This region has no attraction for water or other polar mol ecules (we will discuss this further in the next page).
Figure 1. The fluid mosaic model of the plasma membran e structure describes the plasma membrane as a fluid com bination of
phospholipids, cholesterol, proteins, and carbohydrates.
Hydrophobic, or water-hating molecules, tend to be non -polar. They interact with other non-polar molecules in chemical reactions,
but generally do not interact with polar molecules. When placed in water, hydrophobic molecules tend to form a ball or cluster. The
hydrophilic regions of the phospholipids tend to fo rm hydrogen bonds with water and other polar molecule s on both the exterior
and interior of the cell. Thus, the membrane surfaces that face the interior and exterior of the cell are hydrophilic. In contrast, the
interior of the cell membrane is hydrophobic and wil l not interact with water. Therefore, phospholipids f orm an excellent two-layer
cell membrane that separates fluid within the cell from the fluid outside of the cell.
Figure 2. This phospholipid molecule is composed of a hy drophilic head and two hydrophobic tails. The hydrop hilic head group
consists of a phosphate-containing group attached to a glycerol molecule. The hydrophobic tails, each conta ining either a saturated
or an unsaturated fatty acid, are long hydrocarbon c hains.

7.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43588A phospholipid molecule (Figure 2) consists of a thr ee-carbon glycerol backbone with two fatty acid molecu les attached to carbons
1 and 2, and a phosphate-containing group attached to the third carbon.
This arrangement gives the overall molecule an area d escribed as its head (the phosphate-containing grou p), which has a polar
character or negative charge, and an area called th e tail (the fatty acids), which has no charge. The he ad can form hydrogen bonds,
but the tail cannot. A molecule with this arrangemen t of a positively or negatively charged area and an uncharged, or non-polar,
area is referred to as amphiphilic or “dual-loving.”
This characteristic is vital to the structure of a pl asma membrane because, in water, phospholipids tend to become arranged with
their hydrophobic tails facing each other and their hydrophilic heads facing out. In this way, they form a lipid bilayer—a barrier
composed of a double layer of phospholipids that sep arates the water and other materials on one side of t he barrier from the water
and other materials on the other side. In fact, phos pholipids heated in an aqueous solution tend to sponta neously form small spheres
or droplets (called micelles or liposomes), with their hydrophilic heads forming the exterior and their h ydrophobic tails on the
inside (Figure 3).
Figure 3. In an aqueous solution, phospholipids tend to arrange themselves with their polar heads facing outwa rd and their
hydrophobic tails facing inward. (credit: modificati on of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
7.4: Phospholipids is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435897.5: Introduction to Kinds of Transport
Explain how substances are directly transported across a membrane
In this outcome we’ll learn about passive and active transport; this includes diffusion and osmosis.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Define and describe passive transport
Define and describe active transport
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Passive Transport
Active Transport
Membranes and Transport
Self Check: Kinds of Transport
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
7.5: Introduction to Kinds of Transport is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435907.6: Passive Transport
Plasma membranes must allow certain substances to ent er and leave a cell, and prevent some harmful materi als from entering and
some essential materials from leaving. In other word s, plasma membranes are selectively permeable —they allow some substances
to pass through, but not others. If they were to lose t his selectivity, the cell would no longer be able to sustain itself, and it would be
destroyed. Some cells require larger amounts of speci fic substances than do other cells; they must have a way of obtaining these
materials from extracellular fluids. This may happe n passively, as certain materials move back and fort h, or the cell may have
special mechanisms that facilitate transport. Some ma terials are so important to a cell that it spends som e of its energy, hydrolyzing
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to obtain these material s. Red blood cells use some of their energy doing ju st that. All cells spend the
majority of their energy to maintain an imbalance of so dium and potassium ions between the interior and exterior of the cell.
The most direct forms of membrane transport are pas sive. Passive transport is a naturally occurring phenomenon and does not
require the cell to exert any of its energy to acco mplish the movement. In passive transport, substances move from an area of higher
concentration to an area of lower concentration. A p hysical space in which there is a range of concentrat ions of a single substance is
said to have a concentration gradient.
Selective Permeability
Plasma membranes are asymmetric: the interior of the membrane is not identical to the exterior of the m embrane. In fact, there is a
considerable difference between the array of phospho lipids and proteins between the two leaflets that form a membrane. On the
interior of the membrane, some proteins serve to anc hor the membrane to fibers of the cytoskeleton. There are peripheral proteins
on the exterior of the membrane that bind elements of the extracellular matrix. Carbohydrates, attached to lipids or proteins, are
also found on the exterior surface of the plasma memb rane. These carbohydrate complexes help the cell bin d substances that the
cell needs in the extracellular fluid. This adds considera bly to the selective nature of plasma membranes (Figure 1).
Figure 1. The eukaryotic plasma membrane is a phospholi pid bilayer with proteins and cholesterol embedded in it.
Recall that plasma membranes are amphiphilic: they have hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. This char acteristic helps the
movement of some materials through the membrane and hinders the movement of others. Lipid-soluble materia l with a low
molecular weight can easily slip through the hydrophob ic lipid core of the membrane. Substances such as the f at-soluble vitamins
A, D, E, and K readily pass through the plasma membranes in the digestive tract and other tissues. Fat-soluble drugs and hormones
also gain easy entry into cells and are readily trans ported into the body’s tissues and organs. Molecules of oxygen and carbon
dioxide have no charge and so pass through membranes by simp le diffusion.
Polar substances present problems for the membrane. W hile some polar molecules connect easily with the out side of a cell, they
cannot readily pass through the lipid core of the pl asma membrane. Additionally, while small ions could easi ly slip through the
spaces in the mosaic of the membrane, their charge pr events them from doing so. Ions such as sodium, potass ium, calcium, and

7.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43590chloride must have special means of penetrating pla sma membranes. Simple sugars and amino acids also need h elp with transport
across plasma membranes, achieved by various transmembr ane proteins (channels).
Diffusion
Figure 2. Dispersion
Diffusion is a passive process of transport (see Figure 2). A si ngle substance tends to move from an area of high co ncentration to
an area of low concentration until the concentration is equal across a space. You are familiar with diffusi on of substances through
the air.
For example, think about someone opening a bottle of ammonia in a room filled with people. The ammonia ga s is at its highest
concentration in the bottle; its lowest concentratio n is at the edges of the room. The ammonia vapor will diffuse, or spread away,
from the bottle, and gradually, more and more people will smell the ammonia as it spreads. Materials move wit hin the cell’s cytosol
by diffusion, and certain materials move through the plasma membrane by diffusion (Figure 3). Diffusion exp ends no energy. On
the contrary, concentration gradients are a form of poten tial energy, dissipated as the gradient is eliminated.
Figure 3. Diffusion through a permeable membrane move s a substance from an area of high concentration (extr acellular fluid, in
this case) down its concentration gradient (into the c ytoplasm). (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Each separate substance in a medium, such as the ex tracellular fluid, has its own concentration gradient, independent of the
concentration gradients of other materials. In addit ion, each substance will diffuse according to that gra dient. Within a system, there
will be different rates of diffusion of the different s ubstances in the medium.
Factors That Affect Diffusion
Molecules move constantly in a random manner, at a rat e that depends on their mass, their environment, and the amount of thermal
energy they possess, which in turn is a function of te mperature. This movement accounts for the diffusion o f molecules through
whatever medium in which they are localized. A substa nce will tend to move into any space available to it until it is evenly
distributed throughout it. After a substance has diffus ed completely through a space, removing its concentra tion gradient, molecules
will still move around in the space, but there will be no net movement of the number of molecules from one area to another. This
lack of a concentration gradient in which there is n o net movement of a substance is known as dynamic equ ilibrium. While
diffusion will go forward in the presence of a concentrati on gradient of a substance, several factors affect the ra te of diffusion.

7.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43590Extent of the concentration gradient: The greater the di fference in concentration, the more rapid the diffusi on. The closer the
distribution of the material gets to equilibrium, the slo wer the rate of diffusion becomes.
Mass of the molecules diffusing: Heavier molecules move more slowly; therefore, they diffuse more slowly. The reverse is true
for lighter molecules.
Temperature: Higher temperatures increase the energy and therefore the movement of the molecules, increasing th e rate of
diffusion. Lower temperatures decrease the energy of the m olecules, thus decreasing the rate of diffusion.
Solvent density: As the density of a solvent increases, the rate of diffusion decreases. The molecules slow down beca use they
have a more difficult time getting through the dense r medium. If the medium is less dense, diffusion increase s. Because cells
primarily use diffusion to move materials within the cyto plasm, any increase in the cytoplasm’s density will inhi bit the
movement of the materials. An example of this is a person ex periencing dehydration. As the body’s cells lose water, the ra te of
diffusion decreases in the cytoplasm, and the cells’ fun ctions deteriorate. Neurons tend to be very sensitive to t his effect.
Dehydration frequently leads to unconsciousness and possi bly coma because of the decrease in diffusion rate withi n the cells.
Solubility: As discussed earlier, nonpolar or lipid-solu ble materials pass through plasma membranes more easily t han polar
materials, allowing a faster rate of diffusion.
Surface area and thickness of the plasma membrane: Increas ed surface area increases the rate of diffusion, whereas a thicker
membrane reduces it.
Distance travelled: The greater the distance that a subst ance must travel, the slower the rate of diffusion. This pl aces an upper
limitation on cell size. A large, spherical cell will die beca use nutrients or waste cannot reach or leave the center of the cell,
respectively. Therefore, cells must either be small in si ze, as in the case of many prokaryotes, or be flattened, as with many
single-celled eukaryotes.
A variation of diffusion is the process of filtration. In filtration, material moves according to its conc entration gradient through a
membrane; sometimes the rate of diffusion is enhance d by pressure, causing the substances to filter more rapidly. This occurs in the
kidney, where blood pressure forces large amounts of wat er and accompanying dissolved substances, or solutes, out of the blood
and into the renal tubules. The rate of diffusion i n this instance is almost totally dependent on pressu re. One of the effects of high
blood pressure is the appearance of protein in the urine, wh ich is “squeezed through” by the abnormally high pressure.
Facilitated Transport
In facilitated transport, also called facilitated di ffusion, materials diffuse across the plasma membrane with the help of membrane
proteins. A concentration gradient exists that would allow these materials to diffuse into the cell withou t expending cellular energy.
However, these materials are ions or polar molecules th at are repelled by the hydrophobic parts of the cel l membrane. Facilitated
transport proteins shield these materials from the repul sive force of the membrane, allowing them to diffuse int o the cell.
The material being transported is first attached to pr otein or glycoprotein receptors on the exterior surfa ce of the plasma membrane.
This allows the material that is needed by the cell t o be removed from the extracellular fluid. The subst ances are then passed to
specific integral proteins that facilitate their pa ssage. Some of these integral proteins are collection s of beta pleated sheets that form
a pore or channel through the phospholipid bilayer. Others are carrier proteins which bind with the substan ce and aid its diffusion
through the membrane.

7.6.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43590Channels
Figure 4. Facilitated transport moves substances down thei r concentration gradients. They may cross the plasma me mbrane with the
aid of channel proteins. (credit: modification of wo rk by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
The integral proteins involved in facilitated trans port are collectively referred to as transport proteins, and they function as either
channels for the material or carriers. In both cases, they are transmembrane proteins. Channels are specific for the substance that is
being transported. Channel proteins have hydrophilic domains exposed to the intracellul ar and extracellular fluids; they
additionally have a hydrophilic channel through the ir core that provides a hydrated opening through th e membrane layers (Figure
4). Passage through the channel allows polar compounds t o avoid the nonpolar central layer of the plasma mem brane that would
otherwise slow or prevent their entry into the cell. Aquaporins are channel proteins that allow water to pass through the membrane
at a very high rate.
Channel proteins are either open at all times or the y are “gated,” which controls the opening of the chan nel. The attachment of a
particular ion to the channel protein may control t he opening, or other mechanisms or substances may be involved. In some tissues,
sodium and chloride ions pass freely through open c hannels, whereas in other tissues a gate must be ope ned to allow passage. An
example of this occurs in the kidney, where both forms of channels are found in different parts of the re nal tubules. Cells involved
in the transmission of electrical impulses, such as n erve and muscle cells, have gated channels for sodium, potassium, and calcium
in their membranes. Opening and closing of these cha nnels changes the relative concentrations on opposing sides of the membrane
of these ions, resulting in the facilitation of elect rical transmission along membranes (in the case of ne rve cells) or in muscle
contraction (in the case of muscle cells).
Carrier Proteins
Another type of protein embedded in the plasma membr ane is a carrier protein. This aptly named protein binds a substance and, in
doing so, triggers a change of its own shape, moving t he bound molecule from the outside of the cell to it s interior (Figure 5);
depending on the gradient, the material may move in the opposite direction. Carrier proteins are typical ly specific for a single
substance. This selectivity adds to the overall selec tivity of the plasma membrane. The exact mechanism f or the change of shape is
poorly understood. Proteins can change shape when the ir hydrogen bonds are affected, but this may not full y explain this
mechanism. Each carrier protein is specific to one subs tance, and there are a finite number of these prote ins in any membrane. This
can cause problems in transporting enough of the ma terial for the cell to function properly. When all of the proteins are bound to
their ligands, they are saturated and the rate of tr ansport is at its maximum. Increasing the concentrat ion gradient at this point will
not result in an increased rate of transport.

7.6.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43590
Figure 5. Some substances are able to move down their co ncentration gradient across the plasma membrane with t he aid of carrier
proteins. Carrier proteins change shape as they move mo lecules across the membrane. (credit: modification of work by Mariana
Ruiz Villareal)
An example of this process occurs in the kidney. Gluco se, water, salts, ions, and amino acids needed by the bo dy are filtered in one
part of the kidney. This filtrate, which includes gluc ose, is then reabsorbed in another part of the kidn ey. Because there are only a
finite number of carrier proteins for glucose, if mo re glucose is present than the proteins can handle, t he excess is not transported
and it is excreted from the body in the urine. In a d iabetic individual, this is described as “spilling glu cose into the urine.” A
different group of carrier proteins called glucose tra nsport proteins, or GLUTs, are involved in transporting g lucose and other
hexose sugars through plasma membranes within the body.
Channel and carrier proteins transport material at different rates. Channel proteins transport much mor e quickly than do carrier
proteins. Channel proteins facilitate diffusion at a rate of tens of millions of molecules per second, whe reas carrier proteins work at
a rate of a thousand to a million molecules per second.
Osmosis
Osmosis is the movement of water through a semipermeable membrane according to the concentration gradient of water across the
membrane, which is inversely proportional to the con centration of solutes. While diffusion transports ma terial across membranes
and within cells, osmosis transports only water across a membrane and the membrane limits the diffusi on of solutes in the water.
Not surprisingly, the aquaporins that facilitate water movement play a large role in osmosis, most promine ntly in red blood cells
and the membranes of kidney tubules.
Mechanism
Figure 6. In osmosis, water always moves from an area of higher water concentration to one of lower concentr ation. In the diagram
shown, the solute cannot pass through the selectively pe rmeable membrane, but the water can.
Osmosis is a special case of diffusion. Water, like othe r substances, moves from an area of high concentration to one of low
concentration. An obvious question is what makes water m ove at all? Imagine a beaker with a semipermeable memb rane separating
the two sides or halves (Figure 6). On both sides of th e membrane the water level is the same, but there are different concentrations
of a dissolved substance, or solute, that cannot cross the membrane (otherwise the conce ntrations on each side would be balanced
by the solute crossing the membrane). If the volume o f the solution on both sides of the membrane is the same, but the
concentrations of solute are different, then there are d ifferent amounts of water, the solvent, on either side of the membrane.

7.6.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43590To illustrate this, imagine two full glasses of water. One has a single teaspoon of sugar in it, whereas the second one contains onequarter cup of sugar. If the total volume of the sol utions in both cups is the same, which cup contains mor e water? Because the
large amount of sugar in the second cup takes up muc h more space than the teaspoon of sugar in the first cup, the first cup has more
water in it.
Returning to the beaker example, recall that it has a mixture of solutes on either side of the membran e. A principle of diffusion is
that the molecules move around and will spread evenl y throughout the medium if they can. However, only the material capable of
getting through the membrane will diffuse through it. In this example, the solute cannot diffuse throug h the membrane, but the
water can. Water has a concentration gradient in this system. Thus, water will diffuse down its concentration g radient, crossing the
membrane to the side where it is less concentrated. Th is diffusion of water through the membrane—osmosis—wi ll continue until
the concentration gradient of water goes to zero or until the hydrostatic pressure of the water balances t he osmotic pressure.
Osmosis proceeds constantly in living systems.
Tonicity
Tonicity describes how an extracellular solution can change t he volume of a cell by affecting osmosis. A solution’s tonicity often
directly correlates with the osmolarity of the soluti on. Osmolarity describes the total solute concentration of the solut ion. A
solution with low osmolarity has a greater number of wat er molecules relative to the number of solute partic les; a solution with
high osmolarity has fewer water molecules with respect to solute particles. In a situation in which solutions of two different
osmolarities are separated by a membrane permeable to water, though not to the solute, water will move from the side of the
membrane with lower osmolarity (and more water) to the side with higher osmolarity (and less water). This eff ect makes sense if
you remember that the solute cannot move across the membrane, and thus the only component in the system th at can move—the
water—moves along its own concentration gradient. An im portant distinction that concerns living systems is that osmolarity
measures the number of particles (which may be molec ules) in a solution. Therefore, a solution that is cl oudy with cells may have a
lower osmolarity than a solution that is clear, if the secon d solution contains more dissolved molecules than there are cells.
Hypotonic Solutions
Three terms—hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic—are use d to relate the osmolarity of a cell to the osmolari ty of the extracellular
fluid that contains the cells. In a hypotonic situati on, the extracellular fluid has lower osmolarity than the fluid inside the cell, and
water enters the cell. (In living systems, the point of reference is always the cytoplasm, so the prefix hypo – means that the
extracellular fluid has a lower concentration of solu tes, or a lower osmolarity, than the cell cytoplasm.) It also means that the
extracellular fluid has a higher concentration of wa ter in the solution than does the cell. In this situ ation, water will follow its
concentration gradient and enter the cell.
Hypertonic Solutions
As for a hypertonic solution, the prefix hyper – refers to the extracellular fluid having a higher osmolarity than the cell’s cytoplasm;
therefore, the fluid contains less water than the cell does. Because the cell has a relatively higher concent ration of water, water will
leave the cell.
Isotonic Solutions
In an isotonic solution, the extracellular fluid ha s the same osmolarity as the cell. If the osmolarity o f the cell matches that of the
extracellular fluid, there will be no net movement o f water into or out of the cell, although water will sti ll move in and out. Blood
cells and plant cells (Figure 7) in hypertonic, isotonic, an d hypotonic solutions take on characteristic appearance s.
Practice Question

7.6.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43590
Figure 7. Osmotic pressure changes the shape of red blood cells in hypertonic, isotonic, and hypotonic solution s. The turgor
pressure within a plant cell depends on the tonicity o f the solution that it is bathed in. (credit: modific ation of work by Mariana
Ruiz Villareal)
A doctor injects a patient with what the doctor thinks is an isotonic saline solution. The patient dies, and an autopsy reveals that
many red blood cells have been destroyed. Do you think the solution the doctor injected was really isotonic?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”619831″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”619831″]No, it must have been hypoto nic as a hypotonic solution would cause water to ente r the cells, thereby
making them burst.[/hidden-answer]
Tonicity in Living Systems
In a hypotonic environment, water enters a cell, and the cell swells. In an isotonic condition, the relativ e concentrations of solute
and solvent are equal on both sides of the membrane. T here is no net water movement; therefore, there is no change in the size of
the cell. In a hypertonic solution, water leaves a cell and the cell shrinks. If either the hypo- or hyper- c ondition goes to excess, the
cell’s functions become compromised, and the cell may be destroyed.
A red blood cell will burst, or lyse, when it swells bey ond the plasma membrane’s capability to expand. Rem ember, the membrane
resembles a mosaic, with discrete spaces between the mol ecules composing it. If the cell swells, and the spaces b etween the lipids
and proteins become too large, the cell will break apart.
In contrast, when excessive amounts of water leave a r ed blood cell, the cell shrinks, or crenates. This h as the effect of
concentrating the solutes left in the cell, making t he cytosol denser and interfering with diffusion with in the cell. The cell’s ability
to function will be compromised and may also result in t he death of the cell.
Various living things have ways of controlling the ef fects of osmosis—a mechanism called osmoregulation. Some organisms, such
as plants, fungi, bacteria, and some protists, have cell walls that surround the plasma membrane and pre vent cell lysis in a
hypotonic solution. The plasma membrane can only exp and to the limit of the cell wall, so the cell will no t lyse. In fact, the
cytoplasm in plants is always slightly hypertonic to the cellular environment, and water will always enter a cell if water is
available. This inflow of water produces turgor pressure, which stiffens the cell walls of the plant (Figure 7). In nonwoody plants,
turgor pressure supports the plant. Conversly, if the plant is not watered, the extracellular fluid will be come hypertonic, causing
water to leave the cell. In this condition, the cell does not shrink because the cell wall is not flexibl e. However, the cell membrane
detaches from the wall and constricts the cytoplasm. T his is called plasmolysis. Plants lose turgor pressure i n this condition and
wilt (Figure 8).

7.6.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43590
Figure 8. Without adequate water, the plant on the l eft has lost turgor pressure, visible in its wilting; the turgor pressure is restored
by watering it (right). (credit: Victor M. Vicente Selvas)
Figure 9. A paramecium’s contractile vacuole, here vi sualized using bright field light microscopy at 480× m agnification,
continuously pumps water out of the organism’s body to keep it from bursting in a hypotonic medium. (credit: modification of
work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Tonicity is a concern for all living things. For exa mple, paramecia and amoebas, which are protists that lack cell walls, have
contractile vacuoles. This vesicle collects excess water from the cell and pumps it out, keeping the cell fr om lysing as it takes on
water from its environment (Figure 9).
Many marine invertebrates have internal salt levels matched to their environments, making them isotonic wi th the water in which
they live. Fish, however, must spend approximately five percent of their metabolic energy maintaining osmot ic homeostasis.
Freshwater fish live in an environment that is hypoton ic to their cells. These fish actively take in salt through their gills and excrete
diluted urine to rid themselves of excess water. Saltwater fish li ve in the reverse environment, which is hypertonic to their ce lls, and
they secrete salt through their gills and excrete highl y concentrated urine.
In vertebrates, the kidneys regulate the amount of wat er in the body. Osmoreceptors are specialized cells in the brain that monitor
the concentration of solutes in the blood. If the l evels of solutes increase beyond a certain range, a h ormone is released that retards
water loss through the kidney and dilutes the blood t o safer levels. Animals also have high concentrations of albumin, which is
produced by the liver, in their blood. This protein i s too large to pass easily through plasma membranes and is a major factor in
controlling the osmotic pressures applied to tissues.
Watch this review of osmosis and diffusionLearning Objectives

7.6.9 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43590
A YouTube element has been excluded from this versi on of the text. You can view it online here: pb.libret exts.org/biom1/?
p=220
In Summary: Passive Transport
No energy is required. The “driving force” is a diffe rence in the concentration of a substance on one sid e of the membrane
compared that on the other side.
Simple diffusion (O, CO, H 0. Water and nonpolar molecules).
Osmosis is a special kind of simple diffusion for water only.
Familiarize yourself with the terms hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic, and be able to indicate what either a plant or an animal
cell will look like if placed in a particular kind of solu tion.
Example: a plant cell has a cell wall and is full and happy when placed in water (a hypotonic solution). An animal cell d oes
not have a cell wall and will swell and burst if placed in wa ter. This is why a patient should never receive an IV i njection of
water: it will cause their red blood cells to burst.
Facilitated diffusion (sugars, ions, amino acids, etc. Cha rged or polar molecules).
Carrier proteins
Channel proteins (such as ion channels or aquaporin)
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Diffusion and Osmosis. Authored by: Sal Khan. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at: https://www.khanacademy.org/testprep/mcat/cells/transport-across-a-cell-membrane/v/d iffusion-and-osmosis. License: CC BY-NC-SA: AttributionNonCommercial-ShareAlike
Public domain content
Dispersion. Authored by: CTho. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dispersion.gif. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
7.6: Passive Transport is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2 2 2

7.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435917.7: Active Transport
Active transport mechanisms require the use of the cell’s energy, usual ly in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). If a
substance must move into the cell against its concent ration gradient—that is, if the concentration of th e substance inside the cell is
greater than its concentration in the extracellular fluid (and vice versa)—the cell must use energy to move the substance. Some
active transport mechanisms move small-molecular weight materials, such as ions, through the membrane. Other me chanisms
transport much larger molecules.
Electrochemical Gradient
We have discussed simple concentration gradients—diff erential concentrations of a substance across a spa ce or a membrane—but
in living systems, gradients are more complex. Becau se ions move into and out of cells and because cell s contain proteins that do
not move across the membrane and are mostly negative ly charged, there is also an electrical gradient, a d ifference of charge, across
the plasma membrane. The interior of living cells i s electrically negative with respect to the extracell ular fluid in which they are
bathed, and at the same time, cells have higher conce ntrations of potassium (K) and lower concentrations of sodium (Na) than
does the extracellular fluid. So in a living cell, th e concentration gradient of Na tends to drive it int o the cell, and the electrical
gradient of Na (a positive ion) also tends to drive it inward to the negatively charged interior. The situa tion is more complex,
however, for other elements such as potassium. The elec trical gradient of K, a positive ion, also tends to drive it into the cell, but
the concentration gradient of K tends to drive K out of the cell (Figure 1). The combined gradient of co ncentration and electrical
charge that affects an ion is called its electrochemical gradient.
Figure 1. Electrochemical gradients arise from the com bined effects of concentration gradients and electric al gradients. (credit:
“Synaptitude”/Wikimedia Commons)
Injection of a potassium solution into a person’s b lood is lethal; this is used in capital punishment a nd euthanasia. Why do you
think a potassium solution injection is lethal?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”900539″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”900539″]Cells typically have a hig h concentration of potassium in the cytoplasm and ar e bathed in a high
concentration of sodium. Injection of potassium dissi pates this electrochemical gradient. In heart muscle, the sodium/potassium
potential is responsible for transmitting the signal that causes the muscle to contract. When this pote ntial is dissipated, the signal+ +
Practice Question

7.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43591can’t be transmitted, and the heart stops beating. Po tassium injections are also used to stop the heart f rom beating during surgery.
[/hidden-answer]
Moving Against a Gradient
To move substances against a concentration or electro chemical gradient, the cell must use energy. This ene rgy is harvested from
ATP generated through the cell’s metabolism. Active transport mechanisms, collectively called pumps, work against
electrochemical gradients. Small substances constantly pa ss through plasma membranes. Active transport maintains c oncentrations
of ions and other substances needed by living cells i n the face of these passive movements. Much of a cell’ s supply of metabolic
energy may be spent maintaining these processes. (Most o f a red blood cell’s metabolic energy is used to main tain the imbalance
between exterior and interior sodium and potassium le vels required by the cell.) Because active transport me chanisms depend on a
cell’s metabolism for energy, they are sensitive to many m etabolic poisons that interfere with the supply of ATP.
Two mechanisms exist for the transport of small-molec ular weight material and small molecules. Primary active transport moves
ions across a membrane and creates a difference in c harge across that membrane, which is directly depende nt on ATP. Secondary
active transport describes the movement of material that is due to t he electrochemical gradient established by primary active
transport that does not directly require ATP.
Carrier Proteins for Active Transport
An important membrane adaption for active transport is the presence of specific carrier proteins or pump s to facilitate movement:
there are three types of these proteins or transporters (Figure 2). A uniporter carries one specific ion or molecule. A symporter
carries two different ions or molecules, both in the s ame direction. An antiporter also carries two different ions or molecules, but
in different directions. All of these transporters can also transport small, uncharged organic molecules lik e glucose. These three
types of carrier proteins are also found in facilita ted diffusion, but they do not require ATP to work in that process. Some examples
of pumps for active transport are Na K ATPase, which carr ies sodium and potassium ions, and H K ATPase, which car ries
hydrogen and potassium ions. Both of these are antipor ter carrier proteins. Two other carrier proteins are Ca2 ATPase and H
ATPase, which carry only calcium and only hydrogen ions, r espectively. Both are pumps.
Figure 2. A uniporter carries one molecule or ion. A symporter carries two different molecules or ions, both in the same direction.
An antiporter also carries two different molecules or ions, but in different directions. (credit: modificat ion of work by
“Lupask”/Wikimedia Commons)
Primary Active Transport
The primary active transport that functions with the active transport of sodium and potassium allows secon dary active transport to
occur. The second transport method is still conside red active because it depends on the use of energy a s does primary transport
(Figure 3).+– + +– +

7.7.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43591
Figure 3. Primary active transport moves ions across a mem brane, creating an electrochemical gradient (electr ogenic transport).
(credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villa real)
One of the most important pumps in animals cells is the sodium-potassium pump (Na -K ATPase), which maintains th e
electrochemical gradient (and the correct concentra tions of Na and K) in living cells. The sodium-potass ium pump moves K into
the cell while moving Na+ out at the same time, at a r atio of three Na for every two K ions moved in. The Na - K ATPase exists
in two forms, depending on its orientation to the inter ior or exterior of the cell and its affinity for eit her sodium or potassium ions.
The process consists of the following six steps.
1. With the enzyme oriented towards the interior of the ce ll, the carrier has a high affinity for sodium ions. Three i ons bind to the
protein.
2. ATP is hydrolyzed by the protein carrier and a low-ener gy phosphate group attaches to it.
3. As a result, the carrier changes shape and re-orients itself to wards the exterior of the membrane. The protein’s affini ty for
sodium decreases and the three sodium ions leave the ca rrier.
4. The shape change increases the carrier’s affinity f or potassium ions, and two such ions attach to the protei n. Subsequently, the
low-energy phosphate group detaches from the carrier.
5. With the phosphate group removed and potassium ions attac hed, the carrier protein repositions itself towards the inte rior of the
cell.
6. The carrier protein, in its new configuration, has a decre ased affinity for potassium, and the two ions are released i nto the
cytoplasm. The protein now has a higher affinity for sodium ions, and the process starts again.
Several things have happened as a result of this proc ess. At this point, there are more sodium ions outside o f the cell than inside and
more potassium ions inside than out. For every three i ons of sodium that move out, two ions of potassium mov e in. This results in
the interior being slightly more negative relative to the exterior. This difference in charge is importa nt in creating the conditions
necessary for the secondary process. The sodium-potassi um pump is, therefore, an electrogenic pump (a pump t hat creates a charge
imbalance), creating an electrical imbalance across the m embrane and contributing to the membrane potential.
Secondary Active Transport (Co-transport)
Secondary active transport brings sodium ions, and possib ly other compounds, into the cell. As sodium ion concen trations build
outside of the plasma membrane because of the action of the primary active transport process, an electro chemical gradient is
created. If a channel protein exists and is open, th e sodium ions will be pulled through the membrane. Thi s movement is used to
transport other substances that can attach themselve s to the transport protein through the membrane (Fig ure 4). Many amino acids,
as well as glucose, enter a cell this way. This seconda ry process is also used to store high-energy hydroge n ions in the mitochondria
of plant and animal cells for the production of ATP. The potential energy that accumulates in the store d hydrogen ions is translated
into kinetic energy as the ions surge through the chan nel protein ATP synthase, and that energy is used to co nvert ADP into ATP.+ +

7.7.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43591An electrochemical gradient, created by primary activ e transport, can move other substances against thei r concentration
gradients, a process called co-transport or secondary act ive transport.
Figure 4. (credit: modification of work by Mariana R uiz Villareal)
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”483973″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”483973″]A decrease in pH means an i ncrease in positively charged H ions, and an increa se in the electrical
gradient across the membrane. The transport of amino acids into the cell will increase.[/hidden-answer]
In Summary: Active Transport
Energy is required.
Primary active transport (ATP is the “driving force”).
Secondary active transport (the energy is provided by an electrochemical gradient).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
7.7: Active Transport is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Practice Question

7.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435927.8: Membranes and Transport
Now that we’ve learned about active and passive transpo rt separately, let’s review both topics together. In addition to reviewing the
ways transport works across membranes, this video will disc uss the reasons cells must be selectively permeable.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=224
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
In Da Club - Membranes & Transport: Crash Course Biology #5. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at:
https://youtu.be/dPKvHrD1eS4. Project: Crash Course Biology. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard
YouTube License
7.8: Membranes and Transport is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435937.9: Introduction to Endocytosis and Exocytosis
Describe the primary mechanisms by which cells import and export macromolecules
In addition to moving small ions and molecules thro ugh the membrane, cells also need to remove and take in larger molecules and
particles. Some cells are even capable of engulfing e ntire unicellular microorganisms. You might have cor rectly hypothesized that
the uptake and release of large particles by the cell requires energy. A large particle, however, cannot pa ss through the membrane,
even with energy supplied by the cell.
There are two primary mechanisms that transport these large particles: endocytosis and exocytosis.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe endocytosis and identify different varieties of import, including phagocytosis, pinocytosis, and recept or-mediated
endocytosis
Identify the steps of exocytosis
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Endocytosis
Exocytosis
Self Check: Endocytosis and Exocytosis
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
7.9: Introduction to Endocytosis and Exocytosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435817.10: Endocytosis
Endocytosis is a type of active transport that moves particles, such as large molecules, parts of cells, and even whol e cells, into a
cell. There are different variations of endocytosis, but all share a common characteristic: the plasma membr ane of the cell
invaginates, forming a pocket around the target par ticle. The pocket pinches off, resulting in the partic le being contained in a newly
created intracellular vesicle formed from the plasma mem brane.
Phagocytosis
Figure 1. In phagocytosis, the cell membrane surrounds t he particle and engulfs it. (credit: Mariana Ruiz Vi llareal)
Phagocytosis (the condition of “cell eating”) is the p rocess by which large particles, such as cells or rela tively large particles, are
taken in by a cell. For example, when microorganisms invade the human body, a type of white blood cell ca lled a neutrophil will
remove the invaders through this process, surrounding and engulfing the microorganism, which is then destroye d by the neutrophil
(Figure 1).
In preparation for phagocytosis, a portion of the in ward-facing surface of the plasma membrane becomes co ated with a protein
called clathrin, which stabilizes this section of the membrane. The coated portion of the membrane then extends from t he body of
the cell and surrounds the particle, eventually enclo sing it. Once the vesicle containing the particle is enclosed within the cell, the
clathrin disengages from the membrane and the vesicl e merges with a lysosome for the breakdown of the mate rial in the newly
formed compartment (endosome). When accessible nutrie nts from the degradation of the vesicular contents have been extracted,
the newly formed endosome merges with the plasma membran e and releases its contents into the extracellular fluid. The endosomal
membrane again becomes part of the plasma membrane.
Pinocytosis
Figure 2. In pinocytosis, the cell membrane invaginate s, surrounds a small volume of fluid, and pinches off. (credit: Mariana Ruiz
Villareal)

7.10.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43581A variation of endocytosis is called pinocytosis. Th is literally means “cell drinking” and was named at a time when the assumption
was that the cell was purposefully taking in extracellu lar fluid. In reality, this is a process that takes in molecules, including water,
which the cell needs from the extracellular fluid. Pin ocytosis results in a much smaller vesicle than does phagocytosis, and the
vesicle does not need to merge with a lysosome (Figure 2).
A variation of pinocytosis is called potocytosis. Thi s process uses a coating protein, called caveolin, on t he cytoplasmic side of the
plasma membrane, which performs a similar function to c lathrin. The cavities in the plasma membrane that fo rm the vacuoles have
membrane receptors and lipid rafts in addition to caveoli n.
The vacuoles or vesicles formed in caveolae (singular caveola) are smaller than those in pinocytosis. Potoc ytosis is used to bring
small molecules into the cell and to transport thes e molecules through the cell for their release on the other side of the cell, a
process called transcytosis.
Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis
Figure 3. In receptor-mediated endocytosis, uptake of substances by the cell is targeted to a single type of su bstance that binds to
the receptor on the external surface of the cell mem brane. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Rui z Villareal)
A targeted variation of endocytosis employs recepto r proteins in the plasma membrane that have a specifi c binding affinity for
certain substances (Figure 3).
In receptor-mediated endocytosis, as in phagocytosi s, clathrin is attached to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane. If
uptake of a compound is dependent on receptor-media ted endocytosis and the process is ineffective, the material will not be
removed from the tissue fluids or blood. Instead, it will stay in those fluids and increase in concentration.
Some human diseases are caused by the failure of rece ptor-mediated endocytosis. For example, the form of chol esterol termed lowdensity lipoprotein or LDL (also referred to as “bad” cholesterol) is removed from the blood by receptor-m ediated endocytosis. In
the human genetic disease familial hypercholesterol emia, the LDL receptors are defective or missing entir ely. People with this
condition have life-threatening levels of cholesterol in their blood, because their cells cannot clear LDL parti cles from their blood.
Although receptor-mediated endocytosis is designed to bring specific substances that are normally found in the extracellular fluid
into the cell, other substances may gain entry into th e cell at the same site. Flu viruses, diphtheria, and c holera toxin all have sites
that cross-react with normal receptor-binding sites and gain entry into cells.
Cells perform three main types of endocytosis. Phago cytosis is the process by which cells ingest large par ticles, including other
cells, by enclosing the particles in an extension of the cell membrane and budding off a new vesicle. Durin g pinocytosis, cells
take in molecules such as water from the extracellular fluid. Finally, receptor-mediated endocytosis is a t argeted version of
endocytosis where receptor proteins in the plasma mem brane ensure only specific, targeted substances are broug ht into the cell.Learning Objectives

7.10.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43581Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
7.10: Endocytosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435827.11: Exocytosis
The reverse process of moving material into a cell is the process of exocytosis. Exocytosis is the opposi te of the processes
discussed in the last section in that its purpose i s to expel material from the cell into the extracell ular fluid. Waste material is
enveloped in a membrane and fuses with the interior of the plasma membrane. This fusion opens the membra nous envelope on the
exterior of the cell, and the waste material is expel led into the extracellular space (Figure 1). Other exam ples of cells releasing
molecules via exocytosis include the secretion of pr oteins of the extracellular matrix and secretion of neurotransmitters into the
synaptic cleft by synaptic vesicles.
Figure 1. In exocytosis, vesicles containing substances fuse with the plasma membrane. The contents are then rele ased to the
exterior of the cell. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
A summary of the cellular transport methods discusse d is contained in Table 1, which also includes the ene rgy requirements and
materials transported by each.
Table 1. Methods of Transport, Energy Requirements, an d Types of Material Transported
Transport Method Active/Passive Material Transported
Diffusion Passive Small-molecular weight material
Osmosis Passive Water
Facilitated transport/diffusion Passive Sodium, potassium, cal cium, glucose
Primary active transport Active Sodium, potassium, calcium
Secondary active transport Active Amino acids, lactose
Phagocytosis ActiveLarge macromolecules, whole cells, or
cellular structures
Pinocytosis and potocytosis Active Small molecules (liquids/ water)
Receptor-mediated endocytosis Active Large quantities o f macromolecules
Exocytosis ActiveWaste materials, proteins for the
extracellular matrix, neurotransmitters

7.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43582In Summary: Exocytosis
Exocytosis in many ways is the reverse process from e ndocytosis. Here cells expel material through the fusio n of vesicles with the
plasma membrane and subsequent dumping of their content into the extracellular fluid.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
7.11: Exocytosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435837.12: Putting It Together- Cell Membranes
Let’s return to our discussion of cystic fibrosis. Cysti c fibrosis (CF) is caused by a defect in a single tran smembrane protein: cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), as seen in Figure 1. This regulator is a chloride io n channel that crosses
through the plasma membrane. This channel is specifical ly active in epithelial tissues where it normally hel ps produce thin mucus
via the movement of water. When mutated, the channel does not work properly and mucus becomes thick and vi scous. This in turn
leads directly to many of the symptoms of CF: thick, st icky mucus, frequent chest infections, and coughing or s hortness of breath.
Figure 1. Panel 1 shows a properly working CFTR protein. Panel 2 shows a malfunctioning CFTR protein.
Treatment
Cystic fibrosis is a difficult disease to treat. As we me ntioned at the beginning of the module, patients with CF often suffer lung
infections and sometimes require lung transplants. In a ddition to this, many CF patients are on one or more a ntibiotics at all times
—even when healthy—to suppress infection. Several mech anical techniques are used to dislodge sputum and en courage its
expectoration. In the hospital setting, chest physioth erapy is utilized. As lung disease worsens, mechanical b reathing support may
become necessary. Bi-lateral lung transplantation oft en becomes necessary for individuals with cystic fibro sis as lung function and
exercise tolerance declines.
Gene therapy has been explored as a potential cure fo r cystic fibrosis. Ideally, gene therapy attempts to p lace a normal copy of the
CFTR gene into affected cells. Transferring the norm al CFTR gene into the affected epithelium cells would result in the production
of functional CFTR in all target cells, without adver se reactions or an inflammation response. Studies hav e shown that to prevent
the lung manifestations of cystic fibrosis, only 5–10 per cent the normal amount of CFTR gene expression is neede d.
Finally, a number of small molecules that aim at comp ensating various mutations of the CFTR gene are unde r development. About
10 percent of CF cases result from a premature stop codon in the DNA, leading to early termination of prote in synthesis and
truncated proteins. One approach to combating a faulty receptor is to develop drugs that get the ribosome to overcome this
premature stop codon and synthesize a full-length CFTR p rotein.
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
Cystic Fibrosis on the Mayo Clinic
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision and Modification. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BYSA: Attribution-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previouslyTry It

7.12.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43583Cystic Fibrosis. Provided by: Boundless. Located at: https://courses.lumenlearning.com/boundless-ap/. License: CC BY-SA:
Attribution-ShareAlike
CFTR Protein Panels. Authored by: Lbudd14. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CFTR_Protein_Panels.sv g. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
7.12: Putting It Together- Cell Membranes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435847.13: Assignment- Membranes Alive!
For this assessment you will conduct a kitchen science experiment in which you study the movement of materi als into and out of
cells. Individual cells are generally too small to see; however, a chicken egg is actually a single cell. Please note that on the whole
this lab will take you 3 days to complete. However, there is less than 1 hour of ‘hands-on’ work on the first and last days.
Use the Membrane Lab procedure for your experimental set up.
When complete, write a lab report in MLA format that includ es the following sections.
Introduction
Hypotheses
Materials and Methods
Results
Discussion
Conclusion
References
Use this example to give you an idea of how your experiment may look in progress, and to help with completing your lab report.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment has been proofread and does not contain any majo r spelling or grammatical errors
Assignment includes appropriate references
Assignment is formatted throughout using the MLA style.
Assignment includes all the identified components of a lab report (hypothesis, materials and methods, results, disc ussion,
conclusion). Images and tables are included where required and as appropriate.
Rubric
Membranes Alive!
Outcome: Describe and explain the structure and funct ion of membranes

7.13.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43584Membranes Alive!
Criteria Ratings Pts
Introduction and
conclusion sections
discuss how a membrane
is selectively permeable
and how the
experimental results
demonstrate that.Introduction and
conclusion sections
address selectively
permeable nature of
membranes and
experimental results in
detail.
5.0 ptsIntroduction and
conclusion sections
address selectively
permeable nature of
membranes and
experimental results.
4.0 ptsIntroduction and/or
conclusion sections lack
sufficient detail or do not
connect to the
experiment and results.
0.0 pts5 pts
Discussion and
conclusion section
address the movement of
the tested substances
across the membrane.Movement of tested
substances addressed
correctly and in detail in
both discussion and
conclusion sections.
Illustrations may be
included.
5.0 ptsMovement of tested
substances addressed
correctly in both
discussion and
conclusion sections.
4.0 ptsMovement of tested
substances not addressed
correctly in both
discussion and
conclusion sections.
0.0 pts5 pts
Proper terminology is
used to demonstrate an
understanding of
transport mechanisms
and how substances
move across membranes
in different types of
solutions. Both direction
and relative speed of
transport is discussed.Terminology is used
accurately and
speed/direction are
discussed correctly and
in detail. Illustrations
may be included.
5.0 ptsTerminology is used
accurately and
speed/direction are
discussed correctly.
Illustrations may be
included.
4.0 ptsTerminology is used
incorrectly; direction
and/or speed are not
correctly discussed.
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 15
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Performance Assessment: Membranes Alive!. Authored by: Shelli Carter. Provided by: Columbia Basin College. Located at:
https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
7.13: Assignment- Membranes Alive! is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Module 6- Metabolic Pathways
8.1: Why It Matters- Metabolic Pathways
8.2: Introduction to Redox Reactions
8.3: Electrons and Energy
8.4: ATP in Living Systems
8.5: Introduction to Photosynthesis
8.6: An Overview of Photosynthesis
8.7: Spectrums of Light
8.8: Light-Dependent Reactions
8.9: Light-Independent Reactions
8.10: Photosynthesis
8.11: Introduction to Cellular Respiration
8.12: Glycolysis
8.13: Pyruvate Oxidation
8.14: Citric Acid Cycle
8.15: Electron Transport Chain
8.16: Cellular Respiration
8.17: Introduction to Fermentation
8.18: Metabolism without Oxygen
8.19: Types of Fermentation
8.20: Putting It Together- Metabolic Pathways
8.21: Assignment- Observing Energy Transactions
8: Module 6- Metabolic Pathways is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436058.1: Why It Matters- Metabolic Pathways
Why explain the metabolic pathways involved in the capture and release of energy in cells?
Every time you move—or even breathe—you’re using en ergy. All living things are continually using energy; thus, they need a way
to create or obtain new energy. Two of these ways are photosyn thesis and cellular respiration.
Plants (and other autotrophs) undergo photosynthesis t o create energy. Humans (and other heterotrophs) on the other hand must
consume something that has energy (like plants or o ther animals)—we take this energy and convert it int o a form our body can use.
This process is known as cellular respiration.
Watch this 5 minute video for an overview of why even small changes in the global climate have the potent ial for big impacts on
our daily lives through our food sources.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=238
What role does farming play in giving us energy to use e very day?
How do plants get energy to grow, and how do we then get our ener gy from them?
Ok, let’s see where we get all the energy to stay awake durin g biology class!
Learning Outcomes
Understand the role movement of electrons plays in energy ex changes in cells
Identify the basic components and steps of photosynthesis
Identify the reactants and products of cellular respirati on and where these reactions occur in a cell
Illustrate the basic components and steps of fermentati on
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: Metabolic Pathways. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
All rights reserved content
Withering Crops -- Changing Planet. Authored by: National Science Foundation. Located at: https://youtu.be/cBqr43QbfBE.
License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
8.1: Why It Matters- Metabolic Pathways is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436088.2: Introduction to Redox Reactions
Understand the role movement of electrons plays in energy exchanges in cells
Energy production within a cell involves many coordi nated chemical pathways. Most of these pathways are co mbinations of
oxidation and reduction reactions. Oxidation and redu ction occur in tandem. An oxidation reaction strips a n electron from an atom
in a compound, and the addition of this electron to another compound is a reduction reaction. Because ox idation and reduction
usually occur together, these pairs of reactions are cal led oxidation reduction reactions, or redox reactions.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Relate the movement of electrons to oxidation-reducti on (redox) reactions
Describe how cells store and transfer free energy using ATP
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Electrons and Energy
ATP in Living Systems
Self Check: Redox Reactions
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.2: Introduction to Redox Reactions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436098.3: Electrons and Energy
Let’s imagine that you are a cell. You’ve just been given a b ig, juicy glucose molecule, and you’d like to convert some of the energy in this glucose molecule into a more usable form, one that you
can use to power your metabolic reactions. How can you go about this? What’s the best way for you to squeeze as much energy as p ossible out of that glucose molecule, and to capture this ener gy in
a handy form?
Fortunately for us, our cells—and those of other living orga nisms—are excellent at harvesting energy from glucose and ot her organic molecules, such as fats and amino acids. Here, we’l l go through
a quick overview of how cells break down fuels, then look at the electr on transfer reactions (redox reactions) that are key to this process.
Overview of Fuel Breakdown Pathways
The reactions that allow energy to be extracted from mole cules such as glucose, fats, and amino acids are called catabolic reactions, meaning that they involve breaking a larger molecule into
smaller pieces. For example, when glucose is broken down in t he presence of oxygen, it’s converted into six carbon dioxide molecules and six water molecules. The overall reaction fo r this process
can be written as:
\text{C}_6\text{H}_{12}\text{O}_6+6\text{O}_2\to{6} \text{CO}_2+6\text{H}_2\text{O}\,\,\,\,\,\,\,\,\,\, \Delta{G}=-686\text{kcal/mol}
This reaction, as written, is simply a combustion reaction, simila r to what takes place when you burn a piece of wood in a firepl ace or gasoline in an engine. Does this mean that glucose is
continually combusting inside of your cells? Thankfully, not q uite! The combustion reaction describes the overall process t hat takes place, but inside of a cell, this process is broken do wn into many
smaller steps. Energy contained in the bonds of glucose is re leased in small bursts, and some of it can be captured in the for m of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a small molecule that is used to
power reactions in the cell. Much of the energy from glucose is stil l lost as heat, but enough is captured to keep the metabolism of the ce ll running.
As a glucose molecule is gradually broken down, some of the breakd owns steps release energy that is captured directly as AT P. In these steps, a phosphate group is transferred from a pathway
intermediate straight to ADP, a process known as substrate-level phosphorylation. Many more steps, however, produce ATP in an indirect way. In t hese steps, electrons from glucose are
transferred to small molecules known as electron carriers. The electron carriers take the electrons to a group of proteins in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion, called the e lectron transport
chain. As electrons move through the electron transport chain, they go from a higher to a lower energy level and are ul timately passed to oxygen (forming water). Energy released in the electron
transport chain is captured as a proton gradient, which powers pro duction of ATP by a membrane protein called ATP synthase. T his process is known as oxidative phosphorylation. A simplified
diagram of oxidative and substrate-level phosphorylation is shown bel ow.
Image modified from “ Etc4” by Fvasconcellos (public domain).
When organic fuels like glucose are broken down using an elect ron transport chain that ends with oxygen, the breakdown proce ss is known as aerobic respiration (aerobic = oxygen-requiring).
Most eukaryotic cells, as well as many bacteria and other prokary otes, can carry out aerobic respiration. Some prokaryotes have pathways similar to aerobic respiration, but with a different i norganic
molecule, such as sulfur, substituted for oxygen. These pathwa ys are not oxygen-dependent, so the breakdown process is call ed anaerobic respiration (anaerobic = non-oxygen-requiring).
Officially, both processes are examples of cellular respiration, the breakdown of down organic fuels using an electron tran sport chain. However, cellular respiration is commonly used as a
synonym for aerobic respiration, and we’ll use it that way here.
Redox Reactions
Cellular respiration involves many reactions in which elect rons are passed from one molecule to another. Reactions invo lving electron transfers are known as oxidation-reduction reactions (or
redox reactions), and they play a central role in the metabolism of a cell. In a redox reaction, one of the reacting molecules l oses electrons and is said to be oxidized, while another reacting
molecule gains electrons (the ones lost by the first molecul e) and is said to be reduced. You can remember what oxidation and reduction mean with t he handy mnemonic “LEO goes GER”: Lose
Electrons, Oxidized; Gain Electrons, Reduced. The formation of magnesium chloride is one simple example of a redox reaction:
\text{Mg}+\text{Cl}_2\to\text{Mg}^{2+}+2\text{Cl}^{ -}
In this reaction, the magnesium atom loses two electrons, so it is oxidized. These two electrons are accepted by chlori ne, which is reduced. The atom or molecule that donates el ectrons (in this case,
magnesium) is called the reducing agent, because its donation of electrons allows another molecule to become reduced. The atom or molecule that accepts the elec trons (in this case, chlorine) is
known as the oxidizing agent, because its acceptance of electrons allows the other molecule t o become oxidized.
Redox Reactions with Carbon-containing Molecules
When a reaction involves the formation of ions, as in the exam ple with magnesium and chlorine above, it’s relatively easy to see that electrons are being transferred. Not all redox reactions involve
the complete transfer of electrons, though, and this is particu larly true of reactions important in cellular metabolism. I nstead, some redox reactions simply change the amount of elec tron density on a
particular atom by altering how it shares electrons in covalent bond s. As an example, let’s consider the combustion of butane:
[1]

8.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43609
Butane: [latex]2\text{C}_4\text{H}_{10}+13\text{O}_2\to8\ text{CO}_2+10\text{H}_2\text{O}[/latex]
What’s the electron-sharing situation at the start of the re action? In butane, the carbon atoms are all bonded to other carbons and hydrogens. In
\text{C}-\text{C} bonds, electrons are shared equally, and
in
\text{C}-\text{H} bonds, the
\text{C} atom has a very slight negative charge (since it’s a bit m ore electronegative than hydrogen). Similarly, when oxyge ns are bonded to one another in
\text{O}_2, start
subscript, 2, end subscript, electrons are shared very equally. After the reaction, however, the electron-sharing picture l ooks quite different. Oxygen is much more electronegative than carbon, so the
in the
\text{C}=\text{O} bonds of carbon dioxide, oxygen will “hog” the bond elect rons. In the
\text{O}-\text{H} bonds of water, oxygen will similarly pull electrons away from the hydrogen atoms. Thus,
relative to its state before the reaction, carbon has lost electron density (because oxygen is now hogging its electrons), while oxygen has gained electron density (because it can now hog electrons
shared with other elements). It’s thus reasonable to say that car bon was oxidized during this reaction, while oxygen was reduced. (Hydrogen arguably loses a little electron density too, tho ugh its
electrons were being hogged to some degree in either case.) B iologists often refer to whole molecules, rather than individua l atoms, as being reduced or oxidized; thus, we can say that b utane—the
source of the carbons—is oxidized, while molecular oxygen—the source o f the oxygen atoms—is reduced.
It’s important to understand that oxidation and reduction re actions are fundamentally about the transfer of electrons. In the context of biology, however, you may find it helpful to use the gain or loss
of H and O atoms as a proxy for the transfer of electrons. As a ge neral rule of thumb, if a carbon-containing molecule g ains H atoms or loses O atoms during a reaction, it’s likely been reduced
(gained electrons). Conversely, if it loses H atoms or gains O at oms, it’s probably been oxidized (lost electrons). For example, let’s go back to the reaction for glucose breakdown,
\text{C}_6\text{H}_{12}\text{O}_6+6\text{O}_2\to{6} \text{CO}_2+6\text{H}_2\text{O}. In glucose, carbon is associated with H atoms, while in carbon d ioxide, no Hs are present. Thus, we would predict that glucose is oxidized
in this reaction.
We can confirm this if we look at the actual electron shifts involve d, as in the video below:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the t ext. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org/biom1/?p=24 2
Energy in Redox Reactions
Click on the image for a larger view. Image based on similar diag ram by
Ryan Gutierrez.
Like other chemical reactions, redox reactions involve a free energy change. Reactions that move the system from a h igher to a lower energy state are spontaneous and release ener gy, while those
that do the opposite require an input of energy. In redox re actions, energy is released when an electron loses potenti al energy as a result of the transfer. Electrons have more pot ential energy when
they are associated with less electronegative atoms (such as C or H), and less potential energy when they are associated with a more electronegative atom (such as O). Thus, a redox reactio n that
moves electrons or electron density from a less to a more el ectronegative atom will be spontaneous and release energy. For instance, the combustion of butane (above) releases energy b ecause there
is a net shift of electron density away from carbon and hydrog en and onto oxygen. If you’ve heard it said that molecules like glucose have “high-energy” electrons, this is a reference to the relatively
high potential energy of the electrons in their
\text{C}-\text{C} and
\text{C}-\text{H} bonds.
Quite a bit of energy can be released when electrons in
\text{C}-\text{C} and
\text{C}-\text{H} bonds are shifted to oxygen. In a cell, however, it’s not a g reat idea to release all that energy at once in a
combustion reaction. Instead, cells harvest energy from glu cose in a controlled fashion, capturing as much of it as possi ble in the form of ATP. This is accomplished by oxidizing gl ucose in a
gradual, rather than an explosive, sort of way. There are two impor tant ways in which this oxidation is gradual:
Rather than pulling all the electrons off of glucose at the same time, cellular respiration strips them away in pairs. The redox reactions that re move electron pairs from glucose transfer them to
small molecules called electron carriers.
The electron carriers deposit their electrons in the electron transport c hain, a series of proteins and organic molecules in the inner mito chondrial membrane. Electrons are passed from one
component to the next in a series of energy-releasing steps, allowing e nergy to be captured in the form of an electrochemical gradien t.
We’ll look at both redox carriers and the electron transport chai n in more detail below.
The removal of an electron from a molecule, oxidizing it, results in a decrease in potential energy in the oxidized co mpound. The electron (sometimes as part of a hydrogen atom), does not remain
unbonded, however, in the cytoplasm of a cell. Rather, the electron is shifted to a second compound, reducing the se cond compound. The shift of an electron from one compound to a nother removes
some potential energy from the first compound (the oxidize d compound) and increases the potential energy of the second com pound (the reduced compound). The transfer of electrons betwee n
molecules is important because most of the energy stored in atoms and used to fuel cell functions is in the form of high-ener gy electrons. The transfer of energy in the form of electrons allows the
cell to transfer and use energy in an incremental fashion— in small packages rather than in a single, destructive burst. This module focuses on the extraction of energy from food; y ou will see that as
you track the path of the transfers, you are tracking the path of e lectrons moving through metabolic pathways.
Electron Carriers
Electron carriers, sometimes called electron shuttles, are sma ll organic molecules that readily cycle between oxidized and reduced forms and are used to transport electrons during m etabolic
reactions. There are two electron carriers that play particu larly important roles during cellular respiration: NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, shown below) and FAD (flavin adenine
dinucleotide). Both NAD and FAD can serve as oxidizing agents, accepting a pair of electrons, along with one or more proto ns, to switch to their reduced forms. NAD accepts two electrons an d
one H to become NADH, while FAD accepts two electrons and two H t o become FADH. NAD is the primary electron carrier used during ce llular respiration, with FAD participating in just one
(or two sometimes two) reactions.+
2+

8.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43609
The oxidized form of the electron carrier (NAD) is shown on the left and the reduced form (NADH) is shown on the right. The nitrogenous
base in NADH has one more hydrogen ion and two more electrons than in NAD.
As shown in the image above, NAD is a small organic molecule wh ose structure includes the RNA nucleotide adenine. (FAD is a simil ar type of molecule, although its functional groups are
different.) Both molecules are B vitamin derivatives, with NAD produced from niacin and FAD produced from riboflavin. NAD and FAD are coenzymes, organic molecules that serve as helpers
during enzyme-catalyzed reactions, and they receive electron s and protons as part of these reactions. Specifically, both NAD an d FAD serve as cofactors for enzymes called dehydrogenases,
which remove one or more hydrogen atoms from their substrates.
Electron Transport Chain
In their reduced forms, NADH and FADH carry electrons to the el ectron transport chain in the inner mitochondrial membran e. They deposit their electrons at or near the beginning of t he transport
chain, and the electrons are then passed along from one prote in or organic molecule to the next in a predictable series of steps. Importantly, the movement of electrons through th e transport chain is
energetically “downhill,” such that energy is released at each step. In redox terms, this means that each member of the electron transport chain is more electronegative (electr on-hungry) that the one
before it, and less electronegative than the one after. NAD, which deposits its electrons at the beginning of the chain a s NADH, is the least electronegative, while oxygen, which receives the
electrons at the end of the chain (along with H) to form water, is the most elec tronegative. As electrons trickle “downhill” through the transport chai n, they release energy, and some of this energy is
captured in the form of an electrochemical gradient and used to make ATP.
1. Reece, J. B., Urry, L. A., Cain, M. L., Wasserman, S. A., Minorsky, P. V., and Ja ckson, R. B. (2011). Cellular respiration and fermentation. In Campbell biology (10th ed., pp. 162–184). San
Francisco, CA: Pearson. ↵
2. Ibid. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Introduction to cellular respiration and redox. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/cellular-respiration -and-fermentation/intro-to-cellularrespiration/a/intro-to-cellular-respiration-and-redox. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
Oxidation and reduction in cellular respiration. Authored by: Sal Khan. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/cellular-respiratio n-andfermentation/intro-to-cellular-respiration/v/oxidation-and-red uction-in-cellular-respiration. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
8.3: Electrons and Energy is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTe xts.+
[2] +

8.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436108.4: ATP in Living Systems
A living cell cannot store significant amounts of f ree energy. Excess free energy would result in an incr ease of heat in the cell,
which would result in excessive thermal motion that co uld damage and then destroy the cell. Rather, a cell must be able to handle
that energy in a way that enables the cell to store e nergy safely and release it for use only as needed. Living cells accomplish this
by using the compound adenosine triphosphate (ATP). A TP is often called the “energy currency” of the cell, and, like currency, this
versatile compound can be used to fill any energy need of the cell. How? It functions similarly to a rechargeable battery.
When ATP is broken down, usually by the removal of i ts terminal phosphate group, energy is released. The energy is used to do
work by the cell, usually by the released phosphate binding to another molecule, activating it. For examp le, in the mechanical work
of muscle contraction, ATP supplies the energy to mo ve the contractile muscle proteins. Recall the active transport work of the
sodium-potassium pump in cell membranes. ATP alters the structure of the integral protein that functions as the pump, changing its
affinity for sodium and potassium. In this way, the cell performs work, pumping ions against their electrochemica l gradients.
ATP Structure and Function
Figure 1. ATP (adenosine triphosphate) has three phospha te groups that can be removed by hydrolysis to form AD P (adenosine
diphosphate) or AMP (adenosine monophosphate).The nega tive charges on the phosphate group naturally repel e ach other,
requiring energy to bond them together and releasing energy when these bonds are broken.
At the heart of ATP is a molecule of adenosine monoph osphate (AMP), which is composed of an adenine molecule b onded to a
ribose molecule and to a single phosphate group (Fig ure 1). Ribose is a five-carbon sugar found in RNA, and AMP is one of the
nucleotides in RNA. The addition of a second phosphat e group to this core molecule results in the formati on of adenosine
diphosphate (ADP); the addition of a third phosphate group forms adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
The addition of a phosphate group to a molecule requ ires energy. Phosphate groups are negatively charged and thus repel one
another when they are arranged in series, as they are in ADP and ATP. This repulsion makes the ADP and ATP mol ecules inherently
unstable. The release of one or two phosphate groups from A TP, a process called dephosphorylation, releases energy.
Energy from ATP
Hydrolysis is the process of breaking complex macromol ecules apart. During hydrolysis, water is split, or lys ed, and the resulting
hydrogen atom (H) and a hydroxyl group (OH) are adde d to the larger molecule. The hydrolysis of ATP prod uces ADP, together
with an inorganic phosphate ion (P), and the release of free energy. To carry out life processes, ATP is con tinuously broken down
into ADP, and like a rechargeable battery, ADP is conti nuously regenerated into ATP by the reattachment of a third phosphate
group. Water, which was broken down into its hydrogen at om and hydroxyl group during ATP hydrolysis, is reg enerated when a
third phosphate is added to the ADP molecule, reforming AT P.
Obviously, energy must be infused into the system to re generate ATP. Where does this energy come from? In ne arly every living
thing on earth, the energy comes from the metabolism of glucose. In this way, ATP is a direct link between the limited set of
exergonic pathways of glucose catabolism and the multitud e of endergonic pathways that power living cells.
Phosphorylation
Recall that, in some chemical reactions, enzymes may bind to several substrates that react with each other o n the enzyme, forming
an intermediate complex. An intermediate complex is a temporary structure, and it allows one of the substr ates (such as ATP) and
reactants to more readily react with each other; in reactions involving ATP, ATP is one of the substrate s and ADP is a product.
During an endergonic chemical reaction, ATP forms an intermediate complex with the substrate and enzyme in the reaction. This+ –
i

8.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43610intermediate complex allows the ATP to transfer its t hird phosphate group, with its energy, to the substrate, a process called
phosphorylation. Phosphorylation refers to the addition of the phosphate (~P). This is illustrated by the following generic reaction:
A + enzyme + ATP → [A − enzyme − ~P] → B + enzyme + ADP + phosphate ion
When the intermediate complex breaks apart, the ene rgy is used to modify the substrate and convert it i nto a product of the
reaction. The ADP molecule and a free phosphate ion a re released into the medium and are available for re cycling through cell
metabolism.
Substrate Phosphorylation
ATP is generated through two mechanisms during the b reakdown of glucose. A few ATP molecules are generated (that is,
regenerated from ADP) as a direct result of the chemica l reactions that occur in the catabolic pathways. A ph osphate group is
removed from an intermediate reactant in the pathway, and the free energy of the reaction is used to add the third phosphate to an
available ADP molecule, producing ATP (Figure 2). This very direct method of phosphorylation is called substrate-level
phosphorylation.
Figure 2. In phosphorylation reactions, the gamma phosp hate of ATP is attached to a protein.
Oxidative Phosphorylation
Most of the ATP generated during glucose catabolism, h owever, is derived from a much more complex process, chemiosmosis,
which takes place in mitochondria (Figure 3) within a euka ryotic cell or the plasma membrane of a prokaryotic cell.
Figure 3. The mitochondria (Credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Chemiosmosis, a process of ATP production in cellular metabolism, is used to generate 90 percent of the ATP made duri ng glucose
catabolism and is also the method used in the light reactions of photosynthesis to harness the energy of sunlight. The production of
ATP using the process of chemiosmosis is called oxidative phosphorylation because of the involvement of oxygen in the process.
What happens when the critical reactions of cellular respiration do not proceed correctly? Mitochondria l diseases are genetic
disorders of metabolism. Mitochondrial disorders can arise from mutations in nuclear or mitochondrial DNA, a nd they result in
the production of less energy than is normal in bod y cells. In type 2 diabetes, for instance, the oxidat ion efficiency of NADH is
reduced, impacting oxidative phosphorylation but not the other steps of respiration. Symptoms of mitochond rial diseases can
include muscle weakness, lack of coordination, stroke -like episodes, and loss of vision and hearing. Most affect ed people areTry It

8.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43610diagnosed in childhood, although there are some adult -onset diseases. Identifying and treating mitochondr ial disorders is a
specialized medical field. The educational preparat ion for this profession requires a college education, followed by medical
school with a specialization in medical genetics. Medi cal geneticists can be board certified by the America n Board of Medical
Genetics and go on to become associated with professio nal organizations devoted to the study of mitochond rial diseases, such
as the Mitochondrial Medicine Society and the Society for Inh erited Metabolic Disease.
ATP functions as the energy currency for cells. It allo ws the cell to store energy briefly and transport it within the cell to
support endergonic chemical reactions. The structure of ATP is that of an RNA nucleotide with three phosp hates attached. As
ATP is used for energy, a phosphate group or two are de tached, and either ADP or AMP is produced. Energy derive d from
glucose catabolism is used to convert ADP into ATP. Wh en ATP is used in a reaction, the third phosphate is t emporarily
attached to a substrate in a process called phosphor ylation. The two processes of ATP regeneration that a re used in conjunction
with glucose catabolism are substrate-level phosphoryla tion and oxidative phosphorylation through the proc ess of
chemiosmosis.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.4: ATP in Living Systems is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

8.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436118.5: Introduction to Photosynthesis
Identify the basic components and steps of photosynthesis
The processes in all organisms—from bacteria to huma ns—require energy. To get this energy, many organism s access stored
energy by eating, that is, by ingesting other organi sms. But where does the stored energy in food origin ate? All of this energy can
be traced back to photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis is essential to all life on earth; both plants and animals depend on it. It is the only biol ogical process that can
capture energy that originates in outer space (sunl ight) and convert it into chemical compounds (carbo hydrates) that every organism
uses to power its metabolism. In brief, the energy of sunlight is captured and used to energize electrons, wh ich are then stored in
the covalent bonds of sugar molecules. How long lasting and stable are those covalent bonds? The energy extra cted today by the
burning of coal and petroleum products represents su nlight energy captured and stored by photosynthesis around 300 million years
ago.
Plants, algae, and a group of bacteria called cyanobact eria are the only organisms capable of performing pho tosynthesis (Figure 1).
Because they use light to manufacture their own food, they are called photoautotrophs (literally, “self-feeders using light”). Other
organisms, such as animals, fungi, and most other bacte ria, are termed heterotrophs (“other feeders”), because they must rely on
the sugars produced by photosynthetic organisms for their energy needs. A third very interesting group of bacteria synthesize
sugars, not by using sunlight’s energy, but by extrac ting energy from inorganic chemical compounds; henc e, they are referred to as
chemoautotrophs.
Figure 2. Photoautotrophs including (a) plants, (b) alg ae, and (c) cyanobacteria synthesize their organic co mpounds via
photosynthesis using sunlight as an energy source. Cyanoba cteria and planktonic algae can grow over enormous a reas in water, at
times completely covering the surface. In a (d) deep sea vent, chemoautotrophs, such as these (e) thermophili c bacteria, capture
energy from inorganic compounds to produce organic c ompounds. The ecosystem surrounding the vents has a diver se array of
animals, such as tubeworms, crustaceans, and octopuses that derive energy from the bacteria. (credit a: modifi cation of work by
Steve Hillebrand, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; cred it b: modification of work by “eutrophication&hypox ia”/Flickr; credit c:
modification of work by NASA; credit d: University of Washington, NOAA; credit e: modification of work by Mark Amend, West
Coast and Polar Regions Undersea Research Center, UAF, N OAA)

8.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43611
Figure 2. The energy stored in carbohydrate molecules from photosynthesis passes through the food chain. The pr edator that eats
these deer receives a portion of the energy that orig inated in the photosynthetic vegetation that the dee r consumed. (credit:
modification of work by Steve VanRiper, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
The importance of photosynthesis is not just that it can capture sunlight’s energy. A lizard sunning its elf on a cold day can use the
sun’s energy to warm up. Photosynthesis is vital becaus e it evolved as a way to store the energy in solar ra diation (the “photo” part)
as high-energy electrons in the carbon-carbon bonds of carbohydrate molecules (the “synthesis” part). Th ose carbohydrates are the
energy source that heterotrophs use to power the synt hesis of ATP via respiration. Therefore, photosynthesi s powers 99 percent of
Earth’s ecosystems. When a top predator, such as a wol f, preys on a deer (Figure 2), the wolf is at the end of an energy path that
went from nuclear reactions on the surface of the sun, to l ight, to photosynthesis, to vegetation, to deer, and final ly to wolf.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify the reactants and products of photosynthesis
Describe the visible and electromagnetic spectrums of l ight as they applies to photosynthesis
Describe the light-dependent reactions that take plac e during photosynthesis
Identify the light-independent reactions in photosynthesi s
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
An Overview of Photosynthesis
Spectrums of Light
Light-Dependent Reactions
Light-Independent Reactions
Photosynthesis
Self Check: Photosynthesis
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.5: Introduction to Photosynthesis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436128.6: An Overview of Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is a multi-step process that requires sunlight, carbon dioxide (which is low in energy), and water as substrates
(Figure 1). After the process is complete, it releases oxygen and produces glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GA3P), si mple
carbohydrate molecules (which are high in energy) tha t can subsequently be converted into glucose, sucro se, or any of dozens of
other sugar molecules. These sugar molecules contain en ergy and the energized carbon that all living things need t o survive.
Figure 1. Photosynthesis uses solar energy, carbon dioxide, and water to produce energy-storing carbohydrates. O xygen is
generated as a waste product of photosynthesis.
The following is the chemical equation for photosynthesi s (Figure 2):
Figure 2. The basic equation for photosynthesis is decept ively simple. In reality, the process takes place in ma ny steps involving
intermediate reactants and products. Glucose, the prim ary energy source in cells, is made from two three-car bon GA3Ps.
Although the equation looks simple, the many steps t hat take place during photosynthesis are actually qu ite complex. Before
learning the details of how photoautotrophs turn sunlig ht into food, it is important to become familiar with the structures involved.
In plants, photosynthesis generally takes place in lea ves, which consist of several layers of cells. The process o f photosynthesis
occurs in a middle layer called the mesophyll. The gas exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen occ urs through small, regulated
openings called stomata (singular: stoma), which also play roles in the reg ulation of gas exchange and water balance. The stomata

8.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43612are typically located on the underside of the leaf, which helps to minimize water loss. Each stoma is flank ed by guard cells that
regulate the opening and closing of the stomata by swel ling or shrinking in response to osmotic changes.
In all autotrophic eukaryotes, photosynthesis takes pl ace inside an organelle called a chloroplast. For plants, chloroplast-containing
cells exist in the mesophyll. Chloroplasts have a doubl e membrane envelope (composed of an outer membrane and an inner
membrane). Within the chloroplast are stacked, disc- shaped structures called thylakoids. Embedded in the thylakoid membrane is
chlorophyll, a pigment (molecule that absorbs light) responsible for the init ial interaction between light and plant material, an d
numerous proteins that make up the electron transport chain. The thylakoid membrane encloses an internal space called the
thylakoid lumen. As shown in Figure 3, a stack of thylakoids is calle d a granum, and the liquid-filled space surrounding the
granum is called stroma or “bed” (not to be confused with stoma or “mouth,” an ope ning on the leaf epidermis).
Figure 3. Photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts, which have an outer membrane and an inner membrane. Stack s of
thylakoids called grana form a third membrane layer.
On a hot, dry day, plants close their stomata to conserv e water. What impact will this have on photosynthesis?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”173275″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”173275″]Levels of carbon dioxide (a necessary photosynthetic substrate) will immediately fall. As a result, the
rate of photosynthesis will be inhibited.[/hidden-answer]
Two Parts of Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis takes place in two sequential stages: th e light-dependent reactions and the light independen t-reactions. In the lightdependent reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll an d that energy is converted into stored chemical ener gy. In
the light-independent reactions, the chemical energy harvested during the light-de pendent reactions drive the assembly of sugar
molecules from carbon dioxide. Therefore, although t he light-independent reactions do not use light as a reactant, they require the
products of the light-dependent reactions to functio n. In addition, several enzymes of the light-independ ent reactions are activated
by light. The light-dependent reactions utilize cert ain molecules to temporarily store the energy: Thes e are referred to as energy
carriers. The energy carriers that move energy from l ight-dependent reactions to light-independent react ions can be thought of as
“full” because they are rich in energy. After the ene rgy is released, the “empty” energy carriers return t o the light-dependent
reaction to obtain more energy. Figure 4 illustrates t he components inside the chloroplast where the light -dependent and lightindependent reactions take place.Practice Question

8.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43612
Figure 4. Photosynthesis takes place in two stages: light d ependent reactions and the Calvin cycle. Light-depen dent reactions,
which take place in the thylakoid membrane, use ligh t energy to make ATP and NADPH. The Calvin cycle, w hich takes place in the
stroma, uses energy derived from these compounds to make GA3P from CO.
Click the link to learn more about photosynthesis.
Figure 5. Foods that humans consume originate from photo synthesis. (credit: Associação Brasileira de Supermercado s)
Major grocery stores in the United States are organize d into departments, such as dairy, meats, produce, bread, cereals, and so forth.
Each aisle (Figure 5) contains hundreds, if not thousands, of different products for customers to buy and consume.
Although there is a large variety, each item links ba ck to photosynthesis. Meats and dairy link because the animals were fed plantbased foods. The breads, cereals, and pastas come larg ely from starchy grains, which are the seeds of photo synthesis-dependent
plants. What about desserts and drinks? All of these products contain sugar—sucrose is a plant product, a di saccharide, a
carbohydrate molecule, which is built directly from ph otosynthesis. Moreover, many items are less obviously d erived from plants:
for instance, paper goods are generally plant produc ts, and many plastics (abundant as products and pack aging) can be derived
from algae or from oil, the fossilized remains of p hotosynthetic organisms. Virtually every spice and f lavoring in the spice aisle
was produced by a plant as a leaf, root, bark, flower, f ruit, or stem. Ultimately, photosynthesis connects to e very meal and every
food a person consumes.
The process of photosynthesis transformed life on Ear th. By harnessing energy from the sun, photosynthesis ev olved to allow
living things access to enormous amounts of energy. Because of photosynthesis, living things gained acces s to sufficient energy
that allowed them to build new structures and achieve the bi odiversity evident today.2
Try It
Learning Objectives

8.6.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43612Only certain organisms, called photoautotrophs, can perf orm photosynthesis; they require the presence of chlo rophyll, a
specialized pigment that absorbs certain portions of t he visible spectrum and can capture energy from sunli ght. Photosynthesis
uses carbon dioxide and water to assemble carbohydra te molecules and release oxygen as a waste product in to the atmosphere.
Eukaryotic autotrophs, such as plants and algae, have organelles called chloroplasts in which photosynthe sis takes place, and
starch accumulates. In prokaryotes, such as cyanoba cteria, the process is less localized and occurs within folded membranes,
extensions of the plasma membrane, and in the cytoplasm.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.6: An Overview of Photosynthesis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436138.7: Spectrums of Light
How can light be used to make food? When a person turn s on a lamp, electrical energy becomes light energy. L ike all other forms
of kinetic energy, light can travel, change form, an d be harnessed to do work. In the case of photosynthesi s, light energy is
converted into chemical energy, which photoautotrophs use to build carbohydrate molecules. However, autotrophs only use a few
specific components of sunlight.
What Is Light Energy?
The sun emits an enormous amount of electromagnetic radiation (solar energy). Humans can see only a frac tion of this energy,
which portion is therefore referred to as “visible li ght.” The manner in which solar energy travels is desc ribed as waves. Scientists
can determine the amount of energy of a wave by measu ring its wavelength, the distance between consecutive points of a wave. A
single wave is measured from two consecutive points, such as from crest to crest or from trough to trough (Figure 1).
Figure 1. The wavelength of a single wave is the distan ce between two consecutive points of similar position (two crests or two
troughs) along the wave.
Visible light constitutes only one of many types of electromagnetic radiation emitted from the sun and other stars. Scientists
differentiate the various types of radiant energy f rom the sun within the electromagnetic spectrum. The electromagnetic spectrum is
the range of all possible frequencies of radiation (Figure 2). The difference between wavelengths relates t o the amount of energy
carried by them.

8.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43613
Figure 2. The sun emits energy in the form of electrom agnetic radiation. This radiation exists at different wavelengths, each of
which has its own characteristic energy. All electroma gnetic radiation, including visible light, is charact erized by its wavelength.
Each type of electromagnetic radiation travels at a particular wavelength. The longer the wavelength (or the more stretched out it
appears in the diagram), the less energy is carried. Sho rt, tight waves carry the most energy. This may seem il logical, but think of it
in terms of a piece of moving a heavy rope. It takes little effort by a person to move a rope in long, wi de waves. To make a rope
move in short, tight waves, a person would need to apply sign ificantly more energy.
The electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 2) shows several t ypes of electromagnetic radiation originating from the sun, including Xrays and ultraviolet (UV) rays. The higher-energy wave s can penetrate tissues and damage cells and DNA, explain ing why both Xrays and UV rays can be harmful to living organisms.
Absorption of Light
Light energy initiates the process of photosynthesis when pigments absorb the light. Organic pigments, whethe r in the human retina
or the chloroplast thylakoid, have a narrow range of energy levels that they can absorb. Energy levels lo wer than those represented
by red light are insufficient to raise an orbital ele ctron to a populatable, excited (quantum) state. Ene rgy levels higher than those in
blue light will physically tear the molecules apart, called bleaching. So retinal pigments can only “see” (absorb) 700 nm to 400 nm
light, which is therefore called visible light. For th e same reasons, plants pigment molecules absorb only lig ht in the wavelength
range of 700 nm to 400 nm; plant physiologists refer t o this range for plants as photosynthetically active rad iation.
The visible light seen by humans as white light actua lly exists in a rainbow of colors. Certain objects, such as a prism or a drop of
water, disperse white light to reveal the colors to the human eye. The visible light portion of the electro magnetic spectrum shows
the rainbow of colors, with violet and blue having short er wavelengths, and therefore higher energy. At the ot her end of the
spectrum toward red, the wavelengths are longer and have l ower energy (Figure 3).

8.7.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43613
Figure 3. The colors of visible light do not carry the same amount of energy. Violet has the shortest wavelen gth and therefore
carries the most energy, whereas red has the longest wav elength and carries the least amount of energy. (cred it: modification of
work by NASA)
Understanding Pigments
Different kinds of pigments exist, and each has evolve d to absorb only certain wavelengths (colors) of visi ble light. Pigments
reflect or transmit the wavelengths they cannot absorb, ma king them appear in the corresponding color.
Chlorophylls and carotenoids are the two major classes of photosynthetic pigments found in plants and algae; each class has
multiple types of pigment molecules. There are five major chlorophylls: a, b, c and d and a related molecule found in prokaryotes
called bacteriochlorophyll. Chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b are found in higher plant chloroplasts and will be th e focus of the
following discussion.
With dozens of different forms, carotenoids are a muc h larger group of pigments. The carotenoids found i n fruit—such as the red of
tomato (lycopene), the yellow of corn seeds (zeaxanth in), or the orange of an orange peel (β-carotene)—ar e used as advertisements
to attract seed dispersers. In photosynthesis,
carotenoids function as photosynthetic pigments that are very ef ficient molecules for the disposal of excess energy. When a leaf is
exposed to full sun, the light-dependent reactions a re required to process an enormous amount of energy; if that energy is not
handled properly, it can do significant damage. There fore, many carotenoids reside in the thylakoid membr ane, absorb excess
energy, and safely dissipate that energy as heat.
Each type of pigment can be identified by the specif ic pattern of wavelengths it absorbs from visible ligh t, which is the absorption
spectrum. The graph in Figure 4 shows the absorption spectra f or chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, and a type of carotenoid pigment
called β-carotene (which absorbs blue and green ligh t). Notice how each pigment has a distinct set of peak s and troughs, revealing
a highly specific pattern of absorption. Chlorophyll a absorbs wavelengths from either end of the visible s pectrum (blue and red),
but not green. Because green is reflected or transmit ted, chlorophyll appears green. Carotenoids absorb in the short-wavelength
blue region, and reflect the longer yellow, red, and ora nge wavelengths.

8.7.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43613
Figure 4. (a) Chlorophyll a, (b) chlorophyll b, and (c) β-carotene are hydrophobic organic pigments foun d in the thylakoid
membrane. Chlorophyll a and b, which are identical except for the part indicated in the red box, are r esponsible for the green color
of leaves. β-carotene is responsible for the orange col or in carrots. Each pigment has (d) a unique absorbanc e spectrum.
Figure 5. Plants that commonly grow in the shade have a dapted to low levels of light by changing the relati ve concentrations of
their chlorophyll pigments. (credit: Jason Hollinger)
Many photosynthetic organisms have a mixture of pigmen ts; using them, the organism can absorb energy from a wider range of
wavelengths. Not all photosynthetic organisms have ful l access to sunlight. Some organisms grow underwater whe re light intensity
and quality decrease and change with depth. Other org anisms grow in competition for light. Plants on the r ainforest floor must be
able to absorb any bit of light that comes through, be cause the taller trees absorb most of the sunlight an d scatter the remaining
solar radiation (Figure 5).
When studying a photosynthetic organism, scientists ca n determine the types of pigments present by generat ing absorption spectra.
An instrument called a spectrophotometer can differentiate which wavelengths of light a subst ance can absorb.
Spectrophotometers measure transmitted light and com pute from it the absorption. By extracting pigments from leaves and placing
these samples into a spectrophotometer, scientists can identify which wavelengths of light an organism can a bsorb. Additional
methods for the identification of plant pigments in clude various types of chromatography that separate t he pigments by their
relative affinities to solid and mobile phases.

8.7.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43613Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.7: Spectrums of Light is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436148.8: Light-Dependent Reactions
The overall function of light-dependent reactions i s to convert solar energy into chemical energy in t he form of NADPH and ATP.
This chemical energy supports the light-independent reactions and fuels the assembly of sugar molecules. The light-dependent
reactions are depicted in Figure 1. Protein complexes an d pigment molecules work together to produce NADPH and ATP.
Figure 1. A photosystem consists of a light-harvesting com plex and a reaction center. Pigments in the light-har vesting complex pass
light energy to two special chlorophyll a molecules i n the reaction center. The light excites an electron from the chlorophyll a pair,
which passes to the primary electron acceptor. The exc ited electron must then be replaced. In (a) photosyste m II, the electron comes
from the splitting of water, which releases oxygen as a waste product. In (b) photosystem I, the electron com es from the chloroplast
electron transport chain discussed below.
The actual step that converts light energy into che mical energy takes place in a multiprotein complex called a photosystem, two
types of which are found embedded in the thylakoid me mbrane, photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI) (Figure 2). The
two complexes differ on the basis of what they oxidiz e (that is, the source of the low-energy electron supp ly) and what they reduce
(the place to which they deliver their energized electron s).
Both photosystems have the same basic structure; a num ber of antenna proteins to which the chlorophyll mol ecules are bound
surround the reaction center where the photochemistry takes place. Each photosystem is serviced by the l ight-harvesting complex,
which passes energy from sunlight to the reaction ce nter; it consists of multiple antenna proteins that contain a mixture of 300–400
chlorophyll a and b molecules as well as other pigments like carotenoid s. The absorption of a single photon or distinct quan tity or
“packet” of light by any of the chlorophylls pushes that molecule into an excited state. In short, the l ight energy has now been
captured by biological molecules but is not stored in any useful form yet. The energy is transferred f rom chlorophyll to chlorophyll
until eventually (after about a millionth of a seco nd), it is delivered to the reaction center. Up to thi s point, only energy has been
transferred between molecules, not electrons.
Practice Question

8.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43614
Figure 2. The photosystem II (PSII) reaction center and the photosystem I (PSI).
In the photosystem II (PSII) reaction center, energy from sunlight is used to extract electrons from water. The electrons travel
through the chloroplast electron transport chain to photosystem I (PSI), which reduces NADP to NADPH. The electro n transport
chain moves protons across the thylakoid membrane in to the lumen. At the same time, splitting of water adds protons to the lumen,
and reduction of NADPH removes protons from the stroma. The net result is a low pH in the thylakoid lumen, and a high pH in the
stroma. ATP synthase uses this electrochemical gradi ent to make ATP. What is the initial source of elect rons for the chloroplast
electron transport chain?
a. water
b. oxygen
c. carbon dioxide
d. NADPH
[reveal-answer q=”829552″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”829552″]Water is the initial source. [/hidden-answer]
The reaction center contains a pair of chlorophyll a molecules with a special property. Those two chloroph ylls can undergo
oxidation upon excitation; they can actually give u p an electron in a process called a photoact. It is at this step in the reaction
center, that light energy is converted into an excit ed electron. All of the subsequent steps involve gett ing that electron onto the
energy carrier NADPH for delivery to the Calvin cycle whe re the electron is deposited onto carbon for long-term storage in the
form of a carbohydrate. PSII and PSI are two major compo nents of the photosynthetic electron transport chain, which also
includes the cytochrome complex. The cytochrome complex, an enzyme composed of two protein complexes, transfers the
electrons from the carrier molecule plastoquinone (Pq) to the protein plastocyanin (Pc), thus enabling bo th the transfer of protons
across the thylakoid membrane and the transfer of electrons f rom PSII to PSI.+

8.8.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43614The reaction center of PSII (called P680) delivers its high-energy electrons, one at the tim e, to the primary electron acceptor, and
through the electron transport chain (Pq to cytochro me complex to plastocyanine) to PSI. P680’s missing ele ctron is replaced by
extracting a low-energy electron from water; thus, wat er is split and PSII is re-reduced after every photoact. Splitting one H O
molecule releases two electrons, two hydrogen atoms, an d one atom of oxygen. Splitting two molecules is requir ed to form one
molecule of diatomic O gas. About 10 percent of the oxygen is used by mitochondria in the leaf to suppor t oxidative
phosphorylation. The remainder escapes to the atmosphere wh ere it is used by aerobic organisms to support respirat ion.
As electrons move through the proteins that reside bet ween PSII and PSI, they lose energy. That energy is used to move hydrogen
atoms from the stromal side of the membrane to the thylakoid lumen. Those hydrogen atoms, plus the ones produced by splitting
water, accumulate in the thylakoid lumen and will be used synthesize ATP in a later step. Because the ele ctrons have lost energy
prior to their arrival at PSI, they must be re-energiz ed by PSI, hence, another photon is absorbed by the PSI antenna. That energy is
relayed to the PSI reaction center (called P700). P700 is oxidized and sends a high-energy electron t o NADP to form NADPH.
Thus, PSII captures the energy to create proton gradients to make ATP, and PSI captures the energy to reduce NADP into NADPH.
The two photosystems work in concert, in part, to guara ntee that the production of NADPH will roughly equal the p roduction of
ATP. Other mechanisms exist to fine tune that ratio to exact ly match the chloroplast’s constantly changing energy ne eds.
Generating an Energy Carrier: ATP
As in the intermembrane space of the mitochondria dur ing cellular respiration, the buildup of hydrogen io ns inside the thylakoid
lumen creates a concentration gradient. The passive d iffusion of hydrogen ions from high concentration (in the thylakoid lumen) to
low concentration (in the stroma) is harnessed to crea te ATP, just as in the electron transport chain of cellular respiration. The ions
build up energy because of diffusion and because they all have the same electrical charge, repelling each other.
To release this energy, hydrogen ions will rush throug h any opening, similar to water jetting through a ho le in a dam. In the
thylakoid, that opening is a passage through a special ized protein channel called the ATP synthase. The e nergy released by the
hydrogen ion stream allows ATP synthase to attach a third phosphate group to ADP, which forms a molecule of ATP (Figure 2). The
flow of hydrogen ions through ATP synthase is called c hemiosmosis because the ions move from an area of high t o an area of low
concentration through a semi-permeable structure.
Visit this site and click through the animation to view the process of photosynthesis within a le af.
The pigments of the first part of photosynthesis, the li ght-dependent reactions, absorb energy from sunlight. A photon strikes
the antenna pigments of photosystem II to initiate p hotosynthesis. The energy travels to the reaction cent er that contains
chlorophyll a to the electron transport chain, which pumps hydrogen ions into the thylakoid interior. This action build s up a
high concentration of ions. The ions flow through AT P synthase via chemiosmosis to form molecules of AT P, which are used
for the formation of sugar molecules in the second s tage of photosynthesis. Photosystem I absorbs a second photon, which
results in the formation of an NADPH molecule, another energy an d reducing power carrier for the light-independent reactio ns.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.8: Light-Dependent Reactions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
Learning Objectives

8.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436158.9: Light-Independent Reactions
After the energy from the sun is converted into chem ical energy and temporarily stored in ATP and NADPH mole cules, the cell has
the fuel needed to build carbohydrate molecules for long-term energy storage. The products of the light- dependent reactions, ATP
and NADPH, have lifespans in the range of millionths of se conds, whereas the products of the light-independent reactions
(carbohydrates and other forms of reduced carbon) ca n survive for hundreds of millions of years. The carboh ydrate molecules
made will have a backbone of carbon atoms. Where does the carbon come from? It comes from carbon dioxide, the gas that is a
waste product of respiration in microbes, fungi, plants, an d animals.
In plants, carbon dioxide (CO) enters the leaves throu gh stomata, where it diffuses over short distances t hrough intercellular
spaces until it reaches the mesophyll cells. Once in the mesophyll cells, CO diffuses into the stroma of the c hloroplast—the site of
light-independent reactions of photosynthesis. These reactions actually have several names associated wit h them. Another term, the
Calvin cycle, is named for the man who discovered it, and because these reactions function as a cycle. Others call it t he CalvinBenson cycle to include the name of another scienti st involved in its discovery. The most outdated name is dark reactions, because
light is not directly required (Figure 1). However, the term dark reaction can be misleading because it imp lies incorrectly that the
reaction only occurs at night or is independent of ligh t, which is why most scientists and instructors no longer use it.
Figure 1. Light reactions harness energy from the sun to produce chemical bonds, ATP, and NADPH. These energy- carrying
molecules are made in the stroma where carbon fixatio n takes place.
The light-independent reactions of the Calvin cycle ca n be organized into three basic stages: fixation, reducti on, and regeneration.
Stage 1: Fixation
In the stroma, in addition to CO, two other componen ts are present to initiate the light-independent rea ctions: an enzyme called
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (RuBisCO), and three molecules of ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP), as shown i n Figure 2. RuBP
has five atoms of carbon, flanked by two phosphates.2
Practice Question

8.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43615
Figure 2. The Calvin cycle has three stages.
In stage 1, the enzyme RuBisCO incorporates carbon dio xide into an organic molecule, 3-PGA. In stage 2, the org anic molecule is
reduced using electrons supplied by NADPH. In stage 3, RuBP, the molecule that starts the cycle, is regenerated so that the cycle
can continue. Only one carbon dioxide molecule is inco rporated at a time, so the cycle must be completed three times to produce a
single three-carbon GA3P molecule, and six times to prod uce a six-carbon glucose molecule.
Which of the following statements is true?
a. In photosynthesis, oxygen, carbon dioxide, ATP, and NADPH are reactants. GA3P and water are products.
b. In photosynthesis, chlorophyll, water, and carbon diox ide are reactants. GA3P and oxygen are products.
c. In photosynthesis, water, carbon dioxide, ATP, and NADPH are reactants. RuBP and oxygen are products.
d. In photosynthesis, water and carbon dioxide are react ants. GA3P and oxygen are products.
[reveal-answer q=”542141″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”542141″]Answer d is true.[/hidden-answer]
RuBisCO catalyzes a reaction between CO and RuBP. For each CO molecule that reacts with one RuBP, two molecu les of
another compound (3-PGA) form. PGA has three carbons and one phosphate. Each turn of the cycle involves only one RuBP and
one carbon dioxide and forms two molecules of 3-PGA. Th e number of carbon atoms remains the same, as the atom s move to form
new bonds during the reactions (3 atoms from 3CO + 15 a toms from 3RuBP = 18 atoms in 3 atoms of 3-PGA). This p rocess is
called carbon fixation, because CO is “fixed” from an inorganic form into organi c molecules.
Stage 2: Reduction
ATP and NADPH are used to convert the six molecules of 3 -PGA into six molecules of a chemical called glycerald ehyde 3phosphate (G3P). That is a reduction reaction because i t involves the gain of electrons by 3-PGA. Recall that a reduction is the
gain of an electron by an atom or molecule. Six molec ules of both ATP and NADPH are used. For ATP, energy is re leased with the
loss of the terminal phosphate atom, converting it i nto ADP; for NADPH, both energy and a hydrogen atom are lost, converting it
into NADP. Both of these molecules return to the nearby ligh t-dependent reactions to be reused and reenergized.2 2

8.9.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43615Stage 3: Regeneration
Interestingly, at this point, only one of the G3P mol ecules leaves the Calvin cycle and is sent to the cy toplasm to contribute to the
formation of other compounds needed by the plant. Bec ause the G3P exported from the chloroplast has three carbon atoms, it takes
three “turns” of the Calvin cycle to fix enough net carbon to export one G3P. But each turn makes two G3Ps, thu s three turns make
six G3Ps. One is exported while the remaining five G3P mole cules remain in the cycle and are used to regenerate RuBP, which
enables the system to prepare for more CO to be fixed. Thr ee more molecules of ATP are used in these regeneration re actions.
This link leads to an animation of the Calvin cycle. Click stage 1, stage 2, and then stage 3 to see G3P and ATP regenerate to form
RuBP.
Figure 3. The harsh conditions of the desert have led p lants like these cacti to evolve variations of the lig ht-independent
reactions of photosynthesis. These variations increase the efficiency of water usage, helping to conserve water and energy.
(credit: Piotr Wojtkowski)
During the evolution of photosynthesis, a major shif t occurred from the bacterial type of photosynthesis that involves only one
photosystem and is typically anoxygenic (does not ge nerate oxygen) into modern oxygenic (does generate o xygen) photosynthesis,
employing two photosystems. This modern oxygenic photo synthesis is used by many organisms—from giant tropi cal leaves in the
rainforest to tiny cyanobacterial cells—and the proc ess and components of this photosynthesis remain largel y the same.
Photosystems absorb light and use electron transport chains to convert energy into the chemical energy o f ATP and NADH. The
subsequent light-independent reactions then assemble ca rbohydrate molecules with this energy.
Photosynthesis in desert plants has evolved adaptation s that conserve water. In the harsh dry heat, every dr op of water must be used
to survive. Because stomata must open to allow for t he uptake of CO, water escapes from the leaf during a ctive photosynthesis.
Desert plants have evolved processes to conserve water and deal with harsh conditions. A more efficient use of CO allows plants
to adapt to living with less water. Some plants such a s cacti (Figure 3) can prepare materials for photosy nthesis during the night by
a temporary carbon fixation/storage process, because opening the stomata at this time conserves water due to cooler temperatures.
In addition, cacti have evolved the ability to carr y out low levels of photosynthesis without opening stom ata at all, a mechanism to
face extremely dry periods.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.9: Light-Independent Reactions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
Try It

8.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435958.10: Photosynthesis
Now that we’ve learned about the different pieces of p hotosynthesis, let’s put it all together. This video walks you through the
process of photosynthesis as a whole:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=256
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
Photosynthesis: Crash Course Biology #8. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at: https://youtu.be/sQK3Yr4Sc_k. License:
All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
8.10: Photosynthesis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435968.11: Introduction to Cellular Respiration
Identify the reactants and products of cellular respiration and where these reactions occur in a cell
Now that we’ve learned how autotrophs like plants conve rt sunlight to sugars, let’s take a look at how all e ukaryotes—which
includes humans!—make use of those sugars.
In the process of photosynthesis, plants and other ph otosynthetic producers create glucose, which stores e nergy in its chemical
bonds. Then, both plants and consumers, such as animals, undergo a series of metabolic pathways—collectively called cellular
respiration. Cellular respiration extracts the energ y from the bonds in glucose and converts it into a fo rm that all living things can
use.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe the process of glycolysis and identify its reacta nts and products
Describe the process of pyruvate oxidation and identify its reactants and products
Describe the process of the citric acid cycle (Krebs cycle) and identify its reactants and products
Describe the respiratory chain (electron transport chain) and its role in cellular respiration
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Glycolysis
Pyruvate Oxidation
Citric Acid Cycle
Electron Transport Chain
ATP & Respiration
Self Check: Cellular Respiration
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Modification of Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51ef14f21b5eabd@10.8. License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.11: Introduction to Cellular Respiration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435978.12: Glycolysis
Glycolysis is the first step in the breakdown of glucose to ext ract energy for cellular metabolism. Nearly all livin g organisms carry
out glycolysis as part of their metabolism. The proc ess does not use oxygen and is therefore anaerobic (processes that use oxygen
are called aerobic). Glycolysis takes place in the cyt oplasm of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Glucos e enters heterotrophic
cells in two ways.
1. Through secondary active transport in which the tran sport takes place against the glucose concentration gradie nt.
2. Through a group of integral proteins called GLUT protei ns, also known as glucose transporter proteins. These tra nsporters
assist in the facilitated diffusion of glucose.
Glycolysis begins with the six carbon ring-shaped struc ture of a single glucose molecule and ends with two mo lecules of a threecarbon sugar called pyruvate (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Reactants and products of glycolysis.
Glycolysis consists of ten steps divided into two distin ct halves. The first half of the glycolysis is also known as the energyrequiring steps. This pathway traps the glucose molecule in the cell and uses energy to modify it so that the six-carbo n sugar
molecule can be split evenly into the two three-carb on molecules. The second half of glycolysis (also known as the energyreleasing steps) extracts energy from the molecules and stores it in the f orm of ATP and NADH, the reduced form of NAD.
First Half of Glycolysis (Energy-Requiring Steps)
Figure 2. The first half of glycolysis uses two ATP molec ules in the phosphorylation of glucose, which is then sp lit into two threecarbon molecules.
Step 1. The first step in glycolysis is catalyzed by h exokinase, an enzyme with broad specificity that cat alyzes the phosphorylation
of six-carbon sugars. Hexokinase phosphorylates glucose usi ng ATP as the source of the phosphate, producing gluc ose-6phosphate, a more reactive form of glucose. This rea ction prevents the phosphorylated glucose molecule f rom continuing to
interact with the GLUT proteins, and it can no longer leave the cell because the negatively charged phosp hate will not allow it to
cross the hydrophobic interior of the plasma membrane.
Step 2. In the second step of glycolysis, an isomeras e converts glucose-6-phosphate into one of its isome rs, fructose-6-phosphate.
An isomerase is an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of a mo lecule into one of its isomers. This change from phos phoglucose

8.12.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43597to phosphofructose allows the eventual split of the sugar into two three-carbon molecules.
Step 3. The third step is the phosphorylation of fruct ose-6-phosphate, catalyzed by the enzyme phosphofruc tokinase. A second ATP
molecule donates a high-energy phosphate to fructose -6-phosphate, producing fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. In this pathway,
phosphofructokinase is a rate-limiting enzyme. It is a ctive when the concentration of ADP is high; it is less active when ADP levels
are low and the concentration of ATP is high. Thus, i f there is “sufficient” ATP in the system, the pathwa y slows down. This is a
type of end product inhibition, since ATP is the end prod uct of glucose catabolism.
Step 4. The newly added high-energy phosphates further destabilize fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. The fourth st ep in glycolysis
employs an enzyme, aldolase, to cleave 1,6-bisphosph ate into two three-carbon isomers: dihydroxyacetone-p hosphate and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
Step 5. In the fifth step, an isomerase transforms th e dihydroxyacetone-phosphate into its isomer, glycer aldehyde-3-phosphate.
Thus, the pathway will continue with two molecules of a s ingle isomer. At this point in the pathway, there is a net investment of
energy from two ATP molecules in the breakdown of one glu cose molecule.
Second Half of Glycolysis (Energy-Releasing Steps)
So far, glycolysis has cost the cell two ATP molecules and produced two small, three-carbon sugar molecules. Bo th of these
molecules will proceed through the second half of the pathway, and sufficient energy will be extracted to pa y back the two ATP
molecules used as an initial investment and produce a profit for the cell of two additional ATP molecul es and two even higherenergy NADH molecules.
Figure 3. The second half of glycolysis involves phosphor ylation without ATP investment (step 6) and produces t wo NADH and
four ATP molecules per glucose.
Step 6. The sixth step in glycolysis (Figure 3) oxidize s the sugar (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate), extracting high-energy electrons,
which are picked up by the electron carrier NAD, produ cing NADH. The sugar is then phosphorylated by the addit ion of a second
phosphate group, producing 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Note that the second phosphate group does not require a nother ATP
molecule.
Here again is a potential limiting factor for this pat hway. The continuation of the reaction depends upon the availability of the
oxidized form of the electron carrier, NAD. Thus, NADH must be continuously oxidized back into NAD in order to k eep this
step going. If NAD is not available, the second half o f glycolysis slows down or stops. If oxygen is available in the system, the
NADH will be oxidized readily, though indirectly, and th e high-energy electrons from the hydrogen released i n this process will be
used to produce ATP. In an environment without oxygen, an alternate pathway (fermentation) can provide th e oxidation of NADH
to NAD.+

8.12.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43597Step 7. In the seventh step, catalyzed by phosphoglyce rate kinase (an enzyme named for the reverse reacti on), 1,3bisphosphoglycerate donates a high-energy phosphate to ADP, forming one molecule of ATP. (This is an examp le of substrate-level
phosphorylation.) A carbonyl group on the 1,3-bisphosp hoglycerate is oxidized to a carboxyl group, and 3-p hosphoglycerate is
formed.
Step 8. In the eighth step, the remaining phosphate gr oup in 3-phosphoglycerate moves from the third carb on to the second carbon,
producing 2-phosphoglycerate (an isomer of 3-phosph oglycerate). The enzyme catalyzing this step is a m utase (a type of
isomerase).
Step 9. Enolase catalyzes the ninth step. This enzyme causes 2-phosphoglycerate to lose water from its structu re; this is a
dehydration reaction, resulting in the formation of a double bond that increases the potential energy i n the remaining phosphate
bond and produces phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP).
Step 10. The last step in glycolysis is catalyzed by th e enzyme pyruvate kinase (the enzyme in this case is named for the reverse
reaction of pyruvate’s conversion into PEP) and result s in the production of a second ATP molecule by subs trate-level
phosphorylation and the compound pyruvic acid (or i ts salt form, pyruvate). Many enzymes in enzymatic path ways are named for
the reverse reactions, since the enzyme can catalyze both forward and reverse reactions.
Outcomes of Glycolysis
Glycolysis starts with glucose and ends with two pyruvate molecules, a total of four ATP molecules and two mole cules of NADH.
Two ATP molecules were used in the first half of the pa thway to prepare the six-carbon ring for cleavage, s o the cell has a net gain
of two ATP molecules and two NADH molecules for its use.
If the cell cannot catabolize the pyruvate molecule s further, it will harvest only two ATP molecules from o ne molecule of glucose.
Mature mammalian red blood cells are not capable of aerobic respiration —the process in which organisms convert energy in the
presence of oxygen—and glycolysis is their sole sour ce of ATP. If glycolysis is interrupted, these cells l ose their ability to maintain
their sodium-potassium pumps, and eventually, they die.
The last step in glycolysis will not occur if pyruvate k inase, the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of pyru vate, is not available in
sufficient quantities. In this situation, the entire glycolysis pathway will proceed, but only two ATP molecu les will be made in the
second half. Thus, pyruvate kinase is a rate-limiting en zyme for glycolysis.
Glycolysis is the first pathway used in the breakdown of glucose to extract energy. It was probably one of th e earliest metabolic
pathways to evolve and is used by nearly all of the or ganisms on earth. Glycolysis consists of two parts: The f irst part prepares
the six-carbon ring of glucose for cleavage into two three-carbon sugars. ATP is invested in the process during this half to
energize the separation. The second half of glycolys is extracts ATP and high-energy electrons from hydrog en atoms and
attaches them to NAD. Two ATP molecules are invested i n the first half and four ATP molecules are formed by substrate
phosphorylation during the second half. This produces a ne t gain of two ATP and two NADH molecules for the cell.
Figure 4 shows the entire process of glycolysis in one ima ge:Learning Objectives

8.12.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43597
Figure 4. Glycolysis
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Modification and revision of Biology. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Modification of Glycolysis metabolic pathway 3 annotated. Authored by: Thomas Shafee. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Glycolysis_metabolic _pathway_3_annotated.svg. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
8.12: Glycolysis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435988.13: Pyruvate Oxidation
If oxygen is available, aerobic respiration will go f orward. In eukaryotic cells, the pyruvate molecules pro duced at the end of
glycolysis are transported into mitochondria, which are the sites of cellular respiration. There, pyruvate will be transformed into an
acetyl group that will be picked up and activated by a carrier compound called coenzyme A (CoA). The res ulting compound is
called acetyl CoA. CoA is made from vitamin B5, pant othenic acid. Acetyl CoA can be used in a variety of ways by the cell, but its
major function is to deliver the acetyl group derived fr om pyruvate to the next stage of the pathway in glucose cat abolism.
Breakdown of Pyruvate
In order for pyruvate (which is the product of glycol ysis) to enter the Citric Acid Cycle (the next pathway in cellular respiration), it
must undergo several changes. The conversion is a three- step process (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Upon entering the mitochondrial matrix, a multi-enzyme complex converts pyruvate into acetyl C oA. In the process,
carbon dioxide is released and one molecule of NADH i s formed.
Step 1. A carboxyl group is removed from pyruvate, releasing a molecule of carbon dioxide into the surrounding medium.
The result of this step is a two-carbon hydroxyethyl group bound to the enzyme (pyruvate dehydrogenase). This is the first of the
six carbons from the original glucose molecule to b e removed. This step proceeds twice (remember: there are two pyruvate
molecules produced at the end of glycolysis) for ev ery molecule of glucose metabolized; thus, two of th e six carbons will have
been removed at the end of both steps.
Step 2. NAD is reduced to NADH. The hydroxyethyl group is oxidized to an acetyl gr oup, and the electrons are picked up by
NAD, forming NADH. The high-energy electrons from NADH will be used later to generate ATP.
Step 3. An acetyl group is transferred to conenzyme A, resulting in acetyl CoA. The enzyme-bound acetyl group is transferred
to CoA, producing a molecule of acetyl CoA.
Note that during the second stage of glucose metaboli sm, whenever a carbon atom is removed, it is bound to two oxygen atoms,
producing carbon dioxide, one of the major end products of cellular respiration.
Acetyl CoA to CO
In the presence of oxygen, acetyl CoA delivers its a cetyl group to a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate, to form citrate, a sixcarbon molecule with three carboxyl groups; this path way will harvest the remainder of the extractable ene rgy from what began as
a glucose molecule. This single pathway is called by diff erent names, but we will primarily call it the Citric Acid Cycle.
In the presence of oxygen, pyruvate is transformed i nto an acetyl group attached to a carrier molecule of coenzyme A. The
resulting acetyl CoA can enter several pathways, but m ost often, the acetyl group is delivered to the cit ric acid cycle for further
catabolism. During the conversion of pyruvate into the acetyl group, a molecule of carbon dioxide and two h igh-energy
electrons are removed. The carbon dioxide accounts fo r two (conversion of two pyruvate molecules) of the six carbons of the
original glucose molecule. The electrons are picked u p by NAD, and the NADH carries the electrons to a later pa thway for
ATP production. At this point, the glucose molecule t hat originally entered cellular respiration has been completely oxidized.+
Learning Objectives

8.13.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43598Chemical potential energy stored within the glucose molecule has been transferred to electron carriers o r has been used to
synthesize a few ATPs.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.13: Pyruvate Oxidation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/435998.14: Citric Acid Cycle
Like the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA, the ci tric acid cycle takes place in the matrix of mitoch ondria.This single pathway
is called by different names: the citric acid cycle (for the first intermediate formed—citric acid, or citrate—wh en acetate joins to the
oxaloacetate), the TCA cycle (since citric acid or ci trate and isocitrate are tricarboxylic acids), and t he Krebs cycle, after Hans
Krebs, who first identified the steps in the pathway in the 1930s in pigeon flight muscles.
Almost all of the enzymes of the citric acid cycle ar e soluble, with the single exception of the enzyme s uccinate dehydrogenase,
which is embedded in the inner membrane of the mitoch ondrion. Unlike glycolysis, the citric acid cycle is a closed loop: The last
part of the pathway regenerates the compound used in the first step. The eight steps of the cycle are a series of redox, dehydration,
hydration, and decarboxylation reactions that produc e two carbon dioxide molecules, one GTP/ATP, and reduced forms of NADH
and FADH (Figure 1). This is considered an aerobic pathwa y because the NADH and FADH produced must transfer their
electrons to the next pathway in the system, which will u se oxygen. If this transfer does not occur, the oxid ation steps of the citric
acid cycle also do not occur. Note that the citric acid cy cle produces very little ATP directly and does not direc tly consume oxygen.
Figure 1. In the citric acid cycle, the acetyl group from acetyl CoA is attached to a four-carbon oxaloa cetate molecule to form a sixcarbon citrate molecule. Through a series of steps, cit rate is oxidized, releasing two carbon dioxide molecu les for each acetyl group
fed into the cycle. In the process, three NAD+ molecu les are reduced to NADH, one FAD molecule is reduced to FADH2, and one
ATP or GTP (depending on the cell type) is produced (by substrate-level phosphorylation). Because the final product of the citric
acid cycle is also the first reactant, the cycle runs c ontinuously in the presence of sufficient reactants. (c redit: modification of work
by “Yikrazuul”/Wikimedia Commons)2 2

8.14.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43599Steps in the Citric Acid Cycle
Step 1. Prior to the start of the first step, pyruvate oxidation must occur. Then, the first step of the cy cle begins: This is a
condensation step, combining the two-carbon acetyl gr oup with a four-carbon oxaloacetate molecule to form a six-carbon molecule
of citrate. CoA is bound to a sulfhydryl group (-SH) and diffuses away to eventually combine with another acetyl group. This step
is irreversible because it is highly exergonic. The rate of this reaction is controlled by negative feed back and the amount of ATP
available. If ATP levels increase, the rate of this reac tion decreases. If ATP is in short supply, the rate increases.
Step 2. In step two, citrate loses one water molecule and ga ins another as citrate is converted into its isomer, isocitrate.
Step 3. In step three, isocitrate is oxidized, produci ng a five-carbon molecule, α-ketoglutarate, together with a molecule of CO
and two electrons, which reduce NAD to NADH. This step is also regulated by negative feedback from ATP and NADH, and a
positive effect of ADP.
Steps 3 and 4. Steps three and four are both oxidatio n and decarboxylation steps, which release electrons th at reduce NAD to
NADH and release carboxyl groups that form CO molecules. α -Ketoglutarate is the product of step three, and a succinyl group is
the product of step four. CoA binds the succinyl group to form succinyl CoA. The enzyme that catalyzes step f our is regulated by
feedback inhibition of ATP, succinyl CoA, and NADH.
Step 5. In step five, a phosphate group is substituted f or coenzyme A, and a high-energy bond is formed. This energy is used in
substrate-level phosphorylation (during the conversio n of the succinyl group to succinate) to form eithe r guanine triphosphate
(GTP) or ATP. There are two forms of the enzyme, called isoenzymes, for this step, depending upon the type of animal tissue in
which they are found. One form is found in tissues that use large amounts of ATP, such as heart and skelet al muscle. This form
produces ATP. The second form of the enzyme is found i n tissues that have a high number of anabolic pathwa ys, such as liver. This
form produces GTP. GTP is energetically equivalent to A TP; however, its use is more restricted. In particular, p rotein synthesis
primarily uses GTP.
Step 6. Step six is a dehydration process that converts succinate into fumarate. Two hydrogen atoms are transferred to FAD,
producing FADH. The energy contained in the electrons of these atoms is insufficient to reduce NAD but adeq uate to reduce
FAD. Unlike NADH, this carrier remains attached to the enzym e and transfers the electrons to the electron transpor t chain directly.
This process is made possible by the localization of the enzyme catalyzing this step inside the inner memb rane of the
mitochondrion.
Step 7. Water is added to fumarate during step seven, a nd malate is produced. The last step in the citric acid cycle regenerates
oxaloacetate by oxidizing malate. Another molecule of NADH is produced in th e process.
You can click through each step of the citric acid cy cle here.
Products of the Citric Acid Cycle
Two carbon atoms come into the citric acid cycle fro m each acetyl group, representing four out of the s ix carbons of one glucose
molecule. Two carbon dioxide molecules are released o n each turn of the cycle; however, these do not necess arily contain the most
recently added carbon atoms. The two acetyl carbon a toms will eventually be released on later turns of th e cycle; thus, all six
carbon atoms from the original glucose molecule are eventually incorporated into carbon dioxide. Each turn of the cycle forms
three NADH molecules and one FADH molecule. These carriers will connect with the last portion of aerobic respira tion to
produce ATP molecules. One GTP or ATP is also made in each cycle. Several of the intermediate compounds in t he citric acid cycle
can be used in synthesizing non-essential amino acids; t herefore, the cycle is amphibolic (both catabolic and ana bolic).
The citric acid cycle is a series of redox and deca rboxylation reactions that remove high-energy electro ns and carbon dioxide.
The electrons temporarily stored in molecules of NADH an d FADH are used to generate ATP in a subsequent pathway. One
molecule of either GTP or ATP is produced by substrat e-level phosphorylation on each turn of the cycle. Th ere is no
comparison of the cyclic pathway with a linear one.2
2+
Learning Objectives

8.14.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43599Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.14: Citric Acid Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436008.15: Electron Transport Chain
You have just read about two pathways in cellular res piration—glycolysis and the citric acid cycle—that ge nerate ATP. However,
most of the ATP generated during the aerobic catabo lism of glucose is not generated directly from these p athways. Rather, it is
derived from a process that begins with moving electro ns through a series of electron transporters that und ergo redox reactions: the
electron transport chain. This causes hydrogen ions to accumulate within the m atrix space. Therefore, a concentration gradient
forms in which hydrogen ions diffuse out of the matr ix space by passing through ATP synthase. The current of hydrogen ions
powers the catalytic action of ATP synthase, which phosphor ylates ADP, producing ATP.
Figure 1. The electron transport chain is a series of el ectron transporters embedded in the inner mitochondri al membrane that
shuttles electrons from NADH and FADH to molecular oxy gen. In the process, protons are pumped from the mitoc hondrial matrix
to the intermembrane space, and oxygen is reduced to form water.
The electron transport chain (Figure 1) is the last c omponent of aerobic respiration and is the only par t of glucose metabolism that
uses atmospheric oxygen. Oxygen continuously diffuse s into plants; in animals, it enters the body throug h the respiratory system.
Electron transport is a series of redox reactions that resemble a relay race or bucket brigade in that ele ctrons are passed rapidly
from one component to the next, to the endpoint of the chain where the electrons reduce molecular oxyge n, producing water. There
are four complexes composed of proteins, labeled I through IV in Figure 1, and the aggregation of these four complexes, together
with associated mobile, accessory electron carriers, is called the electron transport chain. The electron transport chain is present in
multiple copies in the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryotes and the plasma membrane of prokaryot es. Note, however, that
the electron transport chain of prokaryotes may not require oxygen as some live in anaerobic conditions. The common feature of all
electron transport chains is the presence of a proton p ump to create a proton gradient across a membrane.
Complex I
To start, two electrons are carried to the first compl ex aboard NADH. This complex, labeled I, is composed of fla vin
mononucleotide (FMN) and an iron-sulfur (Fe-S)-containin g protein. FMN, which is derived from vitamin B, also cal led
riboflavin, is one of several prosthetic groups or co-fa ctors in the electron transport chain. A prosthetic group is a non-protein
molecule required for the activity of a protein. Prost hetic groups are organic or inorganic, non-peptide molecules bound to a protein
that facilitate its function; prosthetic groups inc lude co-enzymes, which are the prosthetic groups of en zymes. The enzyme in
complex I is NADH dehydrogenase and is a very large prot ein, containing 45 amino acid chains. Complex I can pump four
hydrogen ions across the membrane from the matrix in to the intermembrane space, and it is in this way th at the hydrogen ion
gradient is established and maintained between the two com partments separated by the inner mitochondrial membrane.
Q and Complex II
Complex II directly receives FADH, which does not pass through complex I. The compound connecting the first and second
complexes to the third is ubiquinone (Q). The Q molecule is lipid soluble and freely moves through the hydrophobic core of the
membrane. Once it is reduced, (QH), ubiquinone deliver s its electrons to the next complex in the electron transport chain. Q
receives the electrons derived from NADH from complex I a nd the electrons derived from FADH from complex II, in cluding2

8.15.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43600succinate dehydrogenase. This enzyme and FADH form a sm all complex that delivers electrons directly to the electron transport
chain, bypassing the first complex. Since these electr ons bypass and thus do not energize the proton pump in the first complex,
fewer ATP molecules are made from the FADH electrons. Th e number of ATP molecules ultimately obtained is di rectly
proportional to the number of protons pumped across the i nner mitochondrial membrane.
Complex III
The third complex is composed of cytochrome b, anothe r Fe-S protein, Rieske center (2Fe-2S center), and cytoc hrome c proteins;
this complex is also called cytochrome oxidoreductase. Cytochrome proteins have a prosthetic group of heme. The heme molecule
is similar to the heme in hemoglobin, but it carrie s electrons, not oxygen. As a result, the iron ion at it s core is reduced and oxidized
as it passes the electrons, fluctuating between differen t oxidation states: Fe (reduced) and Fe (oxidized). Th e heme molecules
in the cytochromes have slightly different characte ristics due to the effects of the different proteins binding them, giving slightly
different characteristics to each complex. Complex II I pumps protons through the membrane and passes its e lectrons to cytochrome
c for transport to the fourth complex of proteins and enzymes (cytochrome c is the acceptor of electrons from Q; however, whereas
Q carries pairs of electrons, cytochrome c can accept only o ne at a time).
Complex IV
The fourth complex is composed of cytochrome protein s c, a, and a. This complex contains two heme groups (one in each of the
two cytochromes, a, and a) and three copper ions (a pai r of Cu and one Cu in cytochrome a). The cytochromes h old an oxygen
molecule very tightly between the iron and copper io ns until the oxygen is completely reduced. The redu ced oxygen then picks up
two hydrogen ions from the surrounding medium to mak e water (H O). The removal of the hydrogen ions from t he system
contributes to the ion gradient used in the process of chemi osmosis.
Chemiosmosis
In chemiosmosis, the free energy from the series of re dox reactions just described is used to pump hydrogen ions (protons) across
the membrane. The uneven distribution of H ions acr oss the membrane establishes both concentration and el ectrical gradients
(thus, an electrochemical gradient), owing to the hydrogen ions’ positive charge and their aggregation on one sid e of the membrane.
If the membrane were open to diffusion by the hydroge n ions, the ions would tend to diffuse back across into the matrix, driven by
their electrochemical gradient. Recall that many io ns cannot diffuse through the nonpolar regions of ph ospholipid membranes
without the aid of ion channels. Similarly, hydrogen ions in the matrix space can only pass through the inner mitochondrial
membrane through an integral membrane protein calle d ATP synthase (Figure 2). This complex protein acts as a tiny generator,
turned by the force of the hydrogen ions diffusing t hrough it, down their electrochemical gradient. The t urning of parts of this
molecular machine facilitates the addition of a pho sphate to ADP, forming ATP, using the potential energy of the hydrogen ion
gradient.2
3 A B 3
Practice Question

8.15.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43600
Figure 2. ATP synthase is a complex, molecular machine that uses a proton (H+) gradient to form ATP from ADP and inorganic
phosphate (Pi). (Credit: modification of work by Klau s Hoffmeier)
Dinitrophenol (DNP) is an uncoupler that makes the inner mitochondrial membrane leaky to protons. It was used until 1938 as a
weight-loss drug. What effect would you expect DNP to ha ve on the change in pH across the inner mitochondrial membrane? Why
do you think this might be an effective weight-loss drug?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”346232″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”346232″]After DNP poisoning, the elect ron transport chain can no longer form a proton grad ient, and ATP
synthase can no longer make ATP. DNP is an effective d iet drug because it uncouples ATP synthesis; in other words, after taking it,
a person obtains less energy out of the food he or sh e eats. Interestingly, one of the worst side effects of this drug is hyperthermia,
or overheating of the body. Since ATP cannot be formed, the energy from electron transport is lost as heat.[/h idden-answer]
Chemiosmosis (Figure 3) is used to generate 90 percent of the ATP made during aerobic glucose catabolism; it is also the method
used in the light reactions of photosynthesis to harn ess the energy of sunlight in the process of photopho sphorylation. Recall that
the production of ATP using the process of chemiosmosi s in mitochondria is called oxidative phosphorylation. The overall result of
these reactions is the production of ATP from the en ergy of the electrons removed from hydrogen atoms. Th ese atoms were
originally part of a glucose molecule. At the end of the pathway, the electrons are used to reduce an oxyg en molecule to oxygen
ions. The extra electrons on the oxygen attract hydrogen ions (protons) from the surrounding medium, and water is form ed.
Practice Question

8.15.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43600
Figure 3. In oxidative phosphorylation, the pH gradie nt formed by the electron transport chain is used by A TP synthase to form
ATP.
Cyanide inhibits cytochrome c oxidase, a component of the electron transport chain. If cyanide poisoning occurs, would you expect
the pH of the intermembrane space to increase or decrea se? What effect would cyanide have on ATP synthesis?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”26135″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”26135″]After cyanide poisoning, the electron transport chain can no longer pump electron s into the
intermembrane space. The pH of the intermembrane spac e would increase, the pH gradient would decrease, and A TP synthesis
would stop.[/hidden-answer]
ATP Yield
The number of ATP molecules generated from the cata bolism of glucose varies. For example, the number of hydrogen ions that the
electron transport chain complexes can pump through t he membrane varies between species. Another source of variance stems
from the shuttle of electrons across the membranes of the mitochondria. (The NADH generated from glycolysis ca nnot easily enter
mitochondria.) Thus, electrons are picked up on the i nside of mitochondria by either NAD or FAD. As you have l earned earlier,
these FAD molecules can transport fewer ions; consequent ly, fewer ATP molecules are generated when FAD acts as a carrier.
NAD is used as the electron transporter in the liver and F AD acts in the brain.
Another factor that affects the yield of ATP molecul es generated from glucose is the fact that intermed iate compounds in these
pathways are used for other purposes. Glucose catabolism c onnects with the pathways that build or break down all other
biochemical compounds in cells, and the result is som ewhat messier than the ideal situations described thus far. For example,
sugars other than glucose are fed into the glycolyt ic pathway for energy extraction. Moreover, the five-ca rbon sugars that form
nucleic acids are made from intermediates in glycoly sis. Certain nonessential amino acids can be made fr om intermediates of both
glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. Lipids, such as cholesterol and triglycerides, are also made from i ntermediates in these
pathways, and both amino acids and triglycerides are b roken down for energy through these pathways. Overall, in living systems,
these pathways of glucose catabolism extract about 34 per cent of the energy contained in glucose.
The electron transport chain is the portion of aerob ic respiration that uses free oxygen as the final e lectron acceptor of the
electrons removed from the intermediate compounds in glucose catabolism. The electron transport chain is composed of four
large, multiprotein complexes embedded in the inner m itochondrial membrane and two small diffusible electro n carriers
shuttling electrons between them. The electrons are p assed through a series of redox reactions, with a small amount of free+ +
Learning Objectives

8.15.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43600energy used at three points to transport hydrogen i ons across a membrane. This process contributes to the gradient used in
chemiosmosis. The electrons passing through the elect ron transport chain gradually lose energy, High-energy electrons donated
to the chain by either NADH or FADH complete the chain, as low-energy electrons reduce oxygen molecules and fo rm water.
The level of free energy of the electrons drops from about 60 kcal/mol in NADH or 45 kcal/mol in FADH to abou t 0 kcal/mol
in water. The end products of the electron transport chain are water and ATP. A number of intermediate comp ounds of the citric
acid cycle can be diverted into the anabolism of ot her biochemical molecules, such as nonessential amin o acids, sugars, and
lipids. These same molecules can serve as energy source s for the glucose pathways.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.15: Electron Transport Chain is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

8.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436018.16: Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration is a process that all living thin gs use to convert glucose into energy. Autotrophs (like plants) produce glucose
during photosynthesis. Heterotrophs (like humans) inge st other living things to obtain glucose. While the pr ocess can seem
complex, this page takes you through the key elements of each part of cellular respiration.
Cellular respiration is a collection of three uniqu e metabolic pathways: glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the electron transport
chain. Glycolysis is an anaerobic process, while the o ther two pathways are aerobic. In order to move from gl ycolysis to the citric
acid cycle, pyruvate molecules (the output of glycolysis) mu st be oxidized in a process called pyruvate oxidation.
Glycolysis
Glycolysis is the first pathway in cellular respiration. This pathway is anaerobic and takes place in the cy toplasm of the cell. This
pathway breaks down 1 glucose molecule and produces 2 pyruvate molecules. There are two halves of glycolysis, wi th five steps in
each half. The first half is known as the “energy requ iring” steps. This half splits glucose, and uses up 2 ATP. If the concentration of
pyruvate kinase is high enough, the second half of gl ycolysis can proceed. In the second half, the “energy releasing: steps, 4
molecules of ATP and 2 NADH are released. Glycolysis has a net gain of 2 ATP molecules and 2 NADH.
Some cells (e.g., mature mammalian red blood cells) ca nnot undergo aerobic respiration, so glycolysis is their only source of ATP.
However, most cells undergo pyruvate oxidation and continue to the other pathways of cellular respiration.
Pyruvate Oxidation
In eukaryotes, pyruvate oxidation takes place in the m itochondria. Pyruvate oxidation can only happen if o xygen is available. In
this process, the pyruvate created by glycolysis is oxidized. In this oxidation process, a carboxyl group is removed from pyruvate,
creating acetyl groups, which compound with coenzyme A (CoA) to form acetyl CoA. This process also releases CO.
Citric Acid Cycle
The citric acid cycle (also known as the Krebs cycle) is the second pathway in cellular respiration, and it al so takes place in the
mitochondria. The rate of the cycle is controlled by ATP concentration. When there is more ATP available, the rate slows down;
when there is less ATP the rate increases. This pathway is a closed loop: the final step produces the compo und needed for the first
step.
The citric acid cycle is considered an aerobic pathway because the NADH and FADH it produces act as temporary el ectron
storage compounds, transferring their electrons to the next pathway (electron transport chain), which use s atmospheric oxygen.
Each turn of the citric acid cycle provides a net gain of CO, 1 GTP or ATP, and 3 NADH and 1 FADH.
Electron Transport Chain
Most ATP from glucose is generated in the electron tra nsport chain. It is the only part of cellular respira tion that directly consumes
oxygen; however, in some prokaryotes, this is an anaer obic pathway. In eukaryotes, this pathway takes place in the inner
mitochondrial membrane. In prokaryotes it occurs in the plasma membrane.
The electron transport chain is made up of 4 protei ns along the membrane and a proton pump. A cofactor shuttles electrons between
proteins I–III. If NAD is depleted, skip I: FADH starts on I I. In chemiosmosis, a proton pump takes hydrogens from inside
mitochondria to the outside; this spins the “motor” and the phosphate groups attach to that. The movemen t changes from ADP to
ATP, creating 90% of ATP obtained from aerobic glucose c atabolism.
Let’s Practice
Now that you’ve reviewed cellular respiration, this practice activity will help you see how well you know cellular respira tion:
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Click here for a text-only version of the activity.2
2 2

8.16.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43601Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Cellular Respiration. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY:
Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Understanding Cellular Respiration. Provided by: Lumen Learning. Located at: www.oppia.org/explore/LG5n93fp89oh.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
8.16: Cellular Respiration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.17.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436028.17: Introduction to Fermentation
Illustrate the basic components and steps of fermentation.
The final metabolic pathway we’ll discuss is fermentation. T his is an anaerobic process (it occurs without oxygen).
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe fermentation as anaerobic energy production.
Identify the process, products, and reactants of lactic a cid fermentation.
Identify the process, products, and reactants of alcohol f ermentation.
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Metabolism without Oxygen
Types of Fermentation
Self Check: Fermentation
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
8.17: Introduction to Fermentation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.18.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436038.18: Metabolism without Oxygen
Figure 1. The green color seen in these coastal waters i s from an eruption of hydrogen sulfide-producing bact eria. These anaerobic,
sulfate-reducing bacteria release hydrogen sulfide gas as they decompose algae in the water. (credit: modifi cation of work by
NASA/Jeff Schmaltz, MODIS Land Rapid Response Team at NAS A GSFC, Visible Earth Catalog of NASA images)
In aerobic respiration, the final electron acceptor is an oxygen molecule, O. If aerobic respiration occ urs, then ATP will be
produced using the energy of high-energy electrons carried by NADH or FADH to the electron transport chain. I f aerobic
respiration does not occur, NADH must be reoxidized to NAD for reuse as an electron carrier for the glycolytic pathway to
continue. How is this done? Some living systems use an org anic molecule as the final electron acceptor. Processe s that use an
organic molecule to regenerate NAD from NADH are collecti vely referred to as fermentation. In contrast, some living systems
use an inorganic molecule as a final electron accep tor. Both methods are called anaerobic cellular respiration in which organisms
convert energy for their use in the absence of oxygen.
Anaerobic Cellular Respiration
Certain prokaryotes, including some species of bacteria and Archaea, use anaerobic respiration. For example, t he group of Archaea
called methanogens reduces carbon dioxide to methan e to oxidize NADH. These microorganisms are found in soil and in the
digestive tracts of ruminants, such as cows and sheep. Sim ilarly, sulfate-reducing bacteria and Archaea, most o f which are
anaerobic (Figure 1), reduce sulfate to hydrogen sulfide to regenerate NAD from NADH.
Visit this site to see anaerobic cellular respiration in acti on.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
8.18: Metabolism without Oxygen is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

8.19.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436048.19: Types of Fermentation
Lactic Acid Fermentation
The fermentation method used by animals and certain b acteria, like those in yogurt, is lactic acid fermentation (Figure 1). This
type of fermentation is used routinely in mammalian red blood cells and in skeletal muscle that has an insufficient oxygen supply to
allow aerobic respiration to continue (that is, in m uscles used to the point of fatigue). In muscles, la ctic acid accumulation must be
removed by the blood circulation and the lactate br ought to the liver for further metabolism. The chemi cal reactions of lactic acid
fermentation are the following:
\text{Pyruvic acid}+\text{NADH}\longleftrightarrow\ text{lactic acid}+\text{NAD}^+
The enzyme used in this reaction is lactate dehydro genase (LDH). The reaction can proceed in either direc tion, but the reaction
from left to right is inhibited by acidic conditions. Such lactic acid accumulation was once believed to c ause muscle stiffness,
fatigue, and soreness, although more recent research d isputes this hypothesis. Once the lactic acid has been r emoved from the
muscle and circulated to the liver, it can be reconverte d into pyruvic acid and further catabolized for energy.
Figure 1. Lactic acid fermentation is common in muscle cells that have run out of oxygen.
Tremetol, a metabolic poison found in the white snake root plant, prevents the metabolism of lactate. When cows eat this plant, it is
concentrated in the milk they produce. Humans who cons ume the milk become ill. Symptoms of this disease, whic h include
vomiting, abdominal pain, and tremors, become worse after e xercise. Why do you think this is the case?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”453242″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”453242″]The illness is caused by lac tate accumulation. Lactate levels rise after exerci se, making the symptoms
worse. Milk sickness is rare today, but was common in the Midwes tern United States in the early 1800s.[/hidden-answer]Practice Question

8.19.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43604Alcohol Fermentation
Figure 2. Fermentation of grape juice into wine produ ces CO as a byproduct. Fermentation tanks have valves so that the pressure
inside the tanks created by the carbon dioxide produc ed can be released.
Another familiar fermentation process is alcohol fermentation (Figure 3) that produces ethanol, an alcohol (because of this, this
kind of fermentation is also sometimes known as ethanol fermentation). There are two main reactions in alcohol fermentation.
The first reaction is catalyzed by pyruvate decarbox ylase, a cytoplasmic enzyme, with a coenzyme of thiami ne pyrophosphate
(TPP, derived from vitamin B1 and also called thiami ne). A carboxyl group is removed from pyruvic acid, rel easing carbon dioxide
as a gas. The loss of carbon dioxide reduces the size o f the molecule by one carbon, making acetaldehyde. T he second reaction is
catalyzed by alcohol dehydrogenase to oxidize NADH to NAD and reduce acetaldehyde to ethanol. The fermentati on of pyruvic
acid by yeast produces the ethanol found in alcoholic beverages. Ethanol tolerance of yeast is variable, ran ging from about 5
percent to 21 percent, depending on the yeast strain and environmental conditions.
Figure 3. Diagram of alcohol fermentation2

8.19.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43604Other Types of Fermentation
Other fermentation methods occur in bacteria. Many prok aryotes are facultatively anaerobic. This means that they can switch
between aerobic respiration and fermentation, depend ing on the availability of oxygen. Certain prokaryot es, like Clostridia, are
obligate anaerobes. Obligate anaerobes live and grow i n the absence of molecular oxygen. Oxygen is a poison to these
microorganisms and kills them on exposure.
It should be noted that all forms of fermentation, e xcept lactic acid fermentation, produce gas. The pr oduction of particular types of
gas is used as an indicator of the fermentation of sp ecific carbohydrates, which plays a role in the labo ratory identification of the
bacteria. Various methods of fermentation are used by a ssorted organisms to ensure an adequate supply of NAD f or the sixth step
in glycolysis. Without these pathways, that step would not oc cur and no ATP would be harvested from the breakdown of gl ucose.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Ethanol fermentation. Authored by: Davidcarmack. Located at: https://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ethanol_fermentation 1.svg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
8.19: Types of Fermentation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.+

8.20.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436068.20: Putting It Together- Metabolic Pathways
Whether the organism is a bacterium, plant, or animal, all living things access energy by breaking down c arbohydrate molecules.
But if plants make carbohydrate molecules, why would they need to break them down, especially when it has been shown that the
gas organisms release as a “waste product” (CO) acts a s a substrate for the formation of more food in phot osynthesis? Remember,
living things need energy to perform life functions. In addition, an organism can either make its own foo d or eat another organism
—either way, the food still needs to be converted to a form cells can actually use. Finally, in that process of conversion, called
cellular respiration, organisms release needed energy and produce “waste” in the form of CO gas.
Figure 1. Photosynthesis consumes carbon dioxide and produ ces oxygen. Aerobic respiration consumes oxygen and pro duces
carbon dioxide. These two processes play an important r ole in the carbon cycle. (credit: modification of w ork by Stuart Bassil)
In nature, there is no such thing as waste. Every sing le atom of matter and energy is conserved, recyclin g over and over infinitely.
Substances change form or move from one type of molecule to another, but their constituent atoms never disappear (Figur e 1).
While you may be tempted to call CO a waste product, you should remember that oxygen is a “waste product ” of photosynthesis:
CO and oxygen are byproducts of reactions that move o n to other reactions. Photosynthesis absorbs light energ y to build
carbohydrates in chloroplasts, and aerobic cellular respiration releases energy by using oxygen to metab olize carbohydrates in the
cytoplasm and mitochondria. Both processes use electr on transport chains to capture the energy necessary t o drive other reactions.
These two powerhouse processes, photosynthesis and cellu lar respiration, function in biological, cyclical har mony to allow
organisms to access life-sustaining energy that originate s millions of miles away in a burning star humans call the sun.
Biofuels
Obviously its important for providing energy for liv ing organisms to power themselves. But is that the onl y power that
photosynthesis provides? What about biofuels? Watch th is 14 minute video for an amazing discussion of a pro posed biofuel source
that doesn’t use arable land, doesn’t take away food crop s, and utilizes wastewater from cities.

8.20.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43606
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=276
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Jonathan Trent: Energy from floating algae pods. Authored by: TED. Located at: https://youtu.be/X-HE4Hfa-OY. License: All
Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
8.20: Putting It Together- Metabolic Pathways is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.21.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436078.21: Assignment- Observing Energy Transactions
For this assessment you will conduct two kitchen scienc e experiments that each focus on energy processes in living organisms. You
will complete the experiments separately but then discu ss how the two processes are related.
Part 1: Photosynthesis. Use the Photosynthesis lab procedure to conduct your experiment. Your results (table, graph,
photographs) should be compiled as “Part 1 data.” Note t his experiment will take you around 2 hours to complete.
Part 2: Cellular respiration. Use the Cell Respiration lab procedure to conduct your experiment. Your results (table, graph,
photographs) should be compiled as “Part 2 data.” Note t his experiment will take you around 1 hour to complete.
Part 3: Comparison. After you have compiled both sets of data, answer all the q uestions in the Part 3 comparison.
Submit all three parts as a single document. Be sure to add clear headings separating the three parts. Here is an example of what
you might see or how you may photograph your experiment s.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment has been proofread and does not contain any majo r spelling or grammatical errors
Assignment includes appropriate references
Assignment includes table, bar graph, and photographs associa ted with both Part 1 and 2 experiments.
Rubric
Observing Energy Transactions
Outcome: Explain the metabolic pathways involved in t he capture and release of energy in cells
Criteria Ratings Pts
Demonstrate an
understanding of
photosynthesis through
the completion of Part 1
experiment and Part 3
questions.Part 1 experiment
completed and well
documented and Part 3
questions answered
accurately in detail.
5.0 ptsPart 1 experiment
completed and
minimally documented
and Part 3 questions
answered accurately but
with minimal detail.
4.0 ptsPart 1 experiment not
completed fully and/or
Part 3 questions
answered inaccurately
0.0 pts5 pts
A basic understanding of
the steps of cellular
respiration is illustrated
through the completion
of Part 2 experiment and
Part 3 questions.Part 2 experiment
completed and well
documented and Part 3
questions answered
accurately in detail.
5.0 ptsPart 2 experiment
completed and
minimally documented
and Part 3 questions
answered accurately but
with minimal detail.
4.0 ptsPart 2 experiment not
completed fully and/or
Part 3 questions
answered inaccurately
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 10
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Performance Assessment: Observing Energy Transactions. Authored by: Shelli Carter. Provided by: Columbia Basin College.
Located at: https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
8.21: Assignment- Observing Energy Transactions is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: Module 7- Cell Communication
9.1: Why It Matters- Cell Communication
9.2: Introduction to Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors
9.3: Types of Signals
9.4: Signaling Molecules
9.5: Signaling Receptors
9.6: Introduction to Propagation of the Signal
9.7: Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway
9.8: Methods of Intracellular Signaling
9.9: Introduction to Response to the Signal
9.10: Expression and Growth
9.11: Cell Death
9.12: Introduction to Signaling in Single-Celled Organi sms
9.13: Signaling in Yeast
9.14: Signaling in Bacteria
9.15: Putting It Together- Cell Communication
9: Module 7- Cell Communication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436239.1: Why It Matters- Cell Communication
Why identify the main components of a signal transduction pathway?
Imagine what life would be like if you and the people around you could not communicate. You would
not be able to express your wishes to others, nor could you ask questions to find out more about your enviro nment. Social
organization is dependent on communication between t he individuals that comprise that society; without co mmunication, society
would fall apart.
As with people, it is vital for individual cells to be able to interact with their environment. This is true whether a cell is growing by
itself in a pond or is one of many cells that form a larger organism. In order to properly respond to e xternal stimuli, cells have
developed complex mechanisms of communication that ca n receive a message, transfer the information across the plasma
membrane, and then produce changes within the cell in respo nse to the message.
In multicellular organisms, cells send and receive che mical messages constantly to coordinate the actions of distant organs, tissues,
and cells. The ability to send messages quickly and eff iciently enables cells to coordinate and fine-tune th eir functions.
While the necessity for cellular communication in large r organisms seems obvious, even single-celled organism s communicate with
each other. Yeast cells signal each other to aid mat ing. Some forms of bacteria coordinate their actions i n order to form large
complexes called biofilms or to organize the producti on of toxins to remove competing organisms. The abilit y of cells to
communicate through chemical signals originated in single cells and was essential for the evolution of mul ticellular organisms. The
efficient and error-free function of communication sy stems is vital for all life as we know it.
Learning Outcomes
Differentiate between different types of signals
Describe how a cell propagates a signal
Describe how a cell responds to a signal
Discuss the process of signaling in single-celled organisms
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Communication. Authored by: Lorenzo Stella. Located at: https://thenounproject.com/term/communication/27324/. License:
CC BY: Attribution
9.1: Why It Matters- Cell Communication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436249.2: Introduction to Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors
Differentiate between different types of signals
There are two kinds of communication in the world of l iving cells. Communication between cells is called intercellular signaling,
and communication within a cell is called intracellular signaling. An easy way to remember the distinction is by underst anding the
Latin origin of the prefixes: inter – means “between” (for example, intersecting lines are those that cross each other) and intra –
means “inside” (like intravenous).
Chemical signals are released by signaling cells in the form of small, usually volatile or soluble mo lecules called ligands. A ligand
is a molecule that binds another specific molecule, in some cases, delivering a signal in the process. Li gands can thus be thought of
as signaling molecules. Ligands interact with protei ns in target cells, which are cells that are affected by chemical signa ls; these
proteins are also called receptors. Ligands and receptors exist in several varieties; however, a specific ligand will have a specific
receptor that typically binds only that ligand.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Differentiate between different types of signals used by mul ticellular organisms
Identify different types of signaling molecules
Identify types of receptors, their molecular compositio n, and the differences among them
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Types of Signals
Signaling Molecules
Signaling Receptors
Self Check: Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.2: Introduction to Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by LibreTexts.

9.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436259.3: Types of Signals
There are four categories of chemical signaling found in multicellular organisms: paracrine signaling, en docrine signaling,
autocrine signaling, and direct signaling across gap junctions (Figure 1). The main difference between the different categories of
signaling is the distance that the signal travels th rough the organism to reach the target cell. Not all cells are affected by the same
signals.
Figure 1. In chemical signaling, a cell may target it self (autocrine signaling), a cell connected by gap j unctions, a nearby cell
(paracrine signaling), or a distant cell (endocrine si gnaling). Paracrine signaling acts on nearby cells, end ocrine signaling uses the
circulatory system to transport ligands, and autocrine signaling acts on the signaling cell. Signaling via ga p junctions involves
signaling molecules moving directly between adjacent cells.

9.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43625Paracrine Signaling
Figure 2. The distance between the presynaptic cell an d the postsynaptic cell—called the synaptic gap—is very small and allows
for rapid diffusion of the neurotransmitter. Enzymes i n the synaptic cleft degrade some types of neurotransmi tters to terminate the
signal.
Signals that act locally between cells that are close together are called paracrine signals. Paracrine signals move by diffusion
through the extracellular matrix. These types of sign als usually elicit quick responses that last only a sh ort amount of time. In order
to keep the response localized, paracrine ligand mo lecules are normally quickly degraded by enzymes or removed by neighboring
cells. Removing the signals will reestablish the conce ntration gradient for the signal, allowing them to qu ickly diffuse through the
intracellular space if released again.
One example of paracrine signaling is the transfer of signals across synapses between nerve cells. A nerve ce ll consists of a cell
body, several short, branched extensions called dend rites that receive stimuli, and a long extension ca lled an axon, which transmits
signals to other nerve cells or muscle cells. The junc tion between nerve cells where signal transmission occ urs is called a synapse.
A synaptic signal is a chemical signal that travels between nerve cel ls. Signals within the nerve cells are propagated by fa stmoving electrical impulses. When these impulses reach the end of the axon, the signal continues on to a de ndrite of the next cell by
the release of chemical ligands called neurotransmitters by the presynaptic cell (the cell emitting the sig nal). The
neurotransmitters are transported across the very smal l distances between nerve cells, which are called chemical synapses (Figure
2). The small distance between nerve cells allows the signal to travel quickly; this enables an immediate response, such as, Take
your hand off the stove!
When the neurotransmitter binds the receptor on the surface of the postsynaptic cell, the electrochemic al potential of the target cell
changes, and the next electrical impulse is launched. The neurotransmitters that are released into the chemical synapse are degraded
quickly or get reabsorbed by the presynaptic cell so that the recipient nerve cell can recover quickly and be prepared to respond
rapidly to the next synaptic signal.
Endocrine Signaling
Signals from distant cells are called endocrine signals, and they originate from endocrine cells. (In the body, many endocrine cells
are located in endocrine glands, such as the thyroid gland, the hypothalamus, and the pituitary gland.) T hese types of signals
usually produce a slower response but have a longer-l asting effect. The ligands released in endocrine sign aling are called hormones,
signaling molecules that are produced in one part of the bo dy but affect other body regions some distance away.
Hormones travel the large distances between endocrine cells and their target cells via the bloodstream, wh ich is a relatively slow
way to move throughout the body. Because of their for m of transport, hormones get diluted and are present in low concentrations
when they act on their target cells. This is differe nt from paracrine signaling, in which local concentra tions of ligands can be very
high.

9.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43625Autocrine Signaling
Autocrine signals are produced by signaling cells that can also bind t o the ligand that is released. This means the signali ng cell and
the target cell can be the same or a similar cell (the prefix auto- means self, a reminder that the signaling cell sen ds a signal to
itself). This type of signaling often occurs during th e early development of an organism to ensure that ce lls develop into the correct
tissues and take on the proper function. Autocrine sig naling also regulates pain sensation and inflammatory responses. Further, if a
cell is infected with a virus, the cell can signal i tself to undergo programmed cell death, killing the v irus in the process. In some
cases, neighboring cells of the same type are also infl uenced by the released ligand. In embryological dev elopment, this process of
stimulating a group of neighboring cells may help t o direct the differentiation of identical cells int o the same cell type, thus
ensuring the proper developmental outcome.
Direct Signaling Across Gap Junctions
Gap junctions in animals and plasmodesmata in plants are connections between the plasma membranes of nei ghboring cells. These
water-filled channels allow small signaling molecules, called intracellular mediators, to diffuse between the two cells. Small
molecules, such as calcium ions (Ca), are able to mov e between cells, but large molecules like proteins and DNA cannot fit
through the channels. The specificity of the channel s ensures that the cells remain independent but can q uickly and easily transmit
signals. The transfer of signaling molecules communic ates the current state of the cell that is directly n ext to the target cell; this
allows a group of cells to coordinate their response t o a signal that only one of them may have received. In plants, plasmodesmata
are ubiquitous, making the entire plant into a giant, c ommunication network.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.3: Types of Signals is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2+

9.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436269.4: Signaling Molecules
Produced by signaling cells and the subsequent bindin g to receptors in target cells, ligands act as chemic al signals that travel to the
target cells to coordinate responses. The types of mol ecules that serve as ligands are incredibly varied a nd range from small
proteins to small ions like calcium (Ca).
Small Hydrophobic Ligands
Figure 1. Steroid hormones have similar chemical structu res to their precursor, cholesterol. Because these molec ules are small and
hydrophobic, they can diffuse directly across the plasm a membrane into the cell, where they interact with internal receptors.
Small hydrophobic ligands can directly diffuse through the plasma membrane and interact with internal rece ptors. Important
members of this class of ligands are the steroid horm ones. Steroids are lipids that have a hydrocarbon skel eton with four fused
rings; different steroids have different functional groups attached to the carbon skeleton. Steroid horm ones include the female sex
hormone, estradiol, which is a type of estrogen; the m ale sex hormone, testosterone; and cholesterol, which is an important
structural component of biological membranes and a p recursor of steroid hormones (Figure 1). Other hydrop hobic hormones
include thyroid hormones and vitamin D. In order to b e soluble in blood, hydrophobic ligands must bind to carrier proteins while
they are being transported through the bloodstream.
Water-Soluble Ligands
Water-soluble ligands are polar and therefore canno t pass through the plasma membrane unaided; sometim es, they are too large to
pass through the membrane at all. Instead, most wate r-soluble ligands bind to the extracellular domain o f cell-surface receptors.
This group of ligands is quite diverse and includes small molecules, peptides, and proteins.
Other Ligands
Nitric oxide (NO) is a gas that also acts as a ligand. It is able to diffuse directly across the plasma membra ne, and one of its roles is
to interact with receptors in smooth muscle and indu ce relaxation of the tissue. NO has a very short half-l ife and therefore only
functions over short distances. Nitroglycerin, a trea tment for heart disease, acts by triggering the relea se of NO, which causes blood
vessels to dilate (expand), thus restoring blood flow to the heart. NO has become better known recently becau se the pathway that it
affects is targeted by prescription medications for ere ctile dysfunction, such as Viagra (erection involves di lated blood vessels).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.4: Signaling Molecules is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2+

9.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436279.5: Signaling Receptors
Receptors are protein molecules in the target cell or on its surface that bind ligand. There are two typ es of receptors, internal
receptors and cell-surface receptors.
Internal Receptors
Figure 1. Hydrophobic signaling molecules typically di ffuse across the plasma membrane and interact with intr acellular receptors
in the cytoplasm. Many intracellular receptors are tr anscription factors that interact with DNA in the nuc leus and regulate gene
expression.
Internal receptors, also known as intracellular or cytoplasmic receptor s, are found in the cytoplasm of the cell and respond to
hydrophobic ligand molecules that are able to trave l across the plasma membrane. Once inside the cell, man y of these molecules
bind to proteins that act as regulators of mRNA synthe sis (transcription) to mediate gene expression. Gene expr ession is the cellular
process of transforming the information in a cell’s DNA into a sequence of amino acids, which ultimately form s a protein. When
the ligand binds to the internal receptor, a confor mational change is triggered that exposes a DNA-binding s ite on the protein. The
ligand-receptor complex moves into the nucleus, the n binds to specific regulatory regions of the chromo somal DNA and promotes
the initiation of transcription (Figure 1). Transcrip tion is the process of copying the information in a cell’s DNA into a special form
of RNA called messenger RNA (mRNA); the cell uses infor mation in the mRNA (which moves out into the cytoplasm and
associates with ribosomes) to link specific amino acid s in the correct order, producing a protein. Interna l receptors can directly
influence gene expression without having to pass the sign al on to other receptors or messengers.
Cell-Surface Receptors
Cell-surface receptors, also known as transmembrane receptors, are cell sur face, membrane-anchored (integral) proteins that bin d
to external ligand molecules. This type of receptor sp ans the plasma membrane and performs signal transduct ion, in which an
extracellular signal is converted into an intercell ular signal. Ligands that interact with cell-surface re ceptors do not have to enter the
cell that they affect. Cell-surface receptors are al so called cell-specific proteins or markers because they are specific to individual
cell types.
Each cell-surface receptor has three main components: an external ligand-binding domain, a hydrophobic m embrane-spanning
region, and an intracellular domain inside the cell. The ligand-binding domain is also called the extracellular domain. The size
and extent of each of these domains vary widely, depending on the type of receptor.
Because cell-surface receptor proteins are fundamen tal to normal cell functioning, it should come as n o surprise that a malfunction
in any one of these proteins could have severe conseq uences. Errors in the protein structures of certain re ceptor molecules have
been shown to play a role in hypertension (high blood p ressure), asthma, heart disease, and cancer.
Unlike living cells, many viruses do not have a plas ma membrane or any of the structures necessary to su stain life. Some
viruses are simply composed of an inert protein shell containing DNA or RNA. To reproduce, viruses must invade a living cell,
which serves as a host, and then take over the host’s cellular apparatus. But how does a virus recognize its host?Try It

9.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43627Viruses often bind to cell-surface receptors on the host cell. For example, the virus that causes human in fluenza (flu) binds
specifically to receptors on membranes of cells of th e respiratory system. Chemical differences in the cell- surface receptors
among hosts mean that a virus that infects a specifi c species (for example, humans) cannot infect another species (for example,
chickens).
However, viruses have very small amounts of DNA or RNA com pared to humans, and, as a result, viral reproduction can occur
rapidly. Viral reproduction invariably produces erro rs that can lead to changes in newly produced viruses; these changes mean
that the viral proteins that interact with cell-surfac e receptors may evolve in such a way that they can b ind to receptors in a new
host. Such changes happen randomly and quite often in the reproductive cycle of a virus, but the changes on ly matter if a virus
with new binding properties comes into contact with a suitable host. In the case of influenza, this situation can occur in settings
where animals and people are in close contact, such as poultry and swine farms. Once a virus jumps to a new ho st, it can
spread quickly. Scientists watch newly appearing virus es (called emerging viruses) closely in the hope that such monitoring
can reduce the likelihood of global viral epidemics.
Cell-surface receptors are involved in most of the signaling in multicellular organisms. There are three general categories of cellsurface receptors: ion channel-linked receptors, G-prot ein-linked receptors, and enzyme-linked receptors.
Figure 2. Gated ion channels form a pore through the plasma membrane that opens when the signaling molecule binds. The open
pore then allows ions to flow into or out of the cell.
Ion channel-linked receptors bind a ligand and open a channel through the membra ne that allows specific ions to pass through. To
form a channel, this type of cell-surface receptor ha s an extensive membrane-spanning region. In order to interact with the
phospholipid fatty acid tails that form the center o f the plasma membrane, many of the amino acids in th e membrane-spanning
region are hydrophobic in nature. Conversely, the am ino acids that line the inside of the channel are h ydrophilic to allow for the
passage of water or ions. When a ligand binds to the extracellular region of the channel, there is a confo rmational change in the
proteins structure that allows ions such as sodium, calcium, magnesium, and hydrogen to pass through (Figure 2).
G-protein-linked receptors bind a ligand and activate a membrane protein call ed a G-protein. The activated G-protein then
interacts with either an ion channel or an enzyme in the membrane (Figure 3). All G-protein-linked recepto rs have seven
transmembrane domains, but each receptor has its own speci fic extracellular domain and G-protein-binding site.
Cell signaling using G-protein-linked receptors occurs as a cyclic series of events. Before the ligand bin ds, the inactive G-protein
can bind to a newly revealed site on the receptor spe cific for its binding. Once the G-protein binds to the receptor, the resultant
shape change activates the G-protein, which releases GDP and picks up GTP. The subunits of the G-protein then sp lit into the α
subunit and the βγ subunit. One or both of these G-protein fragments may be able to activate other proteins as a result. Afte r awhile,
the GTP on the active α subunit of the G-protein is hydrolyzed to GDP and the βγ subunit is deactivated. The subunits reassociate to
form the inactive G-protein and the cycle begins anew.

9.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43627
Figure 3. Heterotrimeric G proteins have three subunit s: α, β, and γ. When a signaling molecule binds to a G-protein-coup led
receptor in the plasma membrane, a GDP molecule associ ated with the α subunit is exchanged for GTP. The β and γ subunits
dissociate from the α subunit, and a cellular response is triggered either b y the α subunit or the dissociated βγ pair. Hydrolysis of
GTP to GDP terminates the signal.
G-protein-linked receptors have been extensively studi ed and much has been learned about their roles in ma intaining health.
Bacteria that are pathogenic to humans can release poisons that interrupt specific G-protein-linked rece ptor function, leading to
illnesses such as pertussis, botulism, and cholera.

9.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43627
Figure 4. Transmitted primarily through contaminated drinking water, cholera is a major cause of death in the developing world and
in areas where natural disasters interrupt the availabi lity of clean water. (credit: New York City Sanitar y Commission)
In cholera (Figure 4), for example, the water-borne ba cterium Vibrio cholerae produces a toxin, choleragen, that binds to cells
lining the small intestine. The toxin then enters th ese intestinal cells, where it modifies a G-protein tha t controls the opening of a
chloride channel and causes it to remain continuous ly active, resulting in large losses of fluids from the body and potentially fatal
dehydration as a result.
Modern sanitation eliminates the threat of cholera ou tbreaks, such as the one that swept through New York C ity in 1866. This
poster from that era shows how, at that time, the way that the disease was transmitted was not understood.
Enzyme-linked receptors are cell-surface receptors with intracellular domain s that are associated with an enzyme. In some cases,
the intracellular domain of the receptor itself is a n enzyme. Other enzyme-linked receptors have a small i ntracellular domain that
interacts directly with an enzyme. The enzyme-linked receptors normally have large extracellular and int racellular domains, but the
membrane-spanning region consists of a single alpha- helical region of the peptide strand. When a ligand binds to the extracellular
domain, a signal is transferred through the membrane, activating the enzyme. Activation of the enzyme set s off a chain of events
within the cell that eventually leads to a response. On e example of this type of enzyme-linked receptor is the tyrosine kinase
receptor (Figure 5). A kinase is an enzyme that transf ers phosphate groups from ATP to another protein. Th e tyrosine kinase
receptor transfers phosphate groups to tyrosine molec ules (tyrosine residues). First, signaling molecules bi nd to the extracellular
domain of two nearby tyrosine kinase receptors. The t wo neighboring receptors then bond together, or dimer ize. Phosphates are
then added to tyrosine residues on the intracellula r domain of the receptors (phosphorylation). The pho sphorylated residues can
then transmit the signal to the next messenger within t he cytoplasm.
Practice Question

9.5.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43627
Figure 5. A receptor tyrosine kinase is an enzyme-linke d receptor with a single transmembrane region, and ex tracellular and
intracellular domains. Binding of a signaling molecul e to the extracellular domain causes the receptor to dimerize. Tyrosine
residues on the intracellular domain are then autopho sphorylated, triggering a downstream cellular response. The signal is
terminated by a phosphatase that removes the phosphates from the phosphotyrosine residues.
HER2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase. In 30 percent of human breast cancers, HER2 is permanently activated, r esulting in unregulated
cell division. Lapatinib, a drug used to treat breast cancer, inhibits HER2 receptor tyrosine kinase autop hosphorylation (the process
by which the receptor adds phosphates onto itself), thu s reducing tumor growth by 50 percent. Besides autoph osphorylation, which
of the following steps would be inhibited by Lapatinib?
a. Signaling molecule binding, dimerization, and the downst ream cellular response
b. Dimerization, and the downstream cellular response
c. The downstream cellular response
d. Phosphatase activity, dimerization, and the downsteam cell ular response
[reveal-answer q=”222996″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”222996″]Answer c. The downstream cellular response would be inhibited.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8

9.5.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436279.5: Signaling Receptors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436289.6: Introduction to Propagation of the Signal
Describe how a cell propagates a signal
Once a ligand binds to a receptor, the signal is transmi tted through the membrane and into the cytoplasm. C ontinuation of a signal
in this manner is called signal transduction. Signal transduction only occurs with cell-surface re ceptors because internal receptors
are able to interact directly with DNA in the nucleus to ini tiate protein synthesis.
When a ligand binds to its receptor, conformational c hanges occur that affect the receptor’s intracellul ar domain. Conformational
changes of the extracellular domain upon ligand bin ding can propagate through the membrane region of th e receptor and lead to
activation of the intracellular domain or its associ ated proteins. In some cases, binding of the ligand causes dimerization of the
receptor, which means that two receptors bind to each o ther to form a stable complex called a dimer. A dimer is a chemical
compound formed when two molecules (often identical) join together. The binding of the receptors in this manner enables their
intracellular domains to come into close contact and activ ate each other.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Explain how the binding of a ligand initiates signal tr ansduction throughout a cell
Recognize the role of phosphorylation in the transmissio n of intracellular signals
Evaluate the role of second messengers in signal transm ission
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway
Methods of Intracellular Signaling
Self Check: Propagation of the Signal
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Propagation of the Signal. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.6: Introduction to Propagation of the Signal is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436299.7: Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway
After the ligand binds to the cell-surface receptor, the activation of the receptor’s intracellular compo nents sets off a chain of events
that is called a signaling pathway or a signaling cas cade. This process is sometimes called signal transducti on. In a signaling
pathway, second messengers, enzymes, and activated proteins in teract with specific proteins, which are in turn activ ated in a chain
reaction that eventually leads to a change in the c ell’s environment (Figure 1). The events in the casca de occur in a series, much
like a current flows in a river. Interactions that oc cur before a certain point are defined as upstream events, and events after that
point are called downstream events.
Practice Question
Figure 1. The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) is a receptor tyrosine kinase involved in the r egulation of cell
growth, wound healing, and tissue repair. When EGF bin ds to the EGFR, a cascade of downstream events causes the cell to grow
and divide. If EGFR is activated at inappropriate tim es, uncontrolled cell growth (cancer) may occur.
In certain cancers, the GTPase activity of the RAS G-pro tein is inhibited. This means that the RAS protein can no longer hydrolyze
GTP into GDP. What effect would this have on downstream cellu lar events?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”265793″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”265793″]ERK would become permanently activated, resulting in cell proliferation, migrati on, adhesion, and the
growth of new blood vessels. Apoptosis would be inhibited.[/hid den-answer]
Signaling pathways can get very complicated very quick ly because most cellular proteins can affect differe nt downstream events,
depending on the conditions within the cell. A single pathway can branch off toward different endpoints ba sed on the interplay
between two or more signaling pathways, and the same li gands are often used to initiate different signals in different cell types.
This variation in response is due to differences in p rotein expression in different cell types. Another co mplicating element is signal
integration of the pathways, in which signals from two or more diffe rent cell-surface receptors merge to activate the sa me
response in the cell. This process can ensure that mult iple external requirements are met before a cell com mits to a specific
response.
The effects of extracellular signals can also be am plified by enzymatic cascades. At the initiation of the signal, a single ligand binds
to a single receptor. However, activation of a recepto r-linked enzyme can activate many copies of a compon ent of the signaling

9.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43629cascade, which amplifies the signal.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.7: Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436309.8: Methods of Intracellular Signaling
The induction of a signaling pathway depends on the m odification of a cellular component by an enzyme. T here are numerous
enzymatic modifications that can occur, and they are recognized in turn by the next component downstream. The following are
some of the more common events in intracellular signali ng.
Observe an animation of cell signaling at this site.
Phosphorylation
Figure 1. In protein phosphorylation, a phosphate grou p (PO) is added to residues of the amino acids serine, th reonine, and
tyrosine.
One of the most common chemical modifications that o ccurs in signaling pathways is the addition of a phospha te group (PO) to
a molecule such as a protein in a process called phosp horylation. The phosphate can be added to a nucleotid e such as GMP to form
GDP or GTP. Phosphates are also often added to serine, th reonine, and tyrosine residues of proteins, where they r eplace the
hydroxyl group of the amino acid (Figure 1). The tra nsfer of the phosphate is catalyzed by an enzyme call ed a kinase. Various
kinases are named for the substrate they phosphorylate. Phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues ofte n activates enzymes.
Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues can either affect the activity of an enzyme or create a binding site that interacts with
downstream components in the signaling cascade. Phosphor ylation may activate or inactivate enzymes, and the r eversal of
phosphorylation, dephosphorylation by a phosphatase, wil l reverse the effect.
Second Messengers
Second messengers are small molecules that propagate a signal after i t has been initiated by the binding of the signalin g molecule
to the receptor. These molecules help to spread a signal thr ough the cytoplasm by altering the behavior of certain c ellular proteins.
Calcium ion is a widely used second messenger. The fre e concentration of calcium ions (Ca) within a cell i s very low because ion
pumps in the plasma membrane continuously use adenosi ne-5′-triphosphate (ATP) to remove it. For signaling purposes, Ca is
stored in cytoplasmic vesicles, such as the endoplasmi c reticulum, or accessed from outside the cell. When signaling occurs,
ligand-gated calcium ion channels allow the higher le vels of Ca that are present outside the cell (or in intracellular storage
compartments) to flow into the cytoplasm, which raises the concentration of cytoplasmic Ca. The response t o the increase in Ca
varies, depending on the cell type involved. For exa mple, in the β-cells of the pancreas, Ca signaling lea ds to the release of
insulin, and in muscle cells, an increase in Ca leads to muscl e contractions.
Another second messenger utilized in many different cell types is cyclic AMP (cAMP). Cyclic AMP is synthesized by the enzyme
adenylyl cyclase from ATP (Figure 2). The main role of cAMP in cells is to bind to and activate an enzym e called cAMP-dependent
kinase (A-kinase). A-kinase regulates many vital metabol ic pathways: It phosphorylates serine and threonine re sidues of its target4−3
4–3
2+
2+
2+
2+ 2+
2+
2+

9.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43630proteins, activating them in the process. A-kinase is found in many different types of cells, and the target proteins in each kind of
cell are different. Differences give rise to the variat ion of the responses to cAMP in different cells.
Figure 2. This diagram shows the mechanism for the forma tion of cyclic AMP (cAMP). cAMP serves as a second messeng er to
activate or inactivate proteins within the cell. Ter mination of the signal occurs when an enzyme called p hosphodiesterase converts
cAMP into AMP.
Present in small concentrations in the plasma membrane, inositol phospholipids are lipids that can also be converted into second
messengers. Because these molecules are membrane compon ents, they are located near membrane-bound receptors a nd can easily
interact with them. Phosphatidylinositol (PI) is the mai n phospholipid that plays a role in cellular signal ing. Enzymes known as
kinases phosphorylate PI to form PI-phosphate (PIP) and PI-bi sphosphate (PIP).
The enzyme phospholipase C cleaves PIP to form diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP) (Figure 3). These
products of the cleavage of PIP serve as second messe ngers. Diacylglycerol (DAG) remains in the plasma membr ane and activates
protein kinase C (PKC), which then phosphorylates serine and threonine residues in its target proteins. IP diff uses into the
cytoplasm and binds to ligand-gated calcium channel s in the endoplasmic reticulum to release Ca that co ntinues the signal
cascade.
Figure 3. The enzyme phospholipase C breaks down PIP int o IP and DAG, both of which serve as second messengers.2
2 3
2+
2 3

9.8.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43630Ligand binding to the receptor allows for signal tran sduction through the cell. The chain of events that c onveys the signal
through the cell is called a signaling pathway or cas cade. Signaling pathways are often very complex because of the interplay
between different proteins. A major component of cel l signaling cascades is the phosphorylation of molec ules by enzymes
known as kinases. Phosphorylation adds a phosphate group to serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues in a prote in, changing
their shapes, and activating or inactivating the pro tein. Small molecules like nucleotides can also be pho sphorylated. Second
messengers are small, non-protein molecules that are u sed to transmit a signal within a cell. Some examples o f second
messengers are calcium ions (Ca), cyclic AMP (cAMP), diacylglyc erol (DAG), and inositol triphosphate (IP).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.8: Methods of Intracellular Signaling is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives
2+

9.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436319.9: Introduction to Response to the Signal
Describe how a cell responds to a signal
Inside the cell, ligands bind to their internal recep tors, allowing them to directly affect the cell’s DNA an d protein-producing
machinery. Using signal transduction pathways, receptors in the plasma membrane produce a variety of effects on the cell. The
results of signaling pathways are extremely varied an d depend on the type of cell involved as well as the external and internal
conditions. A small sampling of responses is described i n this outcome.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe how signaling pathways direct protein expression, cellular metabolism, and cell growth
Recognize the role of apoptosis in the development and maintenance of a healthy organism
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Expression and Growth
Cell Death
Self Check: Response to the Signal
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Response to the Signal. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
9.9: Introduction to Response to the Signal is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436179.10: Expression and Growth
Gene Expression
Some signal transduction pathways regulate the transcri ption of RNA. Others regulate the translation of protei ns from mRNA. An
example of a protein that regulates translation in the nucleus is the MAP kinase ERK. ERK is activated in a phosphorylation
cascade when epidermal growth factor (EGF) binds the EGF r eceptor. Upon phosphorylation, ERK enters the nucleus and activates
a protein kinase that, in turn, regulates protein translat ion (Figure 1).
Figure 1. ERK is a MAP kinase that activates translation when it is phosphorylated. ERK phosphorylates MNK1, wh ich in turn
phosphorylates eIF-4E, an elongation initiation factor that, with other initiation factors, is associated wit h mRNA. When eIF-4E
becomes phosphorylated, the mRNA unfolds, allowing pro tein synthesis in the nucleus to begin.
The second kind of protein with which PKC can interact i s a protein that acts as an inhibitor. An inhibitor is a molecule that binds
to a protein and prevents it from functioning or red uces its function. In this case, the inhibitor is a pro tein called Iκ-B, which binds
to the regulatory protein NF-κB. (The symbol κ repres ents the Greek letter kappa.) When Iκ-B is bound to NF-κB, the complex
cannot enter the nucleus of the cell, but when Iκ-B is phosphorylated by PKC, it can no longer bind NF-κB, an d NF-κB (a
transcription factor) can enter the nucleus and init iate RNA transcription. In this case, the effect of pho sphorylation is to inactivate
an inhibitor and thereby activate the process of transcr iption.
Increase in Cellular Metabolism
The result of another signaling pathway affects muscle cells. The activation of β-adrenergic receptors in m uscle cells by adrenaline
leads to an increase in cyclic AMP (cAMP) inside the ce ll. Also known as epinephrine, adrenaline is a hormone (produced by the
adrenal gland attached to the kidney) that readies t he body for short-term emergencies. Cyclic AMP activate s PKA (protein kinase
A), which in turn phosphorylates two enzymes. The first enzyme promotes the degradation of glycogen by acti vating intermediate
glycogen phosphorylase kinase (GPK) that in turn activa tes glycogen phosphorylase (GP) that catabolizes glyco gen into glucose.
(Note that your body converts excess glucose to glyco gen for short-term storage. When energy is needed, g lycogen is quickly
reconverted to glucose.) Phosphorylation of the secon d enzyme, glycogen synthase (GS), inhibits its ability to form glycogen from
glucose. In this manner, a muscle cell obtains a ready pool of glucose by activating its formation via gl ycogen degradation and by
inhibiting the use of glucose to form glycogen, thu s preventing a futile cycle of glycogen degradation and synthesis. The glucose is
then available for use by the muscle cell in response to a sudden surge of adrenaline—the “fight or flight” refl ex.
Cell Growth
Cell signaling pathways also play a major role in cel l division. Cells do not normally divide unless they are stimulated by signals
from other cells. The ligands that promote cell growt h are called growth factors. Most growth factors bind to cell-surface receptors
that are linked to tyrosine kinases. These cell-surface receptors are called receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Activation of RTKs
initiates a signaling pathway that includes a G-prote in called RAS, which activates the MAP kinase pathway desc ribed earlier. The
enzyme MAP kinase then stimulates the expression of protei ns that interact with other cellular components to ini tiate cell division.

9.10.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43617Cancer biologists study the molecular origins of canc er with the goal of developing new prevention methods and treatment
strategies that will inhibit the growth of tumors witho ut harming the normal cells of the body. As mentioned earlier, signaling
pathways control cell growth. These signaling pathways are controlled by signaling proteins, which are, in t urn, expressed by
genes. Mutations in these genes can result in malfunct ioning signaling proteins. This prevents the cell fro m regulating its cell
cycle, triggering unrestricted cell division and can cer. The genes that regulate the signaling proteins ar e one type of oncogene,
which is a gene that has the potential to cause canc er. The gene encoding RAS is an oncogene that was origi nally discovered
when mutations in the RAS protein were linked to cancer. Further studies have indicated that 30 percent of c ancer cells have a
mutation in the RAS gene that leads to uncontrolled g rowth. If left unchecked, uncontrolled cell division can lead tumor
formation and metastasis, the growth of cancer cells in new lo cations in the body.
Cancer biologists have been able to identify many o ther oncogenes that contribute to the development o f cancer. For example,
HER2 is a cell-surface receptor that is present in exc essive amounts in 20 percent of human breast cancers. C ancer biologists
realized that gene duplication led to HER2 overexpre ssion in 25 percent of breast cancer patients and dev eloped a drug called
Herceptin (trastuzumab). Herceptin is a monoclonal ant ibody that targets HER2 for removal by the immune sys tem. Herceptin
therapy helps to control signaling through HER2. The use of Herceptin in combination with chemotherapy has helped to
increase the overall survival rate of patients with me tastatic breast cancer.
More information on cancer biology research can be found at the National Cancer Institute website.
Many pathways influence the cell by initiating gene e xpression, and the methods utilized are quite numerou s. Some pathways
activate enzymes that interact with DNA transcription f actors. Others modify proteins and induce them to ch ange their location
in the cell. Depending on the status of the organism, cells can respond by storing energy as glycogen or fat, or making it
available in the form of glucose. A signal transductio n pathway allows muscle cells to respond to immediate requirements for
energy in the form of glucose. Cell growth is almost a lways stimulated by external signals called growth fac tors. Uncontrolled
cell growth leads to cancer, and mutations in the gene s encoding protein components of signaling pathways are often found in
tumor cells.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.10: Expression and Growth is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Try It
Learning Objectives

9.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436189.11: Cell Death
Figure 1. The histological section of a foot of a 15-d ay-old mouse embryo, visualized using light microscopy, reveals areas of tissue
between the toes, which apoptosis will eliminate befor e the mouse reaches its full gestational age at 27 days. (credit: modification
of work by Michal Mañas)
When a cell is damaged, superfluous, or potentially d angerous to an organism, a cell can initiate a mecha nism to trigger
programmed cell death, or apoptosis. Apoptosis allows a cell to die in a controlled manner that prevents the release of potentially
damaging molecules from inside the cell. There are m any internal checkpoints that monitor a cell’s healt h; if abnormalities are
observed, a cell can spontaneously initiate the proce ss of apoptosis. However, in some cases, such as a viral infection or
uncontrolled cell division due to cancer, the cell’s normal checks and balances fail. External signaling can also initiate apoptosis.
For example, most normal animal cells have receptors that interact with the extracellular matrix, a networ k of glycoproteins that
provides structural support for cells in an organism. T he binding of cellular receptors to the extracellul ar matrix initiates a signaling
cascade within the cell. However, if the cell moves away from the extracellular matrix, the signaling ceases, and the cell undergoes
apoptosis. This system keeps cells from traveling thro ugh the body and proliferating out of control, as ha ppens with tumor cells that
metastasize.
Another example of external signaling that leads to a poptosis occurs in T-cell development. T-cells are im mune cells that bind to
foreign macromolecules and particles, and target the m for destruction by the immune system. Normally, T-c ells do not target “self”
proteins (those of their own organism), a process that can lead to autoimmune diseases. In order to develop the ability to
discriminate between self and non-self, immature T-cell s undergo screening to determine whether they bind to so-called self
proteins. If the T-cell receptor binds to self proteins, the cell initiates apoptosis to remove the potentially d angerous cell.
Apoptosis is also essential for normal embryological d evelopment. In vertebrates, for example, early stages o f development include
the formation of web-like tissue between individual fi ngers and toes (Figure 1). During the course of norma l development, these
unneeded cells must be eliminated, enabling fully se parated fingers and toes to form. A cell signaling me chanism triggers
apoptosis, which destroys the cells between the developing d igits.
Termination of the Signal Cascade
The aberrant signaling often seen in tumor cells is proof that the termination of a signal at the approp riate time can be just as
important as the initiation of a signal. One method of stopping a specific signal is to degrade the ligan d or remove it so that it can
no longer access its receptor. One reason that hydrop hobic hormones like estrogen and testosterone trigg er long-lasting events is
because they bind carrier proteins. These proteins all ow the insoluble molecules to be soluble in blood, b ut they also protect the
hormones from degradation by circulating enzymes.

9.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43618Inside the cell, many different enzymes reverse the cellular modifications that result from signaling casc ades. For example,
phosphatases are enzymes that remove the phosphate group attache d to proteins by kinases in a process called dephosphor ylation.
Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is degraded into AMP by phosphodiesterase, and the release of calcium stores is reversed by the Ca pumps
that are located in the external and internal membranes of the cell.
Programmed cell death, or apoptosis, is important for re moving damaged or unnecessary cells. The use of cellu lar signaling to
organize the dismantling of a cell ensures that har mful molecules from the cytoplasm are not released into the spaces between
cells, as they are in uncontrolled death, necrosis. Apopt osis also ensures the efficient recycling of the co mponents of the dead
cell. Termination of the cellular signaling cascade is very important so that the response to a signal is appropriate in both
timing and intensity. Degradation of signaling molec ules and dephosphorylation of phosphorylated interme diates of the
pathway by phosphatases are two ways to terminate signals wi thin the cell.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.11: Cell Death is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2+
Learning Objectives

9.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436199.12: Introduction to Signaling in Single-Celled Organisms
Discuss the process of signaling in single-cell organisms
Within-cell signaling allows bacteria to respond to e nvironmental cues, such as nutrient levels, some singl e-celled organisms also
release molecules to signal to each other.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe how single-celled yeasts use cell signaling to communicate with one another
Relate the role of quorum sensing to the ability of some bacteria to form biofilms
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Signaling in Yeast
Signaling in Bacteria
Self Check: Signaling in Single-Celled Organisms
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Signaling in Single-Celled Organisms. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen
Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC0: No Rights Reserved. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.12: Introduction to Signaling in Single-Celled Org anisms is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

9.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436209.13: Signaling in Yeast
Figure 1. Micrograph of budding Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells.
Yeasts are eukaryotes (fungi), and the components and processes found in yeast signals are similar to those of cell-surface receptor
signals in multicellular organisms. Budding yeasts a re able to participate in a process that is similar to sexual reproduction that
entails two haploid cells (cells with one-half the norma l number of chromosomes) combining to form a diploid cell (a cell with two
sets of each chromosome, which is what normal body cell s contain). Figure 1, shows a micrograph of this proce ss. The budding
Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells are visualized using differential inter ference contrast microscopy, a light microscopy
technique that enhances the contrast of the sample.
In order to find another haploid yeast cell that is prepared to mate, budding yeasts secrete a signaling mo lecule called mating
factor. When mating factor binds to cell-surface receptor s in other yeast cells that are nearby, they stop thei r normal growth cycles
and initiate a cell signaling cascade that includes protei n kinases and GTP-binding proteins that are similar to G- proteins.
Cellular Communication in Yeasts
The first life on our planet consisted of single-cel led prokaryotic organisms that had limited interactio n with each other. While
some external signaling occurs between different speci es of single-celled organisms, the majority of signaling within bacteria and
yeasts concerns only other members of the same species. The evolution of cellular communication is an absolute necessity for the
development of multicellular organisms, and this innov ation is thought to have required approximately 2.5 billion years to appear
in early life forms.
Yeasts are single-celled eukaryotes, and therefore hav e a nucleus and organelles characteristic of more comp lex life forms.
Comparisons of the genomes of yeasts, nematode worms, frui t flies, and humans illustrate the evolution of increa singly complex
signaling systems that allow for the efficient inner worki ngs that keep humans and other complex life forms funct ioning correctly.
Kinases are a major component of cellular communicat ion, and studies of these enzymes illustrate the evoluti onary connectivity of
different species. Yeasts have 130 types of kinases. More complex organisms such as nematode worms and f ruit flies have 454 and
239 kinases, respectively. Of the 130 kinase types in yeast, 97 belong to the 55 subfamilies of kinases th at are found in other
eukaryotic organisms. The only obvious deficiency seen i n yeasts is the complete absence of tyrosine kinases. I t is hypothesized
that phosphorylation of tyrosine residues is needed to control the more sophisticated functions of devel opment, differentiation, and
cellular communication used in multicellular organism s.
Because yeasts contain many of the same classes of sig naling proteins as humans, these organisms are ideal for studying signaling
cascades. Yeasts multiply quickly and are much simple r organisms than humans or other multicellular anim als. Therefore, the
signaling cascades are also simpler and easier to stud y, although they contain similar counterparts to human signal ing.
Practice Question
What characteristics make yeasts a good model for learni ng about signaling in humans?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”285048″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer][1]

9.13.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43620[hidden-answer a=”285048″]Yeasts are eukaryotes and h ave many of the same systems that humans do; however, they are singlecelled, so they are easy to grow, grow rapidly, have a sho rt generation time, and are much simpler than humans.[/ hidden-answer]
1. G. Manning, G.D. Plowman, T. Hunter, S. Sudarsanam, “Evolution of Pr otein Kinase Signaling from Yeast to Man,” Trends in
Biochemical Sciences 27, no. 10 (2002): 514–520. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
9.13: Signaling in Yeast is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436219.14: Signaling in Bacteria
Signaling in bacteria enables bacteria to monitor ex tracellular conditions, ensure that there are sufficie nt amounts of nutrients, and
ensure that hazardous situations are avoided. There ar e circumstances, however, when bacteria communicate with e ach other.
The first evidence of bacterial communication was ob served in a bacterium that has a symbiotic relations hip with Hawaiian bobtail
squid. When the population density of the bacteria re aches a certain level, specific gene expression is initiated, and the bacteria
produce bioluminescent proteins that emit light. Be cause the number of cells present in the environment (cell density) is the
determining factor for signaling, bacterial signaling was named quorum sensing. In politics and business, a quorum is the
minimum number of members required to be present to vote on an issue.
Quorum sensing uses autoinducers as signaling molecule s. Autoinducers are signaling molecules secreted by bacteria to
communicate with other bacteria of the same kind. The secreted autoinducers can be small, hydrophobic mole cules such as acylhomoserine lactone, (AHL) or larger peptide-based mole cules; each type of molecule has a different mode o f action. When AHL
enters target bacteria, it binds to transcription fac tors, which then switch gene expression on or off (see Fig ure 1). The peptide
autoinducers stimulate more complicated signaling pat hways that include bacterial kinases. The changes in bacteria following
exposure to autoinducers can be quite extensive. The pathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa has 616 different genes that
respond to autoinducers.
Practice Question
Figure 1. Autoinducers are small molecules or proteins p roduced by bacteria that regulate gene expression.

9.14.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43621Which of the following statements about quorum sensing is f alse?
a. Autoinducer must bind to receptor to turn on transcri ption of genes responsible for the production of more aut oinducer.
b. The receptor stays in the bacterial cell, but the autoi nducer diffuses out.
c. Autoinducer can only act on a different cell: it cannot a ct on the cell in which it is made.
d. Autoinducer turns on genes that enable the bacteria to form a biofilm.
[reveal-answer q=”147760″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”147760″]Answer c is false.[/hidden-answer]
Some species of bacteria that use quorum sensing form biofilms, complex colonies of bacteria (often containi ng several species)
that exchange chemical signals to coordinate the rel ease of toxins that will attack the host. Bacterial bi ofilms (Figure 2) can
sometimes be found on medical equipment; when biofilm s invade implants such as hip or knee replacements or heart pacemakers,
they can cause life-threatening infections.
Cell-cell communication enables Staphylococcus aureus bacteria (Figure 2a) to work together to form a biof ilm inside a hospital
patient’s catheter, seen here via scanning electron mic roscopy. S. aureus is the main cause of hospital-acquired infections. Hawaiian
bobtail squid (Figure 2b) have a symbiotic relationsh ip with the bioluminescent bacteria Vibrio fischeri. The luminescence makes it
difficult to see the squid from below because it eff ectively eliminates its shadow. In return for camouf lage, the squid provides food
for the bacteria. Free-living V. fischeri do not produce luciferase, the enzyme responsible f or luminescence, but V. fischeri living in
a symbiotic relationship with the squid do. Quorum sensing d etermines whether the bacteria should produce the lucifer ase enzyme.
Practice Question
Figure 2. (a) Staphylococcus aureus bacteria. (b) Hawai ian bobtail squid. (credit a: modifications of work b y CDC/Janice Carr;
credit b: modifications of work by Cliff1066/Flickr)
What advantage might biofilm production confer on the S. aureus inside the catheter?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”10146″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”10146″] S. aureus produces a biofilm because the higher cell density in the biofilm permits the formation of a
dense surface that helps protect the bacteria from anti biotics.[/hidden-answer]
Research on the details of quorum sensing has led to advances in growing bacteria for industrial purposes. Recent discoveries
suggest that it may be possible to exploit bacterial signaling pathways to control bacterial growth; this p rocess could replace or
supplement antibiotics that are no longer effective in c ertain situations.
Watch geneticist Bonnie Bassler discuss her discovery of quor um sensing in biofilm bacteria in squid.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the transcript for “How Bacteria ‘Talk’ ” here (link open s in new window).
Watch this collection of interview clips with biofilm rese archers in “What Are Bacterial Biofilms?”
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the transcript for “What are Bacterial Biofilms? A Six Minute Montage” here (link opens in new window).

9.14.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43621Practice Questions
Quorum sensing is triggered to begin when ___________.
a. treatment with antibiotics occurs
b. bacteria release growth hormones
c. bacterial protein expression is switched on
d. a sufficient number of bacteria are present
[reveal-answer q=”578321″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”578321″]Answer d. Quorum sensing is triggere d to begin when a sufficient number of bacteria are prese nt.
[/hidden-answer]
Why is signaling in multicellular organisms more complicat ed than signaling in single-celled organisms?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”43987″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”43987″]Multicellular organisms must coordinate many different events in different cell t ypes that may be very
distant from each other. Single-celled organisms are on ly concerned with their immediate environment and th e presence of other
cells in the area.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
How bacteria talk - Bonnie Bassler. Authored by: Bonnie Bassler. Provided by: TED-Ed. Located at:
https://youtu.be/KXWurAmtf78. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
What Are Bacterial Biofilms? A Six Minute Montage. Authored by: biofilm. Located at: https://youtu.be/lpI4WCM_9pM.
License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
9.14: Signaling in Bacteria is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436229.15: Putting It Together- Cell Communication
Now that we’ve learned about cell communication, let’s t he process of a single message as the cell passes it along:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=310
We just watched how epinephrine is used as a sample mess enger to trigger the release of glucose from cells i n the liver. This is an
example of phosphorylation, one of the two methods of intracellular signaling. The other method—second mes sengers—can be
seen in Ca signaling in muscle cells, which leads to muscle contractions.
These are just two examples of the many, many body func tions that rely on cell communication. As we discussed i n opening this
module, imagine again what would happen if we could not communicate in society. Now, with your new appreciatio n of cell
communication, imagine what would happen if even a single as pect of that process broke down.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Putting It Together: Cell Communication. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
All rights reserved content
Signal Transduction Pathways. Authored by: Bozeman Science. Located at: https://youtu.be/qOVkedxDqQo. License: All
Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
9.15: Putting It Together- Cell Communication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2+

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: Module 8- Cell Division
10.1: Why It Matters- Cell Division
10.2: Introduction to Chromosomes and DNA Packaging
10.3: DNA and Chromosomes
10.4: Chromosome Structure
10.5: Introduction to the Cell Cycle
10.6: Interphase
10.7: Mitosis
10.8: Cytokinesis
10.9: The Complete Cycle
10.10: Introduction to Cell Cycle Checkpoints
10.11: Control of the Cell Cycle
10.12: Cancer and the Cell Cycle
10.13: Introduction to Meiosis
10.14: Stages of Meiosis
10.15: Meiosis I
10.16: Meiosis II
10.17: Meiosis
10.18: Introduction to Genetic Diversity
10.19: Sexual Reproduction
10.20: Genetic Variation in Meiosis
10.21: Chromosomal Structural Rearrangements
10.22: Mitosis, Meiosis, and Sexual Reproduction
10.23: Introduction to Errors in Chromosome Number
10.24: Karyotypes
10.25: Common Disorders
10.26: Putting It Together- Cell Division
10.27: Assignment- Mitosis and Meiosis Worksheets
10: Module 8- Cell Division is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364310.1: Why It Matters- Cell Division
Why describe and explain the various stages of cell division?
Cell division is key to life: from the moment we are first conceived, we are continually changing and gro wing. In order for our
bodies to grow and develop, they must produce new cells— and allow for the death of old cells. Cell division i s also an essential
component of injury repair. If our cells couldn’t d ivide and create new cells, our bodies could never pro duce new skin cells to heal
road rash, or grow a fingernail back. However, when cell division goes awry, dramatic results may occur. Witho ut sufficient cellular
oversight, repeated rounds of unregulated cell divisi on can lead to a minor condition like psoriasis or a life-threatening disease like
cancer. Cell division takes occurs by a strict cycle, with multiple stages and checkpoints to ensure things don’t go awry.
Perhaps most importantly, without cell division, no spec ies would be able to reproduce—life would simply end (o r would have
ended a long time ago). Every human, as well as every sexually reproducing organism, begins life as a ferti lized egg (embryo) or
zygote. Trillions of cell divisions subsequently occu r in a controlled manner to produce a complex, multi cellular human. In other
words, that original single cell is the ancestor of every other cell in the body. Single-celled organisms use c ell division as their
method of reproduction.
Figure 1. A sea urchin begins life as a single cell that (a) divides to form two cells, visible by scanning ele ctron microscopy. After
four rounds of cell division, (b) there are 16 cells, as seen in this SEM image. After many rounds of cell di vision, the individual
develops into a complex, multicellular organism, as see n in this (c) mature sea urchin. (credit a: modificat ion of work by Evelyn
Spiegel, Louisa Howard; credit b: modification of wor k by Evelyn Spiegel, Louisa Howard; credit c: modifi cation of work by
Marco Busdraghi; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Learning Outcomes
Understand chromosome structure and organization in euka ryotic cells
Identify the stages of the cell cycle, by picture and by description of major milestones
Identify and explain the important checkpoints that a cell passes through during the cell cycle
Identify the stages of meiosis by picture and by descriptio n of major milestones; explain why meiosis involves two rou nds of
nuclear division
Describe and explain a range of mechanisms for generati ng genetic diversity
Examine karyotypes and identify the effects of sign ificant changes in chromosome number
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: Cell Division. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC
BY: Attribution
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.1: Why It Matters- Cell Division is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365210.2: Introduction to Chromosomes and DNA Packaging
Understand chromosome structure and organization in eukaryotic cells
In this outcome, we will discuss autosomes and sex chro mosomes and the differences between the two as well as how cells package
DNA.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Differentiate between two kinds of chromosomes: autosomes an d sex chromosomes
Understand how DNA is protected and compacted inside cells
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
DNA and Chromosomes
Chromosome Structure
Self Check: Types of Chromosomes
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Chromosomes and DNA Packaging. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen
Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
10.2: Introduction to Chromosomes and DNA Packaging is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

10.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365310.3: DNA and Chromosomes
When a cell divides in two, one of its main jobs is t o make sure that each of the two new cells gets a ful l, perfect copy of genetic
material. Mistakes during copying, or unequal divisi on of the genetic material between cells, can lead to cells that are unhealthy or
nonfunctional (and even to diseases such as cancer). But what exactly is this genetic material, and how do es it behave over the course of
a cell division?
DNA and Genomes
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is the genetic material of living organisms. In human s, DNA is found in almost all the cells of the body
and provides the instructions they need to grow, func tion, and respond to their environment. When a cell o f the body divides, it will pass
on a copy of its DNA to each of its daughter cells. DNA is also passed on at the at the level of organisms, with the DNA in sperm and
egg cells combining to form a new organism that has g enetic material from both its parents. Physically spe aking, DNA is a long string
of paired chemical units (nucleotides) that come in fou r different types, and it carries information organiz ed into units called genes.
Genes typically provide instructions for making protein s, which give cells and organisms their functional charac teristics.
In eukaryotes such as plants and animals, the great ma jority of DNA is found in the
nucleus and is called nuclear DNA. Mitochondria, organelles that harvest energy for the cell, contain their own mitochondrial DNA,
and chloroplasts, organelles that carry out photosynth esis in plant cells, also have chloroplast DNA. The amounts of DNA found in
mitochondria and chloroplasts are much smaller than the amount found in the nucleus. In bacteria and othe r prokaryotes, most of the
DNA is found in a central region of the cell called th e nucleoid, which functions similarly to a nucleus but is not s urrounded by a
membrane.
A cell’s set of DNA is called its genome. Since all of the cells in an organism (with a few exce ptions) contain the same DNA, you can
also say that an organism has its own genome, and sin ce the members of a species typically have similar ge nomes, you can also describe
the genome of a species. In general, when people refer to the human genome, or any other eukaryotic genom e, they mean the set of
DNA found in the nucleus (that is, the nuclear genome). Mitochondria and chloroplasts are considered to hav e their own separate
genomes.
Chromosomes
Each species has its own characteristic number of chro mosomes. Humans, for instance, have 46 chromosomes in a typical body cell,
while dogs have 78. Like many species of animals and plants, humans are diploid (2 n), meaning that most of their chromosomes come
in matched sets known as homologous pairs. Thus, the 46 chromosomes of a human cell are organ ized into 23 pairs, and the two
members of each pair are said to be homologues of one another (with the slight exception of the X and Y chr omosomes; see below).
Human sperm and eggs, which have only one homologous c hromosome from each pair, are said to be haploid (1 n). When a sperm and
egg fuse, their genetic material combines to form on e complete, diploid set of chromosomes. So, for each ho mologous pair of
chromosomes in your genome, one of the homologues comes f rom your mom and the other from your dad.

10.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43653
Image modified from “ Karyotype,” by the National Institutes of Health (public domain).
The two chromosomes in a homologous pair are generall y very similar to one another. They’re the same size and shape, and have the
same pattern of light and dark bands, as you can see i n the human karyotype (image of the chromosomes) shown above. Bands appear
when the chromosomes are stained with a dye, and the dark bands mark more compacted DNA (usually, with fewer ge nes), while the
light bands mark less compacted DNA (usually, with mor e genes). Most importantly, the two homologues in a p air carry the same type
of genetic information. For instance, there is a gene found near the bottom of chromosome 15 that affects eye color. A person might
have the blue version, or allele, of this gene on one homologue, but the brown version on the other. Both homologues have the same
type of gene in the same place, but they can (and often do!) h ave different versions of genes.
In humans, the X and Y chromosomes determine a person’s biological sex, with XX for female and XY for male. While the two X
chromosomes in a woman’s cells are genuinely homologo us, the X and Y chromosomes of a man’s cells are not. They differ in size and
shape, with the X being much larger than the Y, and co ntain different mostly different genes (although the y do have small regions of
similarity). The X and Y chromosomes are known as sex chromosomes, while the other 44 human chromosomes are called autosomes.
1. The Tech Museum of Innovation. (2013). Don’t it make your brown eyes blue? In Stanford at the tech: understanding genetics.
Retrieved from http://genetics.thetech.org/original_news/news39. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Chromosomes. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/cellular-mo lecularbiology/intro-to-cell-division/a/dna-and-chromosomes -article. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
10.3: DNA and Chromosomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.[1]

10.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365410.4: Chromosome Structure
The continuity of life from one cell to another has its foundation in the reproduction of cells by way o f the cell cycle. The cell cycle
is an orderly sequence of events that describes the stages of a cell’s life from the division of a single parent cell to the production of
two new daughter cells. The mechanisms involved in the cell cycle are highly regulated.
Eukaryotic Chromosomal Structure and Compaction
If the DNA from all 46 chromosomes in a human cell nuc leus was laid out end to end, it would measure approxi mately two meters;
however, its diameter would be only 2 nm. Considering t hat the size of a typical human cell is about 10 µm (100,000 cells lined up
to equal one meter), DNA must be tightly packaged to f it in the cell’s nucleus. At the same time, it must al so be readily accessible
for the genes to be expressed. During some stages of th e cell cycle, the long strands of DNA are condensed in to compact
chromosomes. There are a number of ways that chromosomes are compacted.
In the first level of compaction, short stretches of the DNA double helix wrap around a core of eight hist one proteins at regular
intervals along the entire length of the chromosome (Figure 1). The DNA-histone complex is called chromatin. The beadlike,
histone DNA complex is called a nucleosome, and DNA con necting the nucleosomes is called linker DNA. A DNA molecul e in this
form is about seven times shorter than the double hel ix without the histones, and the beads are about 10 n m in diameter, in contrast
with the 2-nm diameter of a DNA double helix. The next level of compaction occurs as the nucleosomes and the linker DNA
between them are coiled into a 30-nm chromatin fiber. This coiling further shortens the chromosome so th at it is now about 50
times shorter than the extended form. In the third l evel of packing, a variety of fibrous proteins is u sed to pack the chromatin. These
fibrous proteins also ensure that each chromosome in a non-dividing cell occupies a particular area of t he nucleus that does not
overlap with that of any other chromosome.

10.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43654
Figure 1. Double-stranded DNA wraps around histone prot eins to form nucleosomes that have the appearance of “ beads on a
string.” The nucleosomes are coiled into a 30-nm chrom atin fiber. When a cell undergoes mitosis, the chromoso mes condense even
further.
DNA replicates in the S phase of interphase. After repli cation, the chromosomes are composed of two linked sist er chromatids.
When fully compact, the pairs of identically packed c hromosomes are bound to each other by cohesin protein s. The connection
between the sister chromatids is closest in a region c alled the centromere. The conjoined sister chromatids, with a diameter of about
1 µm, are visible under a light microscope. The centrom eric region is highly condensed and thus will appear as a con stricted area.
This animation illustrates the different levels of chromosom e packing:

10.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43654
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=320
DNA in eukaryotes is highly structured and organized in all stages of an organisms life. Diploid organisms contain a pair of
each chromosome; humans have 23 pairs for a total n umber of 46 chromosomes. Pairs of chromosomes, also known as
homologous chromosomes, contain the same genes though there may be differences between the version of gene on each
member of the pair. DNA is normally tightly packed in to the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell, through protein -DNA complexes that
form the characteristic condensed ‘chromosome’ shape. DNA com pacts even further in preparation for cell division.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
How DNA is Packaged (Advanced). Authored by: DNA Learning Center. Located at: https://youtu.be/gbSIBhFwQ4s.
License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
10.4: Chromosome Structure is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

10.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365510.5: Introduction to the Cell Cycle
Identify the stages of the cell cycle, by picture and by description of major milestones
The cell cycle is an ordered series of events involving cell growt h and cell division that produces two new daughter cell s. Cells on
the path to cell division proceed through a series o f precisely timed and carefully regulated stages of growth, DNA replication, and
division that produces two identical (clone) cells. T he cell cycle has two major phases: interphase and the mitotic phase (Figure 1).
During interphase, the cell grows and DNA is replicated. During the mitotic phase, the replicated DNA and cytoplasmic contents
are separated, and the cell divides.
Figure 1. The cell cycle
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify the characteristics and sub-phases of interpha se
Identify the characteristics and stages of mitosis
Identify the characteristics of cytokinesis
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Interphase
Mitosis
Cytokinesis
The Complete Cycle
Self Check: The Cell Cycle

10.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43655Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.5: Introduction to the Cell Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365610.6: Interphase
During interphase, the cell undergoes normal growth pro cesses while also preparing for cell division. In order for a cell to move
from interphase into the mitotic phase, many internal and external conditions must be met. The three stag es of interphase are called
G, S, and G.
G Phase (First Gap)
The first stage of interphase is called the G phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic aspect, little change is visible. However,
during the G stage, the cell is quite active at the biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the bui lding blocks of chromosomal
DNA and the associated proteins as well as accumulating sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of re plicating each
chromosome in the nucleus.
S Phase (Synthesis of DNA)
Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-c ondensed chromatin configuration. In the S phase, DNA replication can
proceed through the mechanisms that result in the fo rmation of identical pairs of DNA molecules—sister ch romatids—that are
firmly attached to the centromeric region. The centr osome is duplicated during the S phase. The two centros omes will give rise to
the mitotic spindle, the apparatus that orchestrates the movement of ch romosomes during mitosis. At the center of each anima l
cell, the centrosomes of animal cells are associated with a pair of rod-like objects, the centrioles, which are at right angles to each
other. Centrioles help organize cell division. Centr ioles are not present in the centrosomes of other euk aryotic species, such as
plants and most fungi.
G Phase (Second Gap)
In the G phase, the cell replenishes its energy stores and synthesiz es proteins necessary for chromosome manipulation. So me cell
organelles are duplicated, and the cytoskeleton is di smantled to provide resources for the mitotic phase. There may be additional
cell growth during G. The final preparations for the m itotic phase must be completed before the cell is abl e to enter the first stage
of mitosis.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.6: Interphase is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.1 2

10.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365710.7: Mitosis
The mitotic phase (also known as M phase) is a multiste p process during which the duplicated chromosomes are aligned, separated,
and move into two new, identical daughter cells. The f irst portion of the mitotic phase is called karyokinesis, or nuclear division.
The second portion of the mitotic phase, called cyto kinesis, is the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into the two
daughter cells.
Karyokinesis (Mitosis)
Karyokinesis, also known as mitosis, is divided into a s eries of phases—prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anapha se, and
telophase—that result in the division of the cell (Fig ure 1).
Figure 1. Stages of mitosis
During prophase, the “first phase,” the nuclear envelope starts to d issociate into small vesicles, and the membranous org anelles
(such as the Golgi complex or Golgi apparatus, and endo plasmic reticulum), fragment and disperse toward the periphery of the cell.
The nucleolus disappears (disperses). The centrosom es begin to move to opposite poles of the cell. Microt ubules that will form the
mitotic spindle extend between the centrosomes, pushi ng them farther apart as the microtubule fibers lengt hen. The sister
chromatids begin to coil more tightly with the aid of condensin proteins and become visible under a light microscope.
Figure 2. During prometaphase, mitotic spindle microtu bules from opposite poles attach to each sister chromati d at the kinetochore.
In anaphase, the connection between the sister chromat ids breaks down, and the microtubules pull the chromoso mes toward
opposite poles.
During prometaphase, the “first change phase,” many processes that were b egun in prophase continue to advance. The remnants
of the nuclear envelope fragment. The mitotic spind le continues to develop as more microtubules assemble a nd stretch across the
length of the former nuclear area. Chromosomes becom e more condensed and discrete. Each sister chromatid develops a protein

10.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43657structure called a kinetochore in the centromeric r egion (Figure 2). The proteins of the kinetochore attr act and bind mitotic spindle
microtubules. As the spindle microtubules extend from the centrosomes, some of these microtubules come int o contact with and
firmly bind to the kinetochores. Once a mitotic fiber attaches to a chromosome, the chromosome will be orie nted until the
kinetochores of sister chromatids face the opposite pol es. Eventually, all the sister chromatids will be att ached via their
kinetochores to microtubules from opposing poles. Spind le microtubules that do not engage the chromosomes ar e called polar
microtubules. These microtubules overlap each other midway between the two poles and contribute to cell el ongation. Astral
microtubules are located near the poles, aid in spindle orie ntation, and are required for the regulation of mitosis.
During metaphase, the “change phase,” all the chromosomes are aligned in a plane called the metaphase plate, or the equatorial
plane, midway between the two poles of the cell. The sist er chromatids are still tightly attached to each oth er by cohesin proteins.
At this time, the chromosomes are maximally condensed.
During anaphase, the “upward phase,” the cohesin proteins degrade, a nd the sister chromatids separate at the centromere. Each
chromatid, now called a chromosome, is pulled rapidly toward the centrosome to which its microtubule is att ached. The cell
becomes visibly elongated (oval shaped) as the polar microtubules slide against each other at the metap hase plate where they
overlap.
During telophase, the “distance phase,” the chromosomes reach the oppos ite poles and begin to decondense (unravel), relaxing in to
a chromatin configuration. The mitotic spindles are depolymerized into tubulin monomers that will be used to assemble
cytoskeletal components for each daughter cell. Nucle ar envelopes form around the chromosomes, and nucleoso mes appear within
the nuclear area.
The activity below will walk you through mitosis—providi ng you with the chance to review the different steps of the process and
how they work together.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Click here for a text-only version of the activity.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Mitosis diagram. Authored by: Marek Kultys. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mitosis_diagram.jpg.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Mitosis. Provided by: Lumen Learning. Located at: www.oppia.org/explore/q4NBr1JG7Qrt. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
Public domain content
Modification of Mitosis cells sequence. Authored by: LadyofHats. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mitosis_cells_seque nce.svg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
10.7: Mitosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365810.8: Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis, or “cell motion,” is the second main stage of the m itotic phase during which cell division is completed via the
physical separation of the cytoplasmic components i nto two daughter cells. Division is not complete until the cell components have
been apportioned and completely separated into the two daughter cells. Although the stages of mitosis are simi lar for most
eukaryotes, the process of cytokinesis is quite different for eukaryotes that have cell walls, such as plant cells.
In cells such as animal cells that lack cell walls, cyto kinesis follows the onset of anaphase. A contractile ring composed of actin
filaments forms just inside the plasma membrane at th e former metaphase plate. The actin filaments pull th e equator of the cell
inward, forming a fissure. This fissure, or “crack,” is ca lled the cleavage furrow. The furrow deepens as the actin ring contracts,
and eventually the membrane is cleaved in two (Figure 1).
Figure 1. During cytokinesis in animal cells, a ring of actin filaments forms at the metaphase plate. The rin g contracts, forming a
cleavage furrow, which divides the cell in two. In p lant cells, Golgi vesicles coalesce at the former metap hase plate, forming a
phragmoplast. A cell plate formed by the fusion of th e vesicles of the phragmoplast grows from the center to ward the cell walls,
and the membranes of the vesicles fuse to form a plasma membrane that divides the cell in two.
In plant cells, a new cell wall must form between the d aughter cells. During interphase, the Golgi apparatus a ccumulates enzymes,
structural proteins, and glucose molecules prior to breaking into vesicles and dispersing throughout t he dividing cell. During
telophase, these Golgi vesicles are transported on micr otubules to form a phragmoplast (a vesicular structur e) at the metaphase
plate. There, the vesicles fuse and coalesce from the c enter toward the cell walls; this structure is called a cell plate. As more
vesicles fuse, the cell plate enlarges until it merg es with the cell walls at the periphery of the cell. E nzymes use the glucose that has
accumulated between the membrane layers to build a n ew cell wall. The Golgi membranes become parts of the p lasma membrane
on either side of the new cell wall (Figure 1).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.8: Cytokinesis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365910.9: The Complete Cycle
Remember, mitosis is the process of cell division, but it’s just a portion of the full cell cycle. Figure 1 s hows approximately how
long a cell spends in each stage of the cell cycle:
Figure 1. The cell cycle consists of interphase and the mitotic phase. During interphase, the cell grows and t he nuclear DNA is
duplicated. Interphase is followed by the mitotic pha se. During the mitotic phase, the duplicated chromosom es are segregated and
distributed into daughter nuclei. The cytoplasm is usua lly divided as well, resulting in two daughter cells.
As you can see, cells spend most of their time in interphase.
Video Review: The Cell Cycle
This video reviews all the steps of mitosis; seeing it all tog ether is a great review at this stage.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=330
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8

10.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43659All rights reserved content
Mitosis: Splitting Up Is Complicated: Crash Course Biolog y #12. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at:
https://youtu.be/L0k-enzoeOM. Project: Crash Course Biology. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard
YouTube License
10.9: The Complete Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4363310.10: Introduction to Cell Cycle Checkpoints
Identify and explain the important checkpoints that a cell passes through during the cell cycle
As we just learned, the cell cycle is a fairly complica ted process. In order to make sure everything goes ri ght, there are checkpoints
in the cycle. Let’s learn about these and how they help con trol the cell cycle.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify important checkpoints in cell division
Explain how errors in cell division are related to cancer
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Control of the Cell Cycle
Cancer and the Cell Cycle
Self Check: Cell Cycle Checkpoints
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
10.10: Introduction to Cell Cycle Checkpoints is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4363410.11: Control of the Cell Cycle
The length of the cell cycle is highly variable, eve n within the cells of a single organism. In humans, th e frequency of cell turnover
ranges from a few hours in early embryonic developmen t, to an average of two to five days for epithelial ce lls, and to an entire
human lifetime spent in G by specialized cells, such as cortical neurons or cardiac muscle cells. There is also variation in the time
that a cell spends in each phase of the cell cycle. Wh en fast-dividing mammalian cells are grown in culture (outside the body under
optimal growing conditions), the length of the cycle is about 24 hours. In rapidly dividing human cells with a 24-hour cell cycle,
the G phase lasts approximately nine hours, the S ph ase lasts 10 hours, the G phase lasts about four and o ne-half hours, and the M
phase lasts approximately one-half hour. In early em bryos of fruit flies, the cell cycle is completed in about eight minutes. The
timing of events in the cell cycle is controlled by mechan isms that are both internal and external to the cell.
Regulation of the Cell Cycle by External Events
Both the initiation and inhibition of cell division are triggered by events external to the cell when it is about to begin the replication
process. An event may be as simple as the death of a n earby cell or as sweeping as the release of growth-promo ting hormones, such
as human growth hormone (HGH). A lack of HGH can inhibit ce ll division, resulting in dwarfism, whereas too much HGH ca n
result in gigantism. Crowding of cells can also inhibi t cell division. Another factor that can initiate ce ll division is the size of the
cell; as a cell grows, it becomes inefficient due to its de creasing surface-to-volume ratio. The solution to this problem is to divide.
Whatever the source of the message, the cell receive s the signal, and a series of events within the cell allows it to proceed into
interphase. Moving forward from this initiation point, every parameter required during each cell cycle pha se must be met or the
cycle cannot progress.
Regulation at Internal Checkpoints
It is essential that the daughter cells produced be exact duplicates of the parent cell. Mistakes in th e duplication or distribution of
the chromosomes lead to mutations that may be passed forward to every new cell produced from an abnormal cell. To prevent a
compromised cell from continuing to divide, there ar e internal control mechanisms that operate at three main cell cycle
checkpoints. A checkpoint is one of several points in the eukaryotic cell cycle at which the progression of a cell to the next stage in
the cycle can be halted until conditions are favorabl e. These checkpoints occur near the end of G, at the G /M transition, and
during metaphase (Figure 1).0
1 2
1 2

10.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43634
Figure 1. The cell cycle is controlled at three check points. The integrity of the DNA is assessed at the G che ckpoint. Proper
chromosome duplication is assessed at the G checkpoint. A ttachment of each kinetochore to a spindle fiber is a ssessed at the M
checkpoint.
G Checkpoint
The G checkpoint determines whether all conditions a re favorable for cell division to proceed. The G che ckpoint, also called the
restriction point (in yeast), is a point at which the cell irreversibly commits to the cell division proc ess. External influences, such as
growth factors, play a large role in carrying the cel l past the G checkpoint. In addition to adequate re serves and cell size, there is a
check for genomic DNA damage at the G checkpoint. A c ell that does not meet all the requirements will not be allowed to progress
into the S phase. The cell can halt the cycle and att empt to remedy the problematic condition, or the cel l can advance into G and
await further signals when conditions improve.
G Checkpoint
The G checkpoint bars entry into the mitotic phase if certain conditions are not met. As at the G checkp oint, cell size and protein
reserves are assessed. However, the most important role of the G checkpoint is to ensure that all of the chr omosomes have been
replicated and that the replicated DNA is not damaged. If the checkpoint mechanisms detect problems with th e DNA, the cell cycle
is halted, and the cell attempts to either complete DNA repli cation or repair the damaged DNA.
M Checkpoint
The M checkpoint occurs near the end of the metaphas e stage of karyokinesis. The M checkpoint is also known as the spindle
checkpoint, because it determines whether all the sis ter chromatids are correctly attached to the spindle microtubules. Because the
separation of the sister chromatids during anaphase is an irreversible step, the cycle will not proceed un til the kinetochores of each
pair of sister chromatids are firmly anchored to at least two spindle fibers arising from opposite poles of the ce ll.
Watch what occurs at the G, G, and M checkpoints by downloading this animation of the cell cycle.
Regulator Molecules of the Cell Cycle
In addition to the internally controlled checkpoint s, there are two groups of intracellular molecules th at regulate the cell cycle.
These regulatory molecules either promote progress of the cell to the next phase (positive regulation) o r halt the cycle (negative
regulation). Regulator molecules may act individuall y, or they can influence the activity or production of other regulatory proteins.
Therefore, the failure of a single regulator may hav e almost no effect on the cell cycle, especially if more than one mechanism1
1 1
2 1
1 2

10.11.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43634controls the same event. Conversely, the effect of a deficient or non-functioning regulator can be wide- ranging and possibly fatal to
the cell if multiple processes are affected.
Positive Regulation of the Cell Cycle
Two groups of proteins, called cyclins and cyclin-de pendent kinases (Cdks), are responsible for the progre ss of the cell through the
various checkpoints. The levels of the four cyclin p roteins fluctuate throughout the cell cycle in a pr edictable pattern (Figure 2).
Increases in the concentration of cyclin proteins a re triggered by both external and internal signals. After the cell moves to the next
stage of the cell cycle, the cyclins that were active in the p revious stage are degraded.
Figure 2. The concentrations of cyclin proteins change throughout the cell cycle. There is a direct correl ation between cyclin
accumulation and the three major cell cycle checkpo ints. Also note the sharp decline of cyclin levels foll owing each checkpoint
(the transition between phases of the cell cycle), as c yclin is degraded by cytoplasmic enzymes. (credit: mod ification of work by
“WikiMiMa”/Wikimedia Commons)
Cyclins regulate the cell cycle only when they are t ightly bound to Cdks. To be fully active, the Cdk/cy clin complex must also be
phosphorylated in specific locations. Like all kina ses, Cdks are enzymes (kinases) that phosphorylate othe r proteins.
Phosphorylation activates the protein by changing its shape. The proteins phosphorylated by Cdks are involv ed in advancing the
cell to the next phase (Figure 3). The levels of Cdk proteins are relatively stable throughout the cell c ycle; however, the
concentrations of cyclin fluctuate and determine whe n Cdk/cyclin complexes form. The different cyclins and Cdks bind at specific
points in the cell cycle and thus regulate different check points.

10.11.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43634
Figure 3. Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) are protein k inases that, when fully activated, can phosphorylate a nd thus activate other
proteins that advance the cell cycle past a checkpoin t. To become fully activated, a Cdk must bind to a c yclin protein and then be
phosphorylated by another kinase.
Since the cyclic fluctuations of cyclin levels are b ased on the timing of the cell cycle and not on spec ific events, regulation of the
cell cycle usually occurs by either the Cdk molecules alone or the Cdk/cyclin complexes. Without a specifi c concentration of fully
activated cyclin/Cdk complexes, the cell cycle cannot pr oceed through the checkpoints.
Although the cyclins are the main regulatory molecul es that determine the forward momentum of the cell cy cle, there are several
other mechanisms that fine-tune the progress of the c ycle with negative, rather than positive, effects. The se mechanisms essentially
block the progression of the cell cycle until proble matic conditions are resolved. Molecules that prevent the full activation of Cdks
are called Cdk inhibitors. Many of these inhibitor mo lecules directly or indirectly monitor a particular cell cycle event. The block
placed on Cdks by inhibitor molecules will not be remov ed until the specific event that the inhibitor monitors i s completed.
Negative Regulation of the Cell Cycle
The second group of cell cycle regulatory molecules are negative regulators. Negative regulators halt th e cell cycle. Remember that
in positive regulation, active molecules cause the cycle to progress.

10.11.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43634The best understood negative regulatory molecules ar e retinoblastoma protein (Rb), p53, and p21. Retinobl astoma proteins are a
group of tumor-suppressor proteins common in many ce lls. The 53 and 21 designations refer to the functiona l molecular masses of
the proteins (p) in kilodaltons. Much of what is known a bout cell cycle regulation comes from research condu cted with cells that
have lost regulatory control. All three of these regu latory proteins were discovered to be damaged or non-f unctional in cells that
had begun to replicate uncontrollably (became cance rous). In each case, the main cause of the unchecked pr ogress through the cell
cycle was a faulty copy of the regulatory protein.
Rb, p53, and p21 act primarily at the G checkpoint. p53 is a multi-functional protein that has a major i mpact on the commitment
of a cell to division because it acts when there is d amaged DNA in cells that are undergoing the preparato ry processes during G. If
damaged DNA is detected, p53 halts the cell cycle and recruits enzymes to repair the DNA. If the DNA cannot be r epaired, p53 can
trigger apoptosis, or cell suicide, to prevent the d uplication of damaged chromosomes. As p53 levels rise, the production of p21 is
triggered. p21 enforces the halt in the cycle dictate d by p53 by binding to and inhibiting the activity of the Cdk/cyclin complexes.
As a cell is exposed to more stress, higher levels of p53 and p21 accumulate, making it less likely that th e cell will move into the S
phase.
Rb exerts its regulatory influence on other positive regulator proteins. Chiefly, Rb monitors cell size. In the active,
dephosphorylated state, Rb binds to proteins called transcription factors, most commonly, E2F (Figure 4). Tr anscription factors
“turn on” specific genes, allowing the production of proteins encoded by that gene. When Rb is bound to E2F, production of
proteins necessary for the G /S transition is blocked. As the cell increases in size, Rb is slowly phosphoryla ted until it becomes
inactivated. Rb releases E2F, which can now turn on the gene that produces the transition protein, and this particular block is
removed. For the cell to move past each of the checkpo ints, all positive regulators must be “turned on,” and all negative regulators
must be “turned off.”
Figure 4. Rb halts the cell cycle and releases its hold in response to cell growth.
Rb and other proteins that negatively regulate the cell cycle are sometimes called tumor suppressors. Why do you think the name
tumor suppressor might be appropriate for these prote ins?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”518676″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”518676″]Rb and other negative regu latory proteins control cell division and therefore prevent the formation of
tumors. Mutations that prevent these proteins from carryi ng out their function can result in cancer.[/hidden-answer]1
Practice Question

10.11.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43634Each step of the cell cycle is monitored by interna l controls called checkpoints. There are three major checkpoints in the cell
cycle: one near the end of G, a second at the G /M tr ansition, and the third during metaphase. Positive re gulator molecules
allow the cell cycle to advance to the next stage. Neg ative regulator molecules monitor cellular condition s and can halt the
cycle until specific requirements are met.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.11: Control of the Cell Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives
1 2

10.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4363510.12: Cancer and the Cell Cycle
Cancer comprises many different diseases caused by a common mechanism: uncontrolled cell growth. Despite t he redundancy and
overlapping levels of cell cycle control, errors do occur. One of the critical processes monitored by th e cell cycle checkpoint
surveillance mechanism is the proper replication of DNA during the S phase. Even when all of the cell cycle controls are fully
functional, a small percentage of replication errors (mutations) will be passed on to the daughter cells. If changes to the DNA
nucleotide sequence occur within a coding portion of a gene and are not corrected, a gene mutation results. All cancers start when a
gene mutation gives rise to a faulty protein that pl ays a key role in cell reproduction. The change in the cell that results from the
malformed protein may be minor: perhaps a slight de lay in the binding of Cdk to cyclin or an Rb protei n that detaches from its
target DNA while still phosphorylated. Even minor mistak es, however, may allow subsequent mistakes to occur more readily. Over
and over, small uncorrected errors are passed from t he parent cell to the daughter cells and amplified as each generation produces
more non-functional proteins from uncorrected DNA dam age. Eventually, the pace of the cell cycle speeds u p as the effectiveness
of the control and repair mechanisms decreases. Unco ntrolled growth of the mutated cells outpaces the gro wth of normal cells in
the area, and a tumor (~ oma) can result.
Proto-oncogenes
The genes that code for the positive cell cycle regul ators are called proto-oncogenes. Proto-oncogenes are normal genes that, when
mutated in certain ways, become oncogenes, genes that cause a cell to become cancerous. Consid er what might happen to the cell
cycle in a cell with a recently acquired oncogene. I n most instances, the alteration of the DNA sequence wi ll result in a less
functional (or non-functional) protein. The result is detrimental to the cell and will likely prevent th e cell from completing the cell
cycle; however, the organism is not harmed because th e mutation will not be carried forward. If a cell cann ot reproduce, the
mutation is not propagated and the damage is minimal. Occasionally, however, a gene mutation causes a change that increases the
activity of a positive regulator. For example, a mut ation that allows Cdk to be activated without being p artnered with cyclin could
push the cell cycle past a checkpoint before all of the required conditions are met. If the resulting da ughter cells are too damaged to
undergo further cell divisions, the mutation would n ot be propagated and no harm would come to the organ ism. However, if the
atypical daughter cells are able to undergo further cell divisions, subsequent generations of cells will pr obably accumulate even
more mutations, some possibly in additional genes that regulate the cell cycle.
The Cdk gene in the above example is only one of man y genes that are considered proto-oncogenes. In add ition to the cell cycle
regulatory proteins, any protein that influences the cycle can be altered in such a way as to override cell cycle checkpoints. An
oncogene is any gene that, when altered, leads to an increase in the rate of cell cycle progression.
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Like proto-oncogenes, many of the negative cell cyc le regulatory proteins were discovered in cells that h ad become cancerous.
Tumor suppressor genes are segments of DNA that code for negative regulator p roteins, the type of regulators that, when
activated, can prevent the cell from undergoing unco ntrolled division. The collective function of the be st-understood tumor
suppressor gene proteins, Rb, p53, and p21, is to put up a roadblock to cell cycle progression until certa in events are completed. A
cell that carries a mutated form of a negative regu lator might not be able to halt the cell cycle if t here is a problem. Tumor
suppressors are similar to brakes in a vehicle: malfunctio ning brakes can contribute to a car crash.
Mutated p53 genes have been identified in more than o ne-half of all human tumor cells. This discovery is not surprising in light of
the multiple roles that the p53 protein plays at the G1 checkpoint. A cell with a faulty p53 may fail to detect errors present in the
genomic DNA (Figure 1). Even if a partially functional p53 does identify the mutations, it may no longer b e able to signal the
necessary DNA repair enzymes. Either way, damaged DNA will remain uncorrected. At this point, a functional p53 wi ll deem the
cell unsalvageable and trigger programmed cell deat h (apoptosis). The damaged version of p53 found in c ancer cells, however,
cannot trigger apoptosis.

10.12.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43635
Figure 1. The role of normal p53 is to monitor DNA an d the supply of oxygen (hypoxia is a condition of red uced oxygen supply). If
damage is detected, p53 triggers repair mechanisms. If repairs are unsuccessful, p53 signals apoptosis. A cell wit h an abnormal p53
protein cannot repair damaged DNA and thus cannot sig nal apoptosis. Cells with abnormal p53 can become canc erous. (credit:
modification of work by Thierry Soussi)
The loss of p53 function has other repercussions for the cell cycle. Mutated p53 might lose its ability to trigger p21 production.
Without adequate levels of p21, there is no effective block on Cdk activation. Essentially, without a fully functional p53, the G
checkpoint is severely compromised and the cell pro ceeds directly from G to S regardless of internal and external conditions. At
the completion of this shortened cell cycle, two dau ghter cells are produced that have inherited the mut ated p53 gene. Given the
non-optimal conditions under which the parent cell re produced, it is likely that the daughter cells will ha ve acquired other
mutations in addition to the faulty tumor suppressor g ene. Cells such as these daughter cells quickly accum ulate both oncogenes
and non-functional tumor suppressor genes. Again, the result is tumor growth.
This video reviews the ways that cancer is a by-product of b roken DNA replication:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this versi on of the text. You can view it online here: pb.libret exts.org/biom1/?
p=3361
Learning Objectives

10.12.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43635Cancer is the result of unchecked cell division caus ed by a breakdown of the mechanisms that regulate th e cell cycle. The loss
of control begins with a change in the DNA sequence of a gene that codes for one of the regulatory molecu les. Faulty
instructions lead to a protein that does not functi on as it should. Any disruption of the monitoring system can allow other
mistakes to be passed on to the daughter cells. Each successive cell division will give rise to daughter ce lls with even more
accumulated damage. Eventually, all checkpoints beco me nonfunctional, and rapidly reproducing cells cro wd out normal cells,
resulting in a tumor or leukemia (blood cancer).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Cell cycle regulation, cancer, and stem cells. Authored by: Sal Khan. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at:
http://www.khanacademy.org/video?v=RZhL7LDPk8w. Project: Biology. License: CC BY-NC-SA: AttributionNonCommercial-ShareAlike
10.12: Cancer and the Cell Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4363610.13: Introduction to Meiosis
Identify the stages of meiosis by picture and by description of major milestones; explain why meiosis
involves two rounds of nuclear division
Just what is the difference between mitosis and meiosis? We know that mitosis produces autosomes; meiosis produc es sex
chromosomes. Let’s learn just how similar and different thes e processes are.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify the stages of meiosis
Describe the steps of meiosis I
Describe the steps of meiosis II
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Stages of Meiosis
Meiosis I
Meiosis II
Meiosis
Self Check: Meiosis
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
10.13: Introduction to Meiosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4363710.14: Stages of Meiosis
The ability to reproduce in kind is a basic characteristic of all living things. In kind means that the offspring of any organism
closely resemble their parent or parents. Hippopotamuse s give birth to hippopotamus calves, Joshua trees prod uce seeds from
which Joshua tree seedlings emerge, and adult flaming os lay eggs that hatch into flamingo chicks. In kind does not generally mean
exactly the same.
Figure 1. Each of us, like these other large multicell ular organisms, begins life as a fertilized egg. After trillions of cell divisions,
each of us develops into a complex, multicellular org anism. (credit a: modification of work by Frank Woute rs; credit b:
modification of work by Ken Cole, USGS; credit c: mo dification of work by Martin Pettitt)
As you have learned, mitosis is the part of a cell rep roduction cycle that results in identical daughter n uclei that are also genetically
identical to the original parent nucleus. In mitosis, both the parent and the daughter nuclei are at the same ploidy level—diploid for
most plants and animals. While many unicellular orga nisms and a few multicellular organisms can produce g enetically identical
clones of themselves through mitosis, many single-ce lled organisms and most multicellular organisms repro duce regularly using
another method: meiosis. Sexual reproduction, specifically meiosis and fert ilization, introduces variation into offspring that may
account for the evolutionary success of sexual repro duction. The vast majority of eukaryotic organisms, both multicellular and
unicellular, can or must employ some form of meiosis and fertilization to reproduce.
Meiosis employs many of the same mechanisms as mitosi s. However, the starting nucleus is always diploid and th e nuclei that
result at the end of a meiotic cell division are ha ploid. To achieve this reduction in chromosome numbe r, meiosis consists of one
round of chromosome duplication and two rounds of nuclear division.
Because the events that occur during each of the di vision stages are analogous to the events of mitosis, the same stage names are
assigned. However, because there are two rounds of divisio n, the major process and the stages are designated wit h a “I” or a “II.”
Thus, meiosis I is the first round of meiotic division and consist s of prophase I, prometaphase I, and so on. Meiosis II, in which the
second round of meiotic division takes place, includes prop hase II, prometaphase II, and so on.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.14: Stages of Meiosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4363810.15: Meiosis I
Meiosis is preceded by an interphase consisting of th e G, S, and G phases, which are nearly identical to the p hases preceding
mitosis. The G phase, which is also called the first gap phase, is the first phase of the interphase and is focused on cell growth. The
S phase is the second phase of interphase, during which the DNA of the chromosomes is replicated. Finally, the G phase, also
called the second gap phase, is the third and final ph ase of interphase; in this phase, the cell undergoes t he final preparations for
meiosis.
During DNA duplication in the S phase, each chromosome i s replicated to produce two identical copies, called s ister chromatids,
that are held together at the centromere by cohesin proteins. Cohesin holds the chromatids together un til anaphase II. The
centrosomes, which are the structures that organize t he microtubules of the meiotic spindle, also replicat e. This prepares the cell to
enter prophase I, the first meiotic phase.
Prophase I
Early in prophase I, before the chromosomes can be see n clearly microscopically, the homologous chromosome s are attached at
their tips to the nuclear envelope by proteins. As the nuclear envelope begins to break down, the proteins associated with
homologous chromosomes bring the pair close to each o ther. (Recall that, in mitosis, homologous chromosome s do not pair
together. In mitosis, homologous chromosomes line up end -to-end so that when they divide, each daughter cell receives a sister
chromatid from both members of the homologous pair.) The synaptonemal complex, a lattice of proteins between the homologous
chromosomes, first forms at specific locations and t hen spreads to cover the entire length of the chromo somes. The tight pairing of
the homologous chromosomes is called synapsis. In synapsis, the genes on the chromatids of the ho mologous chromosomes are
aligned precisely with each other. The synaptonemal complex supports the exchange of chromosomal segmen ts between non-sister
homologous chromatids, a process called crossing over. Crossing over can be observed visually after the exchange as chiasmata
(singular = chiasma) (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Early in prophase I, homologous chromosomes co me together to form a synapse. The chromosomes are boun d tightly
together and in perfect alignment by a protein latt ice called a synaptonemal complex and by cohesin prot eins at the centromere.
In species such as humans, even though the X and Y sex chromosomes are not homologous (most of their genes differ), they have a
small region of homology that allows the X and Y chrom osomes to pair up during prophase I. A partial syna ptonemal complex
develops only between the regions of homology.
Located at intervals along the synaptonemal complex are large protein assemblies called recombination nodules. These
assemblies mark the points of later chiasmata and me diate the multistep process of crossover —or genetic recombination—between
the non-sister chromatids. Near the recombination no dule on each chromatid, the double-stranded DNA is clea ved, the cut ends are
modified, and a new connection is made between the non- sister chromatids. As prophase I progresses, the synapton emal complex
begins to break down and the chromosomes begin to con dense. When the synaptonemal complex is gone, the homol ogous
chromosomes remain attached to each other at the cen tromere and at chiasmata. The chiasmata remain until anaphase I. The
number of chiasmata varies according to the species an d the length of the chromosome. There must be at lea st one chiasma per
chromosome for proper separation of homologous chrom osomes during meiosis I, but there may be as many as 25. Following
crossover, the synaptonemal complex breaks down and t he cohesin connection between homologous pairs is als o removed. At the1 2

10.15.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43638end of prophase I, the pairs are held together only at the chiasmata (Figure 2) and are called tetrads because the four sister
chromatids of each pair of homologous chromosomes are now v isible.
Figure 2. Crossover occurs between non-sister chromatids o f homologous chromosomes. The result is an exchange of g enetic
material between homologous chromosomes.
The crossover events are the first source of genetic variation in the nuclei produced by meiosis. A sin gle crossover event between
homologous non-sister chromatids leads to a reciproc al exchange of equivalent DNA between a maternal chrom osome and a
paternal chromosome. Now, when that sister chromatid i s moved into a gamete cell it will carry some DNA from one parent of the
individual and some DNA from the other parent. The si ster recombinant chromatid has a combination of mat ernal and paternal
genes that did not exist before the crossover. Multiple crossovers in an arm of the chromosome have the same effect, exchanging
segments of DNA to create recombinant chromosomes.
Prometaphase I
The key event in prometaphase I is the attachment of the spindle fiber microtubules to the kinetochore proteins at the centromeres.
Kinetochore proteins are multiprotein complexes that bind the centromeres of a chromosome to the microtub ules of the mitotic
spindle. Microtubules grow from centrosomes placed at opposite poles of the cell. The microtubules move to ward the middle of the

10.15.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43638cell and attach to one of the two fused homologous ch romosomes. The microtubules attach at each chromosomes’ kinetochores.
With each member of the homologous pair attached to opposite poles of the cell, in the next phase, the m icrotubules can pull the
homologous pair apart. A spindle fiber that has attac hed to a kinetochore is called a kinetochore microtu bule. At the end of
prometaphase I, each tetrad is attached to microtubul es from both poles, with one homologous chromosome faci ng each pole. The
homologous chromosomes are still held together at chias mata. In addition, the nuclear membrane has broken down entirely.
Metaphase I
During metaphase I, the homologous chromosomes are arra nged in the center of the cell with the kinetochores facing opposite
poles. The homologous pairs orient themselves randomly at the equator. For example, if the two homologous me mbers of
chromosome 1 are labeled a and b, then the chromosome s could line up a-b, or b-a. This is important in deter mining the genes
carried by a gamete, as each will only receive one o f the two homologous chromosomes. Recall that homologo us chromosomes are
not identical. They contain slight differences in their genetic information, causing each gamete to have a uniqu e genetic makeup.
This randomness is the physical basis for the creati on of the second form of genetic variation in offspri ng. Consider that the
homologous chromosomes of a sexually reproducing org anism are originally inherited as two separate sets, o ne from each parent.
Using humans as an example, one set of 23 chromosomes i s present in the egg donated by the mother. The fathe r provides the other
set of 23 chromosomes in the sperm that fertilizes the egg. Every cell of the multicellular offspring has copies of the original two
sets of homologous chromosomes. In prophase I of meios is, the homologous chromosomes form the tetrads. In met aphase I, these
pairs line up at the midway point between the two poles of the cell to form the metaphase plate. Because the re is an equal chance
that a microtubule fiber will encounter a maternally or paternally inherited chromosome, the arrangement of the tetrads at the
metaphase plate is random. Any maternally inherited chr omosome may face either pole. Any paternally inherit ed chromosome may
also face either pole. The orientation of each tetrad is independent of the orientation of the other 22 tetrads.
This event—the random (or independent) assortment of homologous chromosomes at the metaphase plate—is the second
mechanism that introduces variation into the gametes or spores. In each cell that undergoes meiosis, the a rrangement of the tetrads
is different. The number of variations is dependent on the number of chromosomes making up a set. There a re two possibilities for
orientation at the metaphase plate; the possible num ber of alignments therefore equals 2, where n is the number of chromosomes
per set. Humans have 23 chromosome pairs, which resul ts in over eight million (2) possible genetically-di stinct gametes. This
number does not include the variability that was pre viously created in the sister chromatids by crossover. Given these two
mechanisms, it is highly unlikely that any two haploid cells resulting from meiosis will have the same genetic composition (Figure
3).n

10.15.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43638
Figure 3. Random, independent assortment during metaph ase I can be demonstrated by considering a cell with a set of two
chromosomes (n = 2). In this case, there are two possible arrangement s at the equatorial plane in metaphase I. The total p ossible
number of different gametes is 2 n, where n equals the number of chromosomes in a set. In this exam ple, there are four possible
genetic combinations for the gametes. With n = 23 in human cells, there are over 8 million possibl e combinations of paternal and
maternal chromosomes.
To summarize the genetic consequences of meiosis I, th e maternal and paternal genes are recombined by cro ssover events that
occur between each homologous pair during prophase I. In addition, the random assortment of tetrads on the metaphase plate
produces a unique combination of maternal and paternal chr omosomes that will make their way into the gametes.
Anaphase I
In anaphase I, the microtubules pull the linked chrom osomes apart. The sister chromatids remain tightly b ound together a the
centromere. The chiasmata are broken in anaphase I as the microtubules attached to the fused kinetochores p ull the homologous
chromosomes apart (Figure 4).

10.15.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43638
Figure 4. The process of chromosome alignment differs be tween meiosis I and meiosis II. In prometaphase I, micro tubules attach to
the fused kinetochores of homologous chromosomes, and th e homologous chromosomes are arranged at the midpoint of the cell in
metaphase I. In anaphase I, the homologous chromosomes a re separated. In prometaphase II, microtubules attach to the
kinetochores of sister chromatids, and the sister chromat ids are arranged at the midpoint of the cells in meta phase II. In anaphase II,
the sister chromatids are separated.
Telophase I and Cytokinesis
In telophase, the separated chromosomes arrive at op posite poles. The remainder of the typical telophase events may or may not
occur, depending on the species. In some organisms, the chromosomes decondense and nuclear envelopes for m around the
chromatids in telophase I. In other organisms, cytok inesis—the physical separation of the cytoplasmic co mponents into two
daughter cells—occurs without reformation of the nucl ei. In nearly all species of animals and some fungi, cytokinesis separates the
cell contents via a cleavage furrow (constriction of the actin ring that leads to cytoplasmic division). In plants, a cell plate is formed
during cell cytokinesis by Golgi vesicles fusing at the metaphase plate. This cell plate will ultimately lead to the formation of cell
walls that separate the two daughter cells.
Two haploid cells are the end result of the first me iotic division. The cells are haploid because at eac h pole, there is just one of each
pair of the homologous chromosomes. Therefore, only one full set of the chromosomes is present. This is why the cells are
considered haploid—there is only one chromosome set, even though each homolog still consists of two sister chromatids. Recall
that sister chromatids are merely duplicates of one of the two homologous chromosomes (except for changes that occurred during
crossing over). In meiosis II, these two sister chromatid s will separate, creating four haploid daughter cells.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously

10.15.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43638Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.15: Meiosis I is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4363910.16: Meiosis II
In some species, cells enter a brief interphase, or interkinesis, before entering meiosis II. Interkinesis lacks an S phase, so
chromosomes are not duplicated. The two cells produced in meiosis I go through the events of meiosis II in synchrony. During
meiosis II, the sister chromatids within the two daug hter cells separate, forming four new haploid gametes. T he mechanics of
meiosis II is similar to mitosis, except that each divi ding cell has only one set of homologous chromosomes. Therefore, each cell
has half the number of sister chromatids to separate out a s a diploid cell undergoing mitosis.
Prophase II
If the chromosomes decondensed in telophase I, they c ondense again. If nuclear envelopes were formed, they fragment into
vesicles. The centrosomes that were duplicated during interkinesis move away from each other toward opposi te poles, and new
spindles are formed.
Prometaphase II
The nuclear envelopes are completely broken down, and the spindle is fully formed. Each sister chromatid forms an individual
kinetochore that attaches to microtubules from opposi te poles.
Metaphase II
The sister chromatids are maximally condensed and a ligned at the equator of the cell.
Anaphase II
The sister chromatids are pulled apart by the kineto chore microtubules and move toward opposite poles. No n-kinetochore
microtubules elongate the cell.

10.16.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43639
Figure 1. The process of chromosome alignment differs be tween meiosis I and meiosis II. In prometaphase I, micro tubules attach to
the fused kinetochores of homologous chromosomes, and th e homologous chromosomes are arranged at the midpoint of the cell in
metaphase I. In anaphase I, the homologous chromosomes a re separated. In prometaphase II, microtubules attach to the
kinetochores of sister chromatids, and the sister chromat ids are arranged at the midpoint of the cells in meta phase II. In anaphase II,
the sister chromatids are separated.
Telophase II and Cytokinesis
The chromosomes arrive at opposite poles and begin to decondense. Nuclear envelopes form around the chrom osomes. Cytokinesis
separates the two cells into four unique haploid cell s. At this point, the newly formed nuclei are both haploi d. The cells produced
are genetically unique because of the random assortme nt of paternal and maternal homologs and because of th e recombining of
maternal and paternal segments of chromosomes (with the ir sets of genes) that occurs during crossover. The en tire process of
meiosis is outlined in Figure 2.

10.16.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43639
Figure 2. An animal cell with a diploid number of fo ur (2 n = 4) proceeds through the stages of meiosis to form fou r haploid
daughter cells.
Review the process of meiosis, observing how chromosomes al ign and migrate, at Meiosis: An Interactive Animation.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.16: Meiosis II is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.17.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364010.17: Meiosis
This video walks you through meiosis I and meiosis II:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=346
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
Meiosis: Where the Sex Starts - Crash Course Biology #13. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at: https://youtu.be/qCLmR9YY7o. Project: Crash Course Biology. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
10.17: Meiosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.18.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364110.18: Introduction to Genetic Diversity
Describe and explain a range of mechanisms for generating genetic diversity
Now that we know how meiosis works, let’s see how it and its in volved processes contribute to genetic diversity.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Understand how sexual reproduction leads to different sexual life cycles
Understand how meiosis contributes to genetic diversit y
Understand the impact of translocation between non-homol ogous chromosomes during meiosis or mitosis
Understand how mitosis, meiosis, and random fertilization all result in genetically unique individuals
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Sexual Reproduction
Genetic Variation in Meiosis
Chromosomal Structural Rearrangements
Mitosis, Meiosis, and Sexual Reproduction
Self Check: Genetic Diversity
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
10.18: Introduction to Genetic Diversity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.19.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364210.19: Sexual Reproduction
Sexual reproduction was an early evolutionary innovat ion after the appearance of eukaryotic cells. It app ears to have been very
successful because most eukaryotes are able to repro duce sexually, and in many animals, it is the only m ode of reproduction. And
yet, scientists recognize some real disadvantages to se xual reproduction. On the surface, creating offspring that are genetic clones
of the parent appears to be a better system. If the p arent organism is successfully occupying a habitat, o ffspring with the same traits
would be similarly successful. There is also the obviou s benefit to an organism that can produce offspring whenever circumstances
are favorable by asexual budding, fragmentation, or asexual eggs. These methods of reproduction do not r equire another organism
of the opposite sex. Indeed, some organisms that lead a solitary lifestyle have retained the ability to r eproduce asexually. In
addition, in asexual populations, every individual i s capable of reproduction. In sexual populations, the males are not producing the
offspring themselves, so in theory an asexual populatio n could grow twice as fast.
However, multicellular organisms that exclusively depend on asexual reproduction are exceedingly rare. Why is sexuality (and
meiosis) so common? This is one of the important unans wered questions in biology and has been the focus of m uch research
beginning in the latter half of the twentieth centur y. There are several possible explanations, one of which is that the variation that
sexual reproduction creates among offspring is very important to the survival and reproduction of the population. Thus, on average,
a sexually reproducing population will leave more de scendants than an otherwise similar asexually reproduci ng population. The
only source of variation in asexual organisms is mutat ion. This is the ultimate source of variation in sexu al organisms, but in
addition, those different mutations are continually r eshuffled from one generation to the next when differ ent parents combine their
unique genomes and the genes are mixed into different combinations by crossovers during prophase I and r andom assortment at
metaphase I.
It is not in dispute that sexual reproduction provide s evolutionary advantages to organisms that employ t his mechanism to
produce offspring. But why, even in the face of fair ly stable conditions, does sexual reproduction persis t when it is more
difficult and costly for individual organisms? Varia tion is the outcome of sexual reproduction, but why a re ongoing variations
necessary? Enter the Red Queen hypothesis, first prop osed by Leigh Van Valen in 1973. The concept was name d in reference to
the Red Queen’s race in Lewis Carroll’s book, Through the Looking-Glass.
All species co-evolve with other organisms; for examp le predators evolve with their prey, and parasites e volve with their hosts.
Each tiny advantage gained by favorable variation g ives a species an edge over close competitors, predato rs, parasites, or even
prey. The only method that will allow a co-evolving sp ecies to maintain its own share of the resources is to also continually
improve its fitness. As one species gains an advantage, this increases selection on the other species; they mu st also develop an
advantage or they will be outcompeted. No single speci es progresses too far ahead because genetic variatio n among the
progeny of sexual reproduction provides all species with a mechanism to improve rapidly. Species that cann ot keep up become
extinct. The Red Queen’s catchphrase was, “It takes al l the running you can do to stay in the same place.” This is an apt
description of co-evolution between competing species.
Life Cycles of Sexually Reproducing Organisms
Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycles. What happens between these two events depends on the organism. The
process of meiosis reduces the chromosome number by h alf. Fertilization, the joining of two haploid gametes, restores the diploid
condition. There are three main categories of life cy cles in multicellular organisms: diploid-dominant, in which the multicellular
diploid stage is the most obvious life stage, such a s with most animals including humans; haploid-dominant, in which the
multicellular haploid stage is the most obvious life sta ge, such as with all fungi and some algae; and alternation of generations, in
which the two stages are apparent to different degrees depen ding on the group, as with plants and some algae.
Diploid-Dominant Life Cycle
Nearly all animals employ a diploid-dominant life-cy cle strategy in which the only haploid cells produced by the organism are the
gametes. Early in the development of the embryo, spec ialized diploid cells, called germ cells, are produced within the gonads, such
as the testes and ovaries. Germ cells are capable of mitosis to perpetuate the cell line and meiosis to pr oduce gametes. Once theTry It

10.19.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43642haploid gametes are formed, they lose the ability to divide again. There is no multicellular haploid lif e stage. Fertilization occurs
with the fusion of two gametes, usually from different ind ividuals, restoring the diploid state (Figure 1).
Figure 1. In animals, sexually reproducing adults form haploid gametes from diploid germ cells. Fusion of the gametes gives rise to
a fertilized egg cell, or zygote. The zygote will u ndergo multiple rounds of mitosis to produce a multice llular offspring. The germ
cells are generated early in the development of the zygote.
Haploid-Dominant Life Cycle
Most fungi and algae employ a life-cycle type in which the “body” of the organism—the ecologically importa nt part of the life
cycle—is haploid. The haploid cells that make up the tissues of the dominant multicellular stage are forme d by mitosis. During
sexual reproduction, specialized haploid cells from t wo individuals, designated the (+) and (−) mating ty pes, join to form a diploid
zygote. The zygote immediately undergoes meiosis to fo rm four haploid cells called spores. Although haploi d like the “parents,”
these spores contain a new genetic combination from two parents. The spores can remain dormant for various time periods.
Eventually, when conditions are conducive, the spores fo rm multicellular haploid structures by many rounds of mitosis (Example
1).
Practice Question

10.19.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43642
Figure 2. Fungi, such as black bread mold (Rhizopus nigr icans), have haploid-dominant life cycles. The haploi d multicellular
stage produces specialized haploid cells by mitosis that fuse to form a diploid zygote. The zygote undergoes m eiosis to produce
haploid spores. Each spore gives rise to a multicellular haploid organism by mitosis. (credit “zygomycota” mic rograph:
modification of work by “Fanaberka”/Wikimedia Common s)
If a mutation occurs so that a fungus is no longer able to produce a minus mating type, will it still be able to reprod uce?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”139510″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”139510″]Most likely yes as the fungus can likely reproduce asexually.[/hidden-answer]
Alternation of Generations
The third life-cycle type, employed by some algae an d all plants, is a blend of the haploid-dominant an d diploid-dominant
extremes. Species with alternation of generations have b oth haploid and diploid multicellular organisms as p art of their life cycle.
The haploid multicellular plants are called gametophytes, because they produce gametes from specialized cell s. Meiosis is not
directly involved in the production of gametes in th is case, because the organism that produces the gamet es is already a haploid.
Fertilization between the gametes forms a diploid zyg ote. The zygote will undergo many rounds of mitosis and give rise to a
diploid multicellular plant called a sporophyte. Specialized cells of the sporophyte will undergo mei osis and produce haploid
spores. The spores will subsequently develop into the g ametophytes (Figure 3).

10.19.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43642
Figure 3. Plants have a life cycle that alternates bet ween a multicellular haploid organism and a multicel lular diploid organism. In
some plants, such as ferns, both the haploid and diploid plant stages are free-living. The diploid plant is ca lled a sporophyte
because it produces haploid spores by meiosis. The spores d evelop into multicellular, haploid plants called gam etophytes because
they produce gametes. The gametes of two individuals w ill fuse to form a diploid zygote that becomes the spo rophyte. (credit
“fern”: modification of work by Cory Zanker; credit “sporangia”: modification of work by “Obsidian Soul” /Wikimedia Commons;
credit “gametophyte and sporophyte”: modification of work by “Vlmastra”/Wikimedia Commons)
Although all plants utilize some version of the alte rnation of generations, the relative size of the sporo phyte and the gametophyte
and the relationship between them vary greatly. In pl ants such as moss, the gametophyte organism is the f ree-living plant, and the
sporophyte is physically dependent on the gametophy te. In other plants, such as ferns, both the gametophy te and sporophyte plants
are free-living; however, the sporophyte is much large r. In seed plants, such as magnolia trees and daisies, the gametophyte is
composed of only a few cells and, in the case of the female gam etophyte, is completely retained within the sporophyte.
Sexual reproduction takes many forms in multicellula r organisms. However, at some point in each type of li fe cycle, meiosis
produces haploid cells that will fuse with the haploid cell of another organism. The mechanisms of variati on—crossover, random
assortment of homologous chromosomes, and random fert ilization—are present in all versions of sexual repro duction. The fact that
nearly every multicellular organism on Earth employ s sexual reproduction is strong evidence for the ben efits of producing
offspring with unique gene combinations, though there are other possible benefits as well.
Nearly all eukaryotes undergo sexual reproduction. Th e variation introduced into the reproductive cells b y meiosis appears to
be one of the advantages of sexual reproduction tha t has made it so successful. Meiosis and fertilizati on alternate in sexual life
cycles. The process of meiosis produces unique reprodu ctive cells called gametes, which have half the numb er of
chromosomes as the parent cell. Fertilization, the fusi on of haploid gametes from two individuals, restores t he diploid
condition. Thus, sexually reproducing organisms altern ate between haploid and diploid stages. However, the ways in which
reproductive cells are produced and the timing betwee n meiosis and fertilization vary greatly. There are three main categories
of life cycles: diploid-dominant, demonstrated by mo st animals; haploid-dominant, demonstrated by all fung i and some algae;
and the alternation of generations, demonstrated by plan ts and some algae.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previouslyLearning Objectives

10.19.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43642Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.19: Sexual Reproduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.20.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364410.20: Genetic Variation in Meiosis
The gametes produced in meiosis aren’t genetically identical to the starting cell, and they also aren’t identical to one another. As an
example, consider the meiosis II diagram above, which shows the end products of meiosis for a simple cell with a diploid number
of 2n = 4 chromosomes. The four gametes produced at the end of meiosis II are all slightly different, each with a un ique
combination of the genetic material present in the starti ng cell.
As it turns out, there are many more potential gamete types than just the four shown in the diagram, even f or a simple cell with
with only four chromosomes. This diversity of possibl e gametes reflects two factors: crossing over and the ra ndom orientation of
homologue pairs during metaphase of meiosis I.
Crossing over. The points where homologues cross over and exchange genetic m aterial are chosen more or less at random, and
they will be different in each cell that goes through meiosis. If meiosis happens many times, as it does in human ovar ies and
testes, crossovers will happen at many different points. This r epetition produces a wide variety of recombinant chro mosomes,
chromosomes where fragments of DNA have been exchanged betwe en homologues.
Random orientation of homologue pairs. The random orientation of homologue pairs during meta phase of meiosis I is
another important source of gamete diversity.
What exactly does random orientation mean here? Well, a homologous pair
consists of one homologue from your dad and one fro m your mom, and you have 23 pairs of homologous chro mosomes all
together, counting the X and Y as homologous for this purpose. During meiosis I, the homologous pairs will s eparate to form two
equal groups, but it’s not usually the case that all th e paternal—dad—chromosomes will go into one group and all the maternal—
mom—chromosomes into the other.
Instead, each pair of homologues will effectively fl ip a coin to decide which chromosome goes into which g roup. In a cell with just
two pairs of homologous chromosomes, like the one at right, random metaphase orientation allows for 2 = 4 different types of
possible gametes. In a human cell, the same mechanism allows for 2 = 8,388,608 different types of possible gametes. And
that’s not even considering crossovers!
Given those kinds of numbers, it’s very unlikely that any two sperm or egg cells made by a person will be t he same. It’s even more
unlikely that you and your sister or brother will be genetically identical, unless you happen to be ide ntical twins, thanks to the
process of fertilization (in which a unique egg from Mom combines with a unique sperm from Dad, making a zy gote whose
genotype is well beyond one-in-a-trillion!).2
23 [1]
[2]

10.20.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43644Meiosis and fertilization create genetic variation b y making new combinations of gene variants (alleles). I n some cases, these new
combinations may make an organism more or less fit (a ble to survive and reproduce), thus providing the ra w material for natural
selection. Genetic variation is important in allowing a pop ulation to adapt via natural selection and thus survive in the long term.
1. Reece, J. B., L. A. Urry, M. L. Cain, S. A. Wasserman, P. V. Minorksy, and R. B. Jackson. "Genetic Variation Produced in
Sexual Life Cycles Contributes to Evolution." In Campbell Biology, 263–65. 10th ed. San Francisco, CA: Pearson, 2011. ↵
2. Ibid. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Meiosis. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/cellular-mol ecularbiology/meiosis/a/phases-of-meiosis. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
10.20: Genetic Variation in Meiosis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.21.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364510.21: Chromosomal Structural Rearrangements
Cytologists have characterized numerous structural rearrangements in chromosomes, but chromosome inversio ns and
translocations are the most common. Both are identifie d during meiosis by the adaptive pairing of rearran ged chromosomes with
their former homologs to maintain appropriate gene a lignment. If the genes carried on two homologs are n ot oriented correctly, a
recombination event could result in the loss of genes from one chromosome and the gain of genes on the oth er. This would produce
aneuploid gametes.
Chromosome Inversions
A chromosome inversion is the detachment, 180° rotation, and reinsertion o f part of a chromosome. Inversions may occur in
nature as a result of mechanical shear, or from the a ction of transposable elements (special DNA sequences capable of facilitating
the rearrangement of chromosome segments with the he lp of enzymes that cut and paste DNA sequences). Unless they disrupt a
gene sequence, inversions only change the orientatio n of genes and are likely to have more mild effects than aneuploid errors.
However, altered gene orientation can result in functi onal changes because regulators of gene expression c ould be moved out of
position with respect to their targets, causing aberran t levels of gene products.
An inversion can be pericentric and include the centromere, or paracentric and occur outside of the centromere (Figure 1). A
pericentric inversion that is asymmetric about the ce ntromere can change the relative lengths of the chro mosome arms, making
these inversions easily identifiable.
Figure 1. Pericentric inversions include the centromere, and paracentric inversions do not. A pericentric in version can change the
relative lengths of the chromosome arms; a paracentric inversion cannot.
When one homologous chromosome undergoes an inversion but the other does not, the individual is described as an inversion
heterozygote. To maintain point-for-point synapsis duri ng meiosis, one homolog must form a loop, and the ot her homolog must
mold around it. Although this topology can ensure tha t the genes are correctly aligned, it also forces the homologs to stretch and
can be associated with regions of imprecise synapsis (Figure 2).

10.21.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43645
Figure 2. When one chromosome undergoes an inversion bu t the other does not, one chromosome must form an inve rted loop to
retain point-for-point interaction during synapsis. Th is inversion pairing is essential to maintaining gene al ignment during meiosis
and to allow for recombination.
The Chromosome 18 Inversion
Not all structural rearrangements of chromosomes produ ce nonviable, impaired, or infertile individuals. In rare instances, such a
change can result in the evolution of a new species. In fact, a pericentric inversion in chromosome 18 appe ars to have contributed
to the evolution of humans. This inversion is not pre sent in our closest genetic relatives, the chimpanzees. Humans and
chimpanzees differ cytogenetically by pericentric i nversions on several chromosomes and by the fusion o f two separate
chromosomes in chimpanzees that correspond to chromosome two in humans.
The pericentric chromosome 18 inversion is believed to have occurred in early humans following their div ergence from a common
ancestor with chimpanzees approximately five million years ago. Researchers characterizing this inversi on have suggested that
approximately 19,000 nucleotide bases were duplicated on 18p, and the duplicated region inverted and rei nserted on chromosome
18 of an ancestral human.
A comparison of human and chimpanzee genes in the re gion of this inversion indicates that two genes— ROCK1 and USP14 —that
are adjacent on chimpanzee chromosome 17 (which corr esponds to human chromosome 18) are more distantly p ositioned on
human chromosome 18. This suggests that one of the inversio n breakpoints occurred between these two genes. Interes tingly,
humans and chimpanzees express USP14 at distinct levels in specific cell types, includi ng cortical cells and fibroblasts. Perhaps the
chromosome 18 inversion in an ancestral human reposit ioned specific genes and reset their expression leve ls in a useful way.
Because both ROCK1 and USP14 encode cellular enzymes, a change in their expressio n could alter cellular function. It is not
known how this inversion contributed to hominid evolu tion, but it appears to be a significant factor in th e divergence of humans
from other primates.
Translocations
A translocation occurs when a segment of a chromosome dissociates and r eattaches to a different, nonhomologous chromosome.
Translocations can be benign or have devastating effe cts depending on how the positions of genes are altere d with respect to
regulatory sequences. Notably, specific translocations h ave been associated with several cancers and with schiz ophrenia.
Reciprocal translocations result from the exchange o f chromosome segments between two nonhomologous chrom osomes such that
there is no gain or loss of genetic information (Figure 3).

10.21.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43645
Figure 3. A reciprocal translocation occurs when a segm ent of DNA is transferred from one chromosome to anoth er,
nonhomologous chromosome. (credit: modification of wo rk by National Human Genome Research/USA)
The overall structure of chromosomes can be changed, in both minor and dramatic ways. Chromosome inversions involve the
detachment, flipping, and reinsertion of a portion of a chromosome. Pericentric inversions involve the centr omere while
paracentric do not. Chromosome translocations involve the insertion of a piece of DNA from one chromosome into a nonhomologous chromosome. Either of these types of structural changes may cause effects that range from minor to drast ic.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.21: Chromosomal Structural Rearrangements is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

10.22.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364610.22: Mitosis, Meiosis, and Sexual Reproduction
As you now know, genetic variation is very important. Gen etic variation is introduced in multiple ways, includ ing changes in
mitosis, crossing over and random orientation in mei osis, and random fertilization. The video below offer s you a nice overview of
how each contributes to genetic diversity.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=356
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Mitosis, Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction. Authored by: Khan Academy. Located at: https://youtu.be/kaSIjIzAtYA. License:
All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
10.22: Mitosis, Meiosis, and Sexual Reproduction is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.23.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364710.23: Introduction to Errors in Chromosome Number
Examine karyotypes and identify the effects of significant changes in chromosome number
We previously learned how errors in mitosis can pote ntially lead to cancer. What could errors in meiosis r esult in? In this outcome,
we’ll learn what happens when errors occur in chromosome num ber.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify a karyotype and describe its uses in biology
Identify common errors that can create an abnormal kar yotype
Identify syndromes that result from a significant change in chromosome number
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Karyotypes
Common Disorders
Self Check: Errors in Chromosome Number
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
10.23: Introduction to Errors in Chromosome Number is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

10.24.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364810.24: Karyotypes
The isolation and microscopic observation of chromos omes forms the basis of cytogenetics and is the primar y method by which
clinicians detect chromosomal abnormalities in huma ns. A karyotype is the number and appearance of chromosomes, and incl udes
their length, banding pattern, and centromere positio n. To obtain a view of an individual’s karyotype, cyt ologists photograph the
chromosomes and then cut and paste each chromosome into a chart, or karyogram, also known as an ideogram (Figure 1).
Figure 1. This karyotype is of a female human. Notice that homologous chromosomes are the same size, and have the same
centromere positions and banding patterns. A human mal e would have an XY chromosome pair instead of the XX pair shown.
(credit: Andreas Blozer et al)
In a given species, chromosomes can be identified by t heir number, size, centromere position, and banding pa ttern. In a human
karyotype, autosomes or “body chromosomes” (all of the non–sex chromosom es) are generally organized in approximate order of
size from largest (chromosome 1) to smallest (chromo some 22). The X and Y chromosomes are not autosomes. Ho wever,
chromosome 21 is actually shorter than chromosome 22. This was discovered after the naming of Down syndrome as trisomy 21,
reflecting how this disease results from possessing on e extra chromosome 21 (three total). Not wanting to ch ange the name of this
important disease, chromosome 21 retained its numberin g, despite describing the shortest set of chromosomes. Th e chromosome
“arms” projecting from either end of the centromere may be designated as short or long, depending on t heir relative lengths. The
short arm is abbreviated p (for “petite”), whereas the long arm is abbreviated q (because it follows “p” alphabetically). Each arm is
further subdivided and denoted by a number. Using th is naming system, locations on chromosomes can be descr ibed consistently in
the scientific literature.
Geneticists Use Karyograms to Identify Chromosomal Aberrations
Although Mendel is referred to as the “father of mode rn genetics,” he performed his experiments with none o f the tools that the
geneticists of today routinely employ. One such power ful cytological technique is karyotyping, a method i n which traits
characterized by chromosomal abnormalities can be ide ntified from a single cell. To observe an individua l’s karyotype, a person’s
cells (like white blood cells) are first collected f rom a blood sample or other tissue. In the laborator y, the isolated cells are
stimulated to begin actively dividing. A chemical ca lled colchicine is then applied to cells to arrest c ondensed chromosomes in
metaphase. Cells are then made to swell using a hypoto nic solution so the chromosomes spread apart. Finally, the sample is
preserved in a fixative and applied to a slide.
The geneticist then stains chromosomes with one of sev eral dyes to better visualize the distinct and repro ducible banding patterns
of each chromosome pair. Following staining, the chromo somes are viewed using bright-field microscopy. A comm on stain choice
is the Giemsa stain. Giemsa staining results in approxim ately 400–800 bands (of tightly coiled DNA and condens ed proteins)
arranged along all of the 23 chromosome pairs; an e xperienced geneticist can identify each band. In ad dition to the banding
patterns, chromosomes are further identified on the b asis of size and centromere location. To obtain the c lassic depiction of the
karyotype in which homologous pairs of chromosomes are aligned in numerical order from longest to shortest, the geneticist
obtains a digital image, identifies each chromosome, and manually arranges the chromosomes into this pattern (Figu re 1).
At its most basic, the karyogram may reveal genetic abn ormalities in which an individual has too many or to o few chromosomes
per cell. Examples of this are Down Syndrome, which is id entified by a third copy of chromosome 21, and Turne r Syndrome,
which is characterized by the presence of only one X ch romosome in women instead of the normal two. Geneticists can also
identify large deletions or insertions of DNA. For inst ance, Jacobsen Syndrome—which involves distinctive faci al features as well
as heart and bleeding defects—is identified by a de letion on chromosome 11. Finally, the karyotype can pi npoint translocations,

10.24.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43648which occur when a segment of genetic material breaks from one chromosome and reattaches to another chro mosome.
Translocations are implicated in certain cancers, includi ng chronic myelogenous leukemia.
During Mendel’s lifetime, inheritance was an abstract concept that could only be inferred by performing crosses and observing the
traits expressed by offspring. By observing a karyog ram, today’s geneticists can actually visualize the chromosomal composition of
an individual to confirm or predict genetic abnormaliti es in offspring, even before birth.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.24: Karyotypes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.25.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4364910.25: Common Disorders
Of all of the chromosomal disorders, abnormalities in ch romosome number are the most obviously identifiable from a karyogram.
Disorders of chromosome number include the duplicati on or loss of entire chromosomes, as well as changes in the number of
complete sets of chromosomes. They are caused by nondi sjunction, which occurs when pairs of homologous chrom osomes or sister
chromatids fail to separate during meiosis. Misaligne d or incomplete synapsis, or a dysfunction of the s pindle apparatus that
facilitates chromosome migration, can cause nondisju nction. The risk of nondisjunction occurring increase s with the age of the
parents.
Nondisjunction can occur during either meiosis I or II, with differing results (Figure 1). If homologous c hromosomes fail to
separate during meiosis I, the result is two gametes th at lack that particular chromosome and two gametes wi th two copies of the
chromosome. If sister chromatids fail to separate dur ing meiosis II, the result is one gamete that lacks th at chromosome, two
normal gametes with one copy of the chromosome, and one ga mete with two copies of the chromosome.
Figure 1. Nondisjunction occurs when homologous chromoso mes or sister chromatids fail to separate during meiosis, resulting
in an abnormal chromosome number. Nondisjunction may occur during meiosis I or meiosis II.
Which of the following statements about nondisjunction is true?
a. Nondisjunction only results in gametes with n+1 or n–1 chromosomes.
b. Nondisjunction occurring during meiosis II results in 50 percent normal gametes.
c. Nondisjunction during meiosis I results in 50 percent n ormal gametes.
d. Nondisjunction always results in four different kinds o f gametes.Practice Question

10.25.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43649[reveal-answer q=”235653″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”235653″]Answer b is true.[/hidden-answer]
Aneuploidy
Figure 2. The incidence of having a fetus with trisomy 21 increases dramatically with maternal age.
An individual with the appropriate number of chromoso mes for their species is called euploid; in humans, euploidy corresponds to
22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. An individual with an error in chromosome number is de scribed as
aneuploid, a term that includes monosomy (loss of one chromosome) or trisomy (gain of an extraneous chromosome).
Monosomic human zygotes missing any one copy of an aut osome invariably fail to develop to birth because t hey lack essential
genes. This underscores the importance of “gene dosage ” in humans. Most autosomal trisomies also fail to develop to birth;
however, duplications of some of the smaller chromoso mes (13, 15, 18, 21, or 22) can result in offspring th at survive for several
weeks to many years. Trisomic individuals suffer fro m a different type of genetic imbalance: an excess i n gene dose. Individuals
with an extra chromosome may synthesize an abundance of the gene products encoded by that chromosome. Th is extra dose (150
percent) of specific genes can lead to a number of f unctional challenges and often precludes development. The most common
trisomy among viable births is that of chromosome 21, which corresponds to Down Syndrome. Individuals with thi s inherited
disorder are characterized by short stature and stunt ed digits, facial distinctions that include a broad skull and large tongue, and
significant developmental delays. The incidence of Down syndrome is correlated with maternal age; older wome n are more likely
to become pregnant with fetuses carrying the trisomy 21 ge notype (Figure 2).
Polyploidy
Figure 3. As with many polyploid plants, this triploid orange daylily (Hemerocallis fulva) is particularly large and robust, and
grows flowers with triple the number of petals of its d iploid counterparts. (credit: Steve Karg)
An individual with more than the correct number of ch romosome sets (two for diploid species) is called polyploid. For instance,
fertilization of an abnormal diploid egg with a normal h aploid sperm would yield a triploid zygote. Polyploid ani mals are extremely
rare, with only a few examples among the flatworms, cru staceans, amphibians, fish, and lizards. Polyploid an imals are sterile

10.25.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43649because meiosis cannot proceed normally and instead pr oduces mostly aneuploid daughter cells that cannot yi eld viable zygotes.
Rarely, polyploid animals can reproduce asexually by haplodiploidy, in which an unfertilized egg divides mi totically to produce
offspring. In contrast, polyploidy is very common in the plant kingdom, and polyploid plants tend to be larger and more robust than
euploids of their species (Figure 3).
Sex Chromosome Nondisjunction in Humans
Humans display dramatic deleterious effects with autoso mal trisomies and monosomies. Therefore, it may seem c ounterintuitive
that human females and males can function normally, despite carrying different numbers of the X chromosom e. Rather than a gain
or loss of autosomes, variations in the number of sex chromosomes are associated with relatively mild effec ts. In part, this occurs
because of a molecular process called X inactivation. Early in development, when female mammalian embryos c onsist of just a
few thousand cells (relative to trillions in the newbor n), one X chromosome in each cell inactivates by tightl y condensing into a
quiescent (dormant) structure called a Barr body. The chance that an X chromosome (maternally or paternall y derived) is
inactivated in each cell is random, but once the ina ctivation occurs, all cells derived from that one wi ll have the same inactive X
chromosome or Barr body. By this process, females compens ate for their double genetic dose of X chromosome.
Figure 4. In cats, the gene for coat color is located on the X chromosome. In the embryonic development of female cats, one of the
two X chromosomes is randomly inactivated in each cell, resulting in a tortoiseshell pattern if the cat has t wo different alleles for
coat color. Male cats, having only one X chromosome, never exhibit a tortoiseshell coat color. (credit: Mi chael Bodega)
In so-called “tortoiseshell” cats, embryonic X inact ivation is observed as color variegation (Figure 4). Females that are
heterozygous for an X-linked coat color gene will exp ress one of two different coat colors over different regions of their body,
corresponding to whichever X chromosome is inactivated in t he embryonic cell progenitor of that region.
An individual carrying an abnormal number of X chromo somes will inactivate all but one X chromosome in each of her cells.
However, even inactivated X chromosomes continue to expr ess a few genes, and X chromosomes must reactivate for the proper
maturation of female ovaries. As a result, X-chromosom al abnormalities are typically associated with mild m ental and physical
defects, as well as sterility. If the X chromosome is absent altogether, the individual will not develop in utero.
Several errors in sex chromosome number have been ch aracterized. Individuals with three X chromosomes, cal led triplo-X, are
phenotypically female but express developmental del ays and reduced fertility. The XXY genotype, correspond ing to one type of
Klinefelter syndrome, corresponds to phenotypically mal e individuals with small testes, enlarged breasts, a nd reduced body hair.
More complex types of Klinefelter syndrome exist in whic h the individual has as many as five X chromosomes. I n all types, every
X chromosome except one undergoes inactivation to comp ensate for the excess genetic dosage. This can be se en as several Barr
bodies in each cell nucleus. Turner syndrome, characte rized as an X0 genotype (i.e., only a single sex chrom osome), corresponds to
a phenotypically female individual with short statur e, webbed skin in the neck region, hearing and cardiac impairments, and
sterility.

10.25.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43649Duplications and Deletions
In addition to the loss or gain of an entire chromos ome, a chromosomal segment may be duplicated or los t. Duplications and
deletions often produce offspring that survive but ex hibit physical and mental abnormalities. Duplicated chromosomal segments
may fuse to existing chromosomes or may be free in th e nucleus. Cri-du-chat (from the French for “cry of the cat”) is a syndrome
associated with nervous system abnormalities and identi fiable physical features that result from a deletion of most of 5p (the small
arm of chromosome 5) (Figure 5). Infants with this ge notype emit a characteristic high-pitched cry on whi ch the disorder’s name is
based.
Figure 5. This individual with cri-du-chat syndrome is shown at two, four, nine, and 12 years of age. (credi t: Paola Cerruti
Mainardi)
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.25: Common Disorders is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.26.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365010.26: Putting It Together- Cell Division
Mitosis and meiosis are both forms of division of the nucleus in eukaryotic cells. They share some simila rities, but also exhibit
distinct differences that lead to very different ou tcomes (Figure 1 and Table 1). Mitosis is a single nuc lear division that results in
two nuclei that are usually partitioned into two new c ells. The nuclei resulting from a mitotic division a re genetically identical to
the original nucleus. They have the same number of se ts of chromosomes, one set in the case of haploid cell s and two sets in the
case of diploid cells. In most plants and all animal spe cies, it is typically diploid cells that undergo mitos is to form new diploid
cells. In contrast, meiosis consists of two nuclear di visions resulting in four nuclei that are usually p artitioned into four new cells.
The nuclei resulting from meiosis are not genetically identical and they contain one chromosome set only. This is half the number
of chromosome sets in the original cell, which is diploid.
The main differences between mitosis and meiosis occu r in meiosis I, which is a very different nuclear div ision than mitosis. In
meiosis I, the homologous chromosome pairs become asso ciated with each other, are bound together with the sy naptonemal
complex, develop chiasmata and undergo crossover betwe en sister chromatids, and line up along the metapha se plate in tetrads
with kinetochore fibers from opposite spindle poles a ttached to each kinetochore of a homolog in a tetra d. All of these events occur
only in meiosis I.
Figure 1. Meiosis and mitosis are both preceded by one r ound of DNA replication; however, meiosis includes two nuclear
divisions. The four daughter cells resulting from meiosi s are haploid and genetically distinct. The daughter cells resulting from
mitosis are diploid and identical to the parent cell.

10.26.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43650Table 1. Meiosis v. Mitosis
Meiosis Mitosis
DNA Synthesis Occurs in S phase of Interphase Occurs in S phase of Interphase
Synapsis of homolgous chromosomes During prophase I Does not occur in mitosis
Crossover During prophase I Does not occur in mitosis
Homologous chromosomes line up at
metaphase plateDuring metaphase I Does not occur in mitosis
Sister chromatids line up at metaphase
plateDuring metaphase II During metaphase
Outcome: Number and genetic composition
of daughter cellsFour haploid cells at the end of meiosis II Two diploid cells at the end of mitosis
The Mystery of the Evolution of Meiosis
Some characteristics of organisms are so widespread and fundamental that it is sometimes difficult to remem ber that they evolved
like other simpler traits. Meiosis is such an extraordina rily complex series of cellular events that biologist s have had trouble
hypothesizing and testing how it may have evolved. Alt hough meiosis is inextricably entwined with sexual re production and its
advantages and disadvantages, it is important to separa te the questions of the evolution of meiosis and the evolution of sex, because
early meiosis may have been advantageous for differe nt reasons than it is now. Thinking outside the box and imagining what the
early benefits from meiosis might have been is one approac h to uncovering how it may have evolved.
Meiosis and mitosis share obvious cellular processes and it makes sense that meiosis evolved from mitosis. The difficulty lies in the
clear differences between meiosis I and mitosis. Adam Wilkins and Robin Holliday summarized the unique eve nts that needed to
occur for the evolution of meiosis from mitosis. The se steps are homologous chromosome pairing, crossover exchanges, sister
chromatids remaining attached during anaphase, and sup pression of DNA replication in interphase. They argue t hat the first step is
the hardest and most important, and that understandin g how it evolved would make the evolutionary process c learer. They suggest
genetic experiments that might shed light on the evolut ion of synapsis.
There are other approaches to understanding the evo lution of meiosis in progress. Different forms of meiosis exist in single-celled
protists. Some appear to be simpler or more “primitive” forms of meiosis. Comparing the meiotic divisions o f different protists
may shed light on the evolution of meiosis. Marilee R amesh and colleagues compared the genes involved in m eiosis in protists to
understand when and where meiosis might have evolved. Al though research is still ongoing, recent scholarship into meiosis in
protists suggests that some aspects of meiosis may have evolved later than others. This kind of genetic comp arison can tell us what
aspects of meiosis are the oldest and what cellular proc esses they may have borrowed from in earlier cells.
1. Adam S. Wilkins and Robin Holliday, “The Evolution of Meio sis from Mitosis,” Genetics 181 (2009): 3–12. ↵
2. Marilee A. Ramesh, Shehre-Banoo Malik and John M. Logsdon, Jr, “ A Phylogenetic Inventory of Meiotic Genes: Evidence for
Sex in Giardia and an Early Eukaryotic Origin of Meiosis,” Current Biology 15 (2005):185–91. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
10.26: Putting It Together- Cell Division is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.[1]
[2]

10.27.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4365110.27: Assignment- Mitosis and Meiosis Worksheets
Use the two documents linked below to complete an inter net hands-on activity involving mitosis and meiosis. During these
activities you will demonstrate your understanding of cell division by identifying and drawing various sta ges of these events as
well as answering questions about each.
Download Worksheets
You may chose to print these sheets, write your answers out and then rescan the documents to create your si ngle submission file. Or
you may chose to type your answers into the Word docum ent and submit that file. Do keep in mind that you mu st complete the
drawing activities as well so in some fashion you have to get th ose images into your final file.
Mitosis Worksheet
PDF
docx
Meiosis Worksheet
PDF
docx
See this example for one way you may insert your images.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment has been proofread and does not contain any majo r spelling or grammatical errors
Assignment includes appropriate references
Assignment includes answers to all questions and required ima ges
Rubric
Mitosis and Meiosis Internet Quests
Outcome: Describe and explain the various stages of cel l division
Criteria Ratings Pts
Identify the stages of the
cell cycle, by picture and
description of major
milestones.More than 22 questions
answered correctly and
all included images are
correct/accurate.
5.0 pts20–22 mitosis questions
answered correctly and 7
correct images included
4.0 ptsLess than 20 mitosis
questions answered
correctly and/or less than
7 correct images
included
0.0 pts5 pts
Identify the stages of
meiosis by picture and
by description of major
milestones; describe why
meiosis involves two
rounds of nuclear
division.More than 13 meiosis
questions answered
correctly.
5.0 pts12–13 meiosis questions
answered correctly
4.0 ptsLess than 12 meiosis
questions answered
correctly
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 10
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter. Provided by: Columbia Basin College. Located at: https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC
BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously

10.27.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43651Mitosis--Internet Lesson. Provided by: Biologycorner. Located at: https://www.biologycorner.com/worksheets/mitosis.html.
License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
Meiosis--Internet Lesson. Provided by: Biologycorner. Located at:
https://www.biologycorner.com//worksheets/meiosis_internet.ht ml. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
10.27: Assignment- Mitosis and Meiosis Worksheets is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: Module 9- DNA Structure and Replication
11.1: Why It Matters- DNA Structure and Replication
11.2: Introduction to Storing Genetic Information
11.3: Structure of DNA
11.4: Genetic Information
11.5: DNA Packaging in Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes
11.6: Introduction to DNA Base Pairs and Replication
11.7: The History of DNA
11.8: Basics of DNA Replication
11.9: Major Enzymes
11.10: “Proofreading” DNA
11.11: Telomeres
11.12: Introduction to DNA Mutations
11.13: What is a Mutation?
11.14: Mutations in Somatic Cells and in Gametes
11.15: Major Types of Mutations
11.16: Putting It Together- DNA Structure and Replication
11.17: Assignment- Which Has More DNA?
11: Module 9- DNA Structure and Replication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366911.1: Why It Matters- DNA Structure and Replication
Why relate DNA structure to the process of DNA replication?
You’re one of a kind. It’s not just your eyes, smil e, and personality. Your health, risk for disease, and the ways you respond to
medicines are also unique. Medicines that work well for some people may not help you at all. In fact, they might even cause
problems. Wouldn’t it be nice if treatments and preve ntive care could be designed just for you?
The careful matching of your biology to your medica l care is known as personalized medicine. It’s alread y being used by health
care providers nationwide.
The story of personalized medicine begins with the uniq ue DNA you inherited from your parents. DNA is
responsible for all the physical traits that make y ou function as a human organism. It plays a vital ro le in life on this planet. DNA
stores genetic information.
Genes are stretches of DNA that serve as a sort of instru ction manual telling your body how to make the prote ins and perform the
other tasks that your body needs. The same genes oft en differ slightly between people. Bases may be switche d, missing, or added
here and there. Most of these variations have no effect on your health. But some can create unusual proteins that might boost your
risk for certain diseases. Some variants can affect ho w well a medicine works in your body. Or they might cau se a medicine to have
different side effects in you than in someone else.
It’s becoming more common for doctors to test for ge ne variants before prescribing certain drugs. “If doc tors know your genes,
they can predict drug response and incorporate this information into the medical decisions they make,” s ays Dr. Rochelle Long, a
pharmacogenomics expert at NIH. “By screening to know who shouldn’t get certain drugs, we can prevent life-thr eatening side
effects,” Long says.
Even one of the oldest and most common drugs, aspirin, can have varying effects based on your genes. Millio ns of people take a
daily aspirin to lower their risk for heart attack a nd stroke. Aspirin helps by preventing blood clots tha t could clog arteries. But
aspirin doesn’t reduce heart disease risk in everyone.
Here are just a few treatments that benefit from personaliza tion:
Blood clot treatments
Colorectal cancer treatments
Breast cancer treatments
So what does this mean for you? Is personalized medici ne something you should look into? Let’s learn more about DNA and
genetics to see if we can answer this question.
Learning Outcomes
Explain how DNA stores genetic information
Explain the role of complementary base pairing in the p recise replication process of DNATry It

11.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43669Recognize the impact of DNA mutations
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
DNA. Authored by: Aneeque Ahmed. Provided by: The Noun Project. Located at: thenounproject.com/search/?
q=DNA&i=783433. License: CC BY: Attribution
Public domain content
Personalized Medicine: Matching Treatments to Your Genes. Authored by: Vicki Contie, Dana Steinberg, Carol Torgan, and
Katherine Wendelsdorf. Provided by: NIH. Located at: https://newsinhealth.nih.gov/issue/dec2013/feature1. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
11.1: Why It Matters- DNA Structure and Replication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

11.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367011.2: Introduction to Storing Genetic Information
Explain how DNA stores genetic information
In this outcome, you will learn to describe the doub le helix structure of DNA: its sugar-phosphate backbon e ladder with
nitrogenous base “rungs” of ladder.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Diagram the structure of DNA
Relate the structure of DNA to the storage of genetic in formation
Explain how DNA packaging in both eukaryotic and prokaryo tic cells protects genetic information
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Structure of DNA
Genetic Information
DNA Packaging in Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes
Self Check: Storing Genetic Information
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
11.2: Introduction to Storing Genetic Information is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367111.3: Structure of DNA
The building blocks of DNA are nucleotides. The impor tant components of each nucleotide are a nitrogenous base, deoxyribose (5carbon sugar), and a phosphate group (see Figure 1). Each nucleotide is named depending on its nitrogenou s base. The nitrogenous
base can be a purine, such as adenine (A) and guanine (G), or a pyrimidine, such as cytosine (C) and thymin e (T). Uracil (U) is also
a pyrimidine (as seen in Figure 1), but it only occurs in RNA, which we will talk more about later.
Figure 1. Each nucleotide is made up of a sugar, a pho sphate group, and a nitrogenous base. The sugar is deoxy ribose in DNA and
ribose in RNA.
Purines have a double ring structure with a six-membe red ring fused to a five-membered ring. Pyrimidines a re smaller in size; they
have a single six-membered ring structure. The carbo n atoms of the five-carbon sugar are numbered 1′, 2′, 3′, 4′, and 5′ (1′ is read
as “one prime”). The nucleotides combine with each ot her by covalent bonds known as phosphodiester bonds o r linkages. The
phosphate residue is attached to the hydroxyl group of the 5′ carbon of one sugar of one nucleotide and the hydroxyl group of the 3′
carbon of the sugar of the next nucleotide, thereby form ing a 5′-3′ phosphodiester bond.
In the 1950s, Francis Crick and James Watson worked toget her to determine the structure of DNA at the Universit y of Cambridge,
England. Other scientists like Linus Pauling and Maurice Wilkins were also actively exploring this field. Paul ing had discovered
the secondary structure of proteins using X-ray crystal lography. In Wilkins’ lab, researcher Rosalind Franklin was using X-ray
diffraction methods to understand the structure of DNA. Watson and Crick were able to piece together the puz zle of the DNA
molecule on the basis of Franklin’s data because Cri ck had also studied X-ray diffraction (Figure 2). In 1 962, James Watson,
Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins were awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine. Unfortunately, by then Franklin had died, and
Nobel prizes are not awarded posthumously.

11.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43671
Figure 2. The work of pioneering scientists (a) James Wat son, Francis Crick, and Maclyn McCarty led to our prese nt day
understanding of DNA. Scientist Rosalind Franklin discov ered (b) the X-ray diffraction pattern of DNA, whic h helped to elucidate
its double helix structure. (credit a: modification o f work by Marjorie McCarty, Public Library of Scienc e)
Watson and Crick proposed that DNA is made up of two st rands that are twisted around each other to form a rig ht-handed helix.
Base pairing takes place between a purine and pyrimid ine; namely, A pairs with T and G pairs with C. Adenine and thymine are
complementary base pairs, and cytosine and guanine a re also complementary base pairs. The base pairs are stabilized by hydrogen
bonds; adenine and thymine form two hydrogen bonds an d cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds. The two strands are
anti-parallel in nature; that is, the 3′ end of one strand faces the 5′ end of the other strand. The su gar and phosphate of the
nucleotides form the backbone of the structure, where as the nitrogenous bases are stacked inside. Each base pair is separated from
the other base pair by a distance of 0.34 nm, and e ach turn of the helix measures 3.4 nm. Therefore, ten base pairs are present per
turn of the helix. The diameter of the DNA double heli x is 2 nm, and it is uniform throughout. Only the pair ing between a purine
and pyrimidine can explain the uniform diameter. Th e twisting of the two strands around each other results in the formation of
uniformly spaced major and minor grooves (Figure 3).
Figure 3. DNA has (a) a double helix structure and (b) phosphodiester bonds. The (c) major and minor grooves are binding sites for
DNA binding proteins during processes such as transcriptio n (the copying of RNA from DNA) and replication.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStaxCNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
11.3: Structure of DNA is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367211.4: Genetic Information
The genetic information of an organism is stored in DNA molecules. How can one kind of molecule contain all the instructions for
making complicated living beings like ourselves? Wha t component or feature of DNA can contain this inform ation? It has to come
from the nitrogen bases, because, as you already know, the backbone of all DNA molecules is the same. But the re are only four
bases found in DNA: G, A, C, and T. The sequence of these fo ur bases can provide all the instructions needed to bu ild any living
organism. It might be hard to imagine that 4 differe nt “letters” can communicate so much information. Bu t think about the English
language, which can represent a huge amount of informa tion using just 26 letters. Even more profound is th e binary code used to
write computer programs. This code contains only ones and zeros, and think of all the things your computer can do. The DNA
alphabet can encode very complex instructions using just four letters, though the messages end up being r eally long. For example,
the E. coli bacterium carries its genetic instructions in a DNA m olecule that contains more than five million nucleot ides. The
human genome (all the DNA of an organism) consists of around three billion nucleotides divided up between 23 paired DNA
molecules, or chromosomes.
The information stored in the order of bases is org anized into genes: each gene contains information for making a funct ional
product. The genetic information is first copied to another nucleic acid polymer, RNA (ribonucleic acid), preserving the order of
the nucleotide bases. Genes that contain instruction s for making proteins are converted to messenger RNA (mRNA). Some
specialized genes contain instructions for making fu nctional RNA molecules that don’t make proteins. These RNA molecules
function by affecting cellular processes directly; for example some of these RNA molecules regulate the expression of mRNA.
Other genes produce RNA molecules that are required fo r protein synthesis, transfer RNA (tRNA), and ribosomal RNA
(rRNA).
In order for DNA to function effectively at storing i nformation, two key processes are required. First, inform ation stored in the
DNA molecule must be copied, with minimal errors, ever y time a cell divides. This ensures that both daugh ter cells inherit the
complete set of genetic information from the parent cell. Second, the information stored in the DNA molecul e must be translated,
or expressed. In order for the stored information to be useful, cells must be able to access the instruc tions for making specific
proteins, so the correct proteins are made in the right place at the right time.
Figure 1. DNA’s double helix. Graphic modified from “ DNA chemical structure,” by Madeleine Price Ball, CC-BY-SA-2.0
Both copying and reading the information stored in DNA relies on base pairing between two nucleic acid polymer strands. Recall
that DNA structure is a double helix (see Figure 1).
The sugar deoxyribose with the phosphate group forms the scaffold or backbone of the molecule (hi ghlighted in yellow in Figure
1). Bases point inward. Complementary bases form hydr ogen bonds with each other within the double helix. Se e how the bigger
bases (purines) pair with the smaller ones (pyrimidines). This keeps the width of the double helix constant. More specifically, A
pairs with T and C pairs with G. As we discuss the function of DNA in subsequent sections, keep in mind that the re is a chemical
reason for specific pairing of bases.
To illustrate the connection between information in DNA and an observable characteristic of an organism, le t’s consider a gene that
provides the instructions for building the hormone in sulin. Insulin is responsible for regulating blood sugar levels. The insulin gene
contains instructions for assembling the protein insul in from individual amino acids. Changing the sequence of nucleotides in the
DNA molecule can change the amino acids in the final protein, leading to protein malfunction. If insulin d oes not function

11.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43672correctly, it might be unable to bind to another pr otein (insulin receptor). On the organismal level of organization, this molecular
event (change of DNA sequence) can lead to a disease state —in this case, diabetes.
Practice Questions
The order of nucleotides in a gene (in DNA) is the key to how information is stored. For example, consider th ese two words: stable
and tables. Both words are built from the same letters (subunits), but the different order of these subunits results in very different
meanings. In DNA, the information is stored in units of 3 letters. Use the following key to decode the encrypted message. This
should help you to see how information can be stored in the linear order of nucleotides in DNA.
ABC = a DEF = d GHI = e JKL = f
MNO = h PQR = i STU = m VWX = n
YZA = o BCD = r EFG = s HIJ = t
KLM = w NOP = j QRS = p TUV = y
Encrypted Message: HIJMNOPQREFG – PQREFG – MNOYZAKLM – DEFVWXABC – EFGHIJYZABCDGHIEFG –
PQRVWXJKLYZABCDSTUABCHIJPQRYZA VWX
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”236947″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”236947″]This is how DNA stores information.
[/hidden-answer]
Where in the DNA is information stored?
a. The shape of the DNA
b. The sugar-phosphate backbone
c. The sequence of bases
d. The presence of two strands.
[reveal-answer q=”767717″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”767717″]Answer c. The sequence of the bases codes for the instructions for protein synthesis. The shape is
DNA is not related to information storage. The sugar- phosphate backbone only acts as a scaffold. The pres ence of two strands is
important for replication, but their information conten t is equivalent, as they are complementary to each other.
[/hidden-answer]
Which statement is correct?
a. The sequence of DNA bases is arranged into chromosomes, mo st of which contain the instructions to build an amino aci d.
b. The sequence of DNA strands is arranged into chromosomes, m ost of which contain the instructions to build a protein.
c. The sequence of DNA bases is arranged into genes, most of which contain the instructions to build a protein.
d. The sequence of DNA phosphates is arranged into genes, most of which contain the instructions to build a cell.
[reveal-answer q=”363484″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”363484″]Answer c. The sequence of DNA bases is arranged into genes, most of which conta in the
instructions to build a protein. DNA stores information in the sequence of its bases. The information is grouped into genes.
Protein is what is mainly coded.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Information Content of DNA. Provided by: Open Learning Initiative. Located at:
https://oli.cmu.edu/jcourse/workbook/activity/page?cont ext=434a5f7d80020ca600a650db8880db33. Project: Introduction to
Biology (Open + Free). License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike

11.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367211.4: Genetic Information is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367311.5: DNA Packaging in Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes
When comparing prokaryotic cells to eukaryotic cell s, prokaryotes are much simpler than eukaryotes in many of their features
(Figure 1). Most prokaryotes contain a single, circular ch romosome that is found in an area of the cytoplasm called t he nucleoid.
Practice Question
Figure 1. A eukaryote contains a well-defined nucleus, whereas in prokaryotes, the chromosome lies in the cyt oplasm in an area
called the nucleoid.
In eukaryotic cells, DNA and RNA synthesis occur in a s eparate compartment from protein synthesis. In prokar yotic cells, both
processes occur together. What advantages might there be to separating the processes?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”306617″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”306617″]What advantages might ther e be to having them occur together? Compartmentaliz ation enables a
eukaryotic cell to divide processes into discrete ste ps so it can build more complex protein and RNA produc ts. But there is an
advantage to having a single compartment as well: RNA and protein synthesis occurs much more quickly in a p rokaryotic cell.
[/hidden-answer]
The size of the genome in one of the most well-studie d prokaryotes, E.coli, is 4.6 million base pairs (approximately 1.1 mm, if cu t
and stretched out). So how does this fit inside a small bacterial cell? The DNA is twisted by what is known as su percoiling.
Supercoiling means that DNA is either under-wound (less t han one turn of the helix per 10 base pairs) or over-wo und (more than 1
turn per 10 base pairs) from its normal relaxed sta te. Some proteins are known to be involved in the super coiling; other proteins
and enzymes such as DNA gyrase help in maintaining the sup ercoiled structure.
Eukaryotes, whose chromosomes each consist of a linear DNA molecule, employ a different type of packing strat egy to fit their
DNA inside the nucleus (Figure 2). At the most basic leve l, DNA is wrapped around proteins known as histones to form structures
called nucleosomes. The histones are evolutionarily con served proteins that are rich in basic amino acids an d form an octamer. The
DNA (which is negatively charged because of the phospha te groups) is wrapped tightly around the histone core. This nucleosome is
linked to the next one with the help of a linker DNA. Th is is also known as the “beads on a string” structure. This is further
compacted into a 30 nm fiber, which is the diameter of the structure. At the metaphase stage, the chromosome s are at their most
compact, are approximately 700 nm in width, and are found in association with scaffold proteins.
In interphase, eukaryotic chromosomes have two distinc t regions that can be distinguished by staining. The t ightly packaged region
is known as heterochromatin, and the less dense region is known as euchromatin. Heterochromatin usually contai ns genes that are
not expressed, and is found in the regions of the cent romere and telomeres. The euchromatin usually conta ins genes that are
transcribed, with DNA packaged around nucleosomes but not fur ther compacted.

11.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43673
Figure 2. These figures illustrate the compaction of th e eukaryotic chromosome.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
11.5: DNA Packaging in Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

11.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367411.6: Introduction to DNA Base Pairs and Replication
Explain the role of complementary base pairing in the precise replication process of DNA
In this outcome, we’ll learn more about the precise structu re of DNA and how it replicates.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Understand the historical basis of our understanding of DNA
Outline the basic steps in DNA replication
Identify the major enzymes that play a role in DNA replicati on
Identify the key proofreading processes in DNA replication
Understand the basic role of telomeres in protecting DNA from replication errors
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
The History of DNA
Basics of DNA Replication
Major Enzymes
“Proofreading” DNA
Telomeres
Self Check: DNA Base Pairs and Replication
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
11.6: Introduction to DNA Base Pairs and Replication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

11.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367511.7: The History of DNA
Figure 1. Friedrich Miescher (1844–1895) discovered nuc leic acids.
Modern understandings of DNA have evolved from the dis covery of nucleic acid to the development of the do uble-helix model. In
the 1860s, Friedrich Miescher (Figure 1), a physician b y profession, was the first person to isolate phosphate -rich chemicals from
white blood cells or leukocytes. He named these chemica ls (which would eventually be known as RNA and DNA) nuclein because
they were isolated from the nuclei of the cells.
To see Miescher conduct an experiment step-by-step, click through this review of how he discovered the key role of DNA and
proteins in the nucleus.
A half century later, British bacteriologist Frederick Griffith was perhaps the first person to show that hered itary information could
be transferred from one cell to another “horizontall y,” rather than by descent. In 1928, he reported the fi rst demonstration of
bacterial transformation, a process in which external DNA is taken up by a cell, thereby changing morphology and physiology. He
was working with Streptococcus pneumoniae, the bacterium that causes pneumonia. Griffith worked wit h two strains, rough (R)
and smooth (S). The R strain is non-pathogenic (does n ot cause disease) and is called rough because its oute r surface is a cell wall
and lacks a capsule; as a result, the cell surface ap pears uneven under the microscope. The S strain is pat hogenic (disease-causing)
and has a capsule outside its cell wall. As a result, i t has a smooth appearance under the microscope. Griffit h injected the live R
strain into mice and they survived. In another exper iment, when he injected mice with the heat-killed S st rain, they also survived.
In a third set of experiments, a mixture of live R st rain and heat-killed S strain were injected into mice, and—to his surprise—the
mice died. Upon isolating the live bacteria from the dead mouse, only the S strain of bacteria was recovered. When this isolated S
strain was injected into fresh mice, the mice died. Gri ffith concluded that something had passed from the he at-killed S strain into
the live R strain and transformed it into the pathoge nic S strain, and he called this the transforming princ iple (Figure 2). These
experiments are now famously known as Griffith’s transform ation experiments.

11.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43675
Figure 2. Two strains of S. pneumoniae were used in Griffith’s transformation experiments. Th e R strain is non-pathogenic. The S
strain is pathogenic and causes death. When Griffith in jected a mouse with the heat-killed S strain and a li ve R strain, the mouse
died. The S strain was recovered from the dead mouse. T hus, Griffith concluded that something had passed from the heat-killed S
strain to the R strain, transforming the R strain into S strain in the process. (credit “living mouse”: modifi cation of work by NIH;
credit “dead mouse”: modification of work by Sarah M arriage)
Scientists Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty (1944) were interested in exploring this transformin g principle
further. They isolated the S strain from the dead mi ce and isolated the proteins and nucleic acids, name ly RNA and DNA, as these
were possible candidates for the molecule of heredit y. They conducted a systematic elimination study. The y used enzymes that
specifically degraded each component and then used e ach mixture separately to transform the R strain. T hey found that when DNA
was degraded, the resulting mixture was no longer able to transform the bacteria, whereas all of the other combinations were able
to transform the bacteria. This led them to conclude that DNA was the transforming principle.
Forensic Scientists and DNA Analysis
DNA evidence was used for the first time to solve an imm igration case. The story started with a teenage boy re turning to London
from Ghana to be with his mother. Immigration authorit ies at the airport were suspicious of him, thinking t hat he was traveling on a
forged passport. After much persuasion, he was allowed to g o live with his mother, but the immigration authorit ies did not drop the
case against him. All types of evidence, including ph otographs, were provided to the authorities, but deport ation proceedings were
started nevertheless. Around the same time, Dr. Alec Je ffreys of Leicester University in the United Kingdom ha d invented a
technique known as DNA fingerprinting. The immigration authorities approached Dr. Jeffreys for help. He took DNA samples from
the mother and three of her children, plus an unrel ated mother, and compared the samples with the boy’s DNA. Because the
biological father was not in the picture, DNA from the three children was compared with the boy’s DNA. He found a match in the
boy’s DNA for both the mother and his three siblings. He conc luded that the boy was indeed the mother’s son.
Forensic scientists analyze many items, including doc uments, handwriting, firearms, and biological samples. They analyze the
DNA content of hair, semen, saliva, and blood, and compa re it with a database of DNA profiles of known criminals. Analysis
includes DNA isolation, sequencing, and sequence analy sis; most forensic DNA analysis involves polymerase ch ain reaction (PCR)
amplification of short tandem repeat (STR) loci and e lectrophoresis to determine the length of the PCR-ampl ified fragment. Only
mitochondrial DNA is sequenced for forensics. Forensic sci entists are expected to appear at court hearings to p resent their findings.
They are usually employed in crime labs of city and state government agencies. Geneticists experimenting with DNA techniques
also work for scientific and research organizations, p harmaceutical industries, and college and university l abs. Students wishing to
pursue a career as a forensic scientist should have at least a bachelor’s degree in chemistry, biology, or physics, and preferably
some experience working in a laboratory.
Experiments conducted by Martha Chase and Alfred Hersh ey in 1952 provided confirmatory evidence that DNA was the genetic
material and not proteins. Chase and Hershey were stu dying a bacteriophage, which is a virus that infects b acteria. Viruses typically
have a simple structure: a protein coat, called the ca psid, and a nucleic acid core that contains the genet ic material, either DNA or
RNA. The bacteriophage infects the host bacterial cell by attaching to its surface, and then it injects its nucleic acids inside the cell.
The phage DNA makes multiple copies of itself using th e host machinery, and eventually the host cell burst s, releasing a large
number of bacteriophages. Hershey and Chase labeled one batch of phage with radioactive sulfur, S, to labe l the protein coat.
Another batch of phage were labeled with radioactive p hosphorus, P. Because phosphorous is found in DNA, but not protein, the
DNA and not the protein would be tagged with radioactive phosp horus.35

11.7.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43675Each batch of phage was allowed to infect the cells se parately. After infection, the phage bacterial suspen sion was put in a blender,
which caused the phage coat to be detached from the host cell. The phage and bacterial suspension was spun d own in a centrifuge.
The heavier bacterial cells settled down and formed a pellet, whereas the lighter phage particles stayed i n the supernatant. In the
tube that contained phage labeled with S, the superna tant contained the radioactively labeled phage, where as no radioactivity was
detected in the pellet. In the tube that contained t he phage labeled with P, the radioactivity was detect ed in the pellet that
contained the heavier bacterial cells, and no radio activity was detected in the supernatant. Hershey and C hase concluded that it was
the phage DNA that was injected into the cell and carri ed information to produce more phage particles, thu s providing evidence
that DNA was the genetic material and not proteins (Figure 3).
Figure 3. In Hershey and Chase’s experiments, bacteria w ere infected with phage radiolabeled with either S, which labels protein,
or P, which labels DNA. Only P entered the bacterial cells, indicating that DNA is the genetic material.
Around this same time, Austrian biochemist Erwin Chargaf f examined the content of DNA in different species an d found that the
amounts of adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine wer e not found in equal quantities, and that it varied f rom species to species,
but not between individuals of the same species. He f ound that the amount of adenine equals the amount o f thymine, and the
amount of cytosine equals the amount of guanine, or A = T and G = C. This is also known as Chargaff’s rules. T his finding proved
immensely useful when Watson and Crick were getting ready to propose their DNA double helix model.
Practice Question
The experiments by Hershey and Chase helped confirm that DNA was the hereditary material on the basis of the finding that:
a. radioactive phage were found in the pellet
b. radioactive cells were found in the supernatant
c. radioactive sulfur was found inside the cell
d. radioactive phosphorus was found in the cell
[reveal-answer q=”549343″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”549343″]d. radioactive phosphorus was found in the cell[/hidden-answer]35
32 32

11.7.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43675In Summary: The History of DNA
DNA was first isolated from white blood cells by Friedric h Miescher, who called it nuclein because it was isolat ed from nuclei.
Frederick Griffith’s experiments with strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae provided the first hint that DNA may be the
transforming principle. Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty pro ved that DNA is required for the transformation of ba cteria. Later
experiments by Hershey and Chase using bacteriophage T2 proved that DNA is the genetic material. Chargaff found that the ratio
of A = T and C = G, and that the percentage content of A, T, G, and C is different for different species.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
11.7: The History of DNA is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367611.8: Basics of DNA Replication
Figure 1. The three suggested models of DNA replication. Grey indicates the original DNA strands, and blue in dicates newly
synthesized DNA.
The elucidation of the structure of the double heli x provided a hint as to how DNA divides and makes copies of itself. This model
suggests that the two strands of the double helix sep arate during replication, and each strand serves as a template from which the
new complementary strand is copied. What was not clear was how the replication took place. There were three m odels suggested:
conservative, semi-conservative, and dispersive (see Fig ure 1).
In conservative replication, the parental DNA remains t ogether, and the newly formed daughter strands are to gether. The semiconservative method suggests that each of the two pa rental DNA strands act as a template for new DNA to be s ynthesized; after
replication, each double-stranded DNA includes one par ental or “old” strand and one “new” strand. In the dis persive model, both
copies of DNA have double-stranded segments of parental DNA and newly synthesized DNA interspersed.
Meselson and Stahl were interested in understanding ho w DNA replicates. They grew E. coli for several generations in a medium
containing a “heavy” isotope of nitrogen (N) that ge ts incorporated into nitrogenous bases, and eventually into the DNA (Figure
2).15

11.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43676
Figure 2. Meselson and Stahl experimented with E. coli grown first in heavy nitrogen (N) then in N. DNA gr own in N (red
band) is heavier than DNA grown in N (orange band), and sediments to a lower level in cesium chloride solut ion in an
ultracentrifuge. When DNA grown in N is switched to m edia containing N, after one round of cell division the DNA sediments
halfway between the N and N levels, indicating that it now contains fifty percent N. In subsequent cell di visions, an
increasing amount of DNA contains N only. This data sup ports the semi-conservative replication model. (credit: modification of
work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
The E. coli culture was then shifted into medium containing N and allowed to grow for one generation. The cells were ha rvested
and the DNA was isolated. The DNA was centrifuged at high speeds in an ultracentrifuge. Some cells were allowed to grow for one
more life cycle in N and spun again. During the densi ty gradient centrifugation, the DNA is loaded into a gr adient (typically a salt
such as cesium chloride or sucrose) and spun at hig h speeds of 50,000 to 60,000 rpm. Under these circumsta nces, the DNA will
form a band according to its density in the gradient. DNA grown in N will band at a higher density position tha n that grown in
N. Meselson and Stahl noted that after one generation o f growth in N after they had been shifted from N, the single band
observed was intermediate in position in between DNA of cells grown exclusively in N and N. This suggested either a semiconservative or dispersive mode of replication. The DNA harvested from cells grown for two generations in N for med two bands:
one DNA band was at the intermediate position between N a nd N, and the other corresponded to the band of N DNA. Th ese
results could only be explained if DNA replicates in a semi-c onservative manner. Therefore, the other two modes were r uled out.
During DNA replication, each of the two strands that mak e up the double helix serves as a template from which new strands are
copied. The new strand will be complementary to the pa rental or “old” strand. When two daughter DNA copies ar e formed, they
have the same sequence and are divided equally into the two daughter cells.
Click through this tutorial on DNA replication.
In Summary: Basics of DNA Replication
The model for DNA replication suggests that the two str ands of the double helix separate during replicatio n, and each strand serves
as a template from which the new complementary strand is copied. In conservative replication, the parental DNA is conserved, and
the daughter DNA is newly synthesized. The semi-conserva tive method suggests that each of the two parental DNA strands acts as
template for new DNA to be synthesized; after replicati on, each double-stranded DNA includes one parental or “old” strand and15 14 15
15 14
15 14 14
14 14 15
15 14
15 14 14

11.8.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43676one “new” strand. The dispersive mode suggested that the two copies of the DNA would have segments of parent al DNA and
newly synthesized DNA. Experimental evidence showed DNA replic ation is semi-conservative.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
11.8: Basics of DNA Replication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367711.9: Major Enzymes
The process of DNA replication is catalyzed by a type of enzyme called DNA polymerase (poly meaning many, mer meaning pieces, and – ase meaning enzyme; so an enzyme that attaches many
pieces of DNA). Observe Figure 1: the double helix of the original DNA molecule separates (blue) and new strands are made to matc h the separated strands. The result will be two DNA molecules,
each containing an old and a new strand. Therefore, DNA replicat ion is called semiconservative. The term semiconservative refers to the fact that half of the original molecule (one of the two strands
in the double helix) is “conserved” in the new molecule. The original strand is referred to as the template strand because it provides the information, or template, for the newly synth esized strand.
3′ synthesis shown, no enzymes in diagram. ” width=”1024″ height=”5 08″> Figure 1. By Madprime(Wikipedia) (DNA replication split horizontal) CC BY-SA 2.0
Figure 2. Primer and Template
DNA replication relies on the double-stranded nature of the molecule. One dou ble stranded DNA molecule, when replicated, will become t wo double-stranded molecules, each containing one
original strand and one newly synthesized strand. You remem ber that the two strands of DNA run antiparallel: one from the 5′ to the 3′, and the other from the 3′ to the 5′. The sy nthesis of the new
DNA strand can only happen in one direction: from the 5′ to the 3′ end. In other words, the new bases are always added t o the 3′ end of the newly synthesized DNA strand. So if the ne w nucleotide
is always added to the 3′ end of an existing nucleotide, where does the first nucleotide come from? In fact, DNA polymerase needs an “anchor” to start adding nucleotides: a short sequ ence of DNA
or RNA that is complementary to the template strand will work to provide a free 3′ end. This sequence is called a primer (Figure 2).
How does DNA polymerase know in what order to add nucleotides? Specific base pairing i n DNA is the key to copying the DNA: if you know the sequence of one strand, you can use base pairing
rules to build the other strand. Bases form pairs (base pairs) in a very specific way. Figure 3 shows how A (adenine) pairs with T (thymine) and G (guanine) pairs with C (cytosine). It is important to
remember that this binding is specific: T pairs with A, but not with C. The molecular recognition occurs because of the ability of b ases to form specific hydrogen bonds: atoms align just right to
make hydrogen bonds possible. Also note that a larger base (purine, A or G) always pairs with a smaller base (pyrimidine, C or T).
Figure 3. DNA chemical structure. Modification of DNA chemical structure by Madeleine Price Ball; CC-BY-SA-2.0
Practice Questions
True/False: DNA replication requires an enzyme.
[practice-area rows=”1″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”527189″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”527189″]True. Most biological reactions rely on the enzyme to speed up the reaction. In the case of DNA replication, thi s enzyme is DNA polymerase.
[/hidden-answer]
What are the building blocks on DNA?
a. Deoxyribonucleotides
b. Fatty acids
c. Ribonucleotides
d. Amino acids
[reveal-answer q=”93495″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”93495″]Answer a. DNA is a double helix made up of two long c hains of deoxyribonucleotides.
[/hidden-answer]
True/False: DNA replication requires energy.

11.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43677[practice-area rows=”1″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”62103″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”62103″]True. Making large molecules from small subunits (anabolism) requires energy. What supplies the energy? The building blocks themselves serve as a source of energy.
As they get incorporated into the DNA polymer, two phosphate grou ps are broken off to release energy, some of which is used fo r making the polymer. Deoxyribonucleotides differ from nucle otides
like ATP only by one missing oxygen atom.
[/hidden-answer]
We have the building blocks, a source of energy, and a catalyst. Wha t’s missing? We need instruction about the order of nucleotides in th e new polymer. Which molecule provides these instructions?
a. Protein
b. DNA
c. Carbohydrate
d. Lipid
[reveal-answer q=”494506″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”494506″]Answer b. We refer to this DNA as a template. The or iginal information stored in the order of bases will direct the syn thesis of the new DNA via base pairing.
[/hidden-answer]
There is one more thing required by the DNA polymerase. It cannot just start making a DNA copy of the template strand; i t needs a short piece of DNA or RNA with a free hydroxyl group i n the
right place to attach the nucleotides to. (Remember that synthesis always occurs in one direction—new building blocks ar e added to the 3′ end.) This component starts the process by giving DNA
polymerase something to bind to. What might you call this short pie ce of nucleic acid?
a. A solvent
b. A primer
c. A converter
d. A sealant
[reveal-answer q=”529681″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”529681″]Answer b. A primer is used to start this process by g iving DNA polymerase something to bind the new nucleotide to.[/h idden-answer]
Now that you understand the basics of DNA replication, we can add a bit of complexity. The two strands of DNA have to be temporarily separated from each other; this job is done by a special
enzyme, helicase, that helps unwind and separate the DNA helices (Figure 4). Ano ther issue is that the DNA polymerase only works in one direction along the strand (5′ to 3′), b ut the doublestranded DNA has two strands oriented in opposite directions. T his problem is solved by synthesizing the two strands slightly dif ferently: one new strand grows continuously, the other in bits and
pieces. Short fragments of RNA are used as primers for the DNA polymerase.
Figure 4. By Mariana Ruiz (DNA replication) Public Domain
Practice Questions
Which of these separates the two complementary strands of DNA?
a. DNA polymerase
b. helicase
c. RNA primer
d. single-strand binding protein
[reveal-answer q=”197431″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”197431″]Answer b. Helicase breaks the hydrogen bonds holdi ng together the two strands of DNA.
[/hidden-answer]
Which of these attaches complementary bases to the template strand?
a. DNA polymerase
b. helicase
c. RNA primer
d. single-strand binding protein
[reveal-answer q=”381621″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”381621″]Answer a. DNA polymerase builds the new strand of DNA.
[/hidden-answer]
Which of these is later replaced with DNA bases?
a. DNA polymerase
b. helicase
c. RNA primer
d. single-strand binding protein

11.9.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43677[reveal-answer q=”2143″]Show Answers[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”2143″]Answer c. the RNA primer is replaced with DNA nuc leotides.[/hidden-answer]
In Summary: Major Enzymes
Replication in eukaryotes starts at multiple origins of rep lication. A primer is required to initiate synthesis, which is then extended by DNA polymerase as it adds nucleotid es one by one to the
growing chain. The leading strand is synthesized continuously, whereas the lagging strand is synthesized in short stretches c alled Okazaki fragments. The RNA primers are replaced with DNA
nucleotides; the DNA remains one continuous strand by linking the DNA fragments with DNA ligase. Below is a summary table of the ma jor enzymes addressed in this reading, listed in rough order
of activity during replication.
Important Enzymes in DNA Replication
Enzyme Function
Topoisomerase Relaxes the super-coiled DNA
DNA helicase Unwinds the double helix at the replication fork
Primase Provides the starting point for DNA polymerase to begin synthesis of the new strand
DNA polymerase Synthesizes the new DNA strand; also proofreads and corrects some errors
DNA ligase Re-joins the two DNA strands into a double helix and joins Okazaki fragments of the lagging strand
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Revision, adaptation, and original content. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
CC licensed content, Shared previously
DNA Replication. Provided by: Open Learning Initiative. Located at: https://oli.cmu.edu/jcourse/workbook/activity/page?context=4 34a5f7e80020ca6000225da6a4220c9. Project: Introduction
to Biology (Open + Free). License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
11.9: Major Enzymes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Libre Texts.

11.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366111.10: “Proofreading” DNA
DNA replication is a highly accurate process, but mista kes can occasionally occur, such as a DNA polymerase i nserting a wrong
base. Uncorrected mistakes may sometimes lead to serio us consequences, such as cancer. Repair mechanisms correc t the mistakes.
In rare cases, mistakes are not corrected, leading to mutati ons; in other cases, repair enzymes are themselves muta ted or defective.
Most of the mistakes during DNA replication are promptly corrected by DNA polymerase by proofreading the base that has been
just added (Figure 1). In proofreading, the DNA pol reads the newly added base before adding the next one, so a correction can be
made. The polymerase checks whether the newly added base has paired correctly with the base in the template strand. If it is the
right base, the next nucleotide is added. If an incorr ect base has been added, the enzyme makes a cut at the phosphodiester bond
and releases the wrong nucleotide. This is performed by the exonuclease action of DNA pol III. Once the inco rrect nucleotide has
been removed, a new one will be added again.
Figure 1. Proofreading by DNA polymerase corrects error s during replication.
Some errors are not corrected during replication, bu t are instead corrected after replication is complet ed; this type of repair is
known as mismatch repair (Figure 2). The enzymes recognize the incorrectly add ed nucleotide and excise it; this is then replaced
by the correct base. If this remains uncorrected, it may lead to more permanent damage. How do mismatch repa ir enzymes
recognize which of the two bases is the incorrect one? In E. coli, after replication, the nitrogenous base adenine acq uires a methyl
group; the parental DNA strand will have methyl groups, whereas the newly synthesized strand lacks them. Thus, DNA polymerase
is able to remove the wrongly incorporated bases fro m the newly synthesized, non-methylated strand. In euka ryotes, the
mechanism is not very well understood, but it is belie ved to involve recognition of unsealed nicks in the new strand, as well as a
short-term continuing association of some of the replica tion proteins with the new daughter strand after replicatio n has completed.
Figure 2. In mismatch repair, the incorrectly added b ase is detected after replication. The mismatch repair proteins detect this base
and remove it from the newly synthesized strand by nuc lease action. The gap is now filled with the correctl y paired base.
In another type of repair mechanism, nucleotide excision repair, enzymes replace incorrect bases by making a cut o n both the 3′
and 5′ ends of the incorrect base (Figure 3).
Figure 3. Nucleotide excision repairs thymine dimers. W hen exposed to UV, thymines lying adjacent to each ot her can form
thymine dimers. In normal cells, they are excised and replaced.

11.10.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43661The segment of DNA is removed and replaced with the cor rectly paired nucleotides by the action of DNA pol. Onc e the bases are
filled in, the remaining gap is sealed with a phospho diester linkage catalyzed by DNA ligase. This repair mec hanism is often
employed when UV exposure causes the formation of pyrimi dine dimers.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
11.10: “Proofreading” DNA is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366211.11: Telomeres
As you’ve learned, the enzyme DNA pol can add nucleotide s only in the 5′ to 3′ direction. In the leading str and, synthesis continues
until the end of the chromosome is reached. On the lagg ing strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches, each of which is initiated
by a separate primer. When the replication fork reac hes the end of the linear chromosome, there is no pla ce for a primer to be made
for the DNA fragment to be copied at the end of the c hromosome. These ends thus remain unpaired, and over time these ends may
get progressively shorter as cells continue to divide.
The ends of the linear chromosomes are known as telomeres, which have repetitive sequences that code for no par ticular gene. In a
way, these telomeres protect the genes from getting d eleted as cells continue to divide. In humans, a six base pair sequence,
TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times. The discovery of th e enzyme telomerase (Figure 1) helped in the underst anding of how
chromosome ends are maintained. The telomerase enzyme contains a catalytic part and a built-in RNA template. It attaches to the
end of the chromosome, and complementary bases to the RNA template are added on the 3′ end of the DNA stran d. Once the 3′ end
of the lagging strand template is sufficiently elong ated, DNA polymerase can add the nucleotides complemen tary to the ends of the
chromosomes. Thus, the ends of the chromosomes are replic ated.
Figure 1. The ends of linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomerase enzyme.
Figure 2. Elizabeth Blackburn, 2009 Nobel Laureate, is the scientist who discovered how telomerase works. (cr edit: US Embassy
Sweden)

11.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43662Telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adul t stem cells. It is not active in adult somatic cell s. For her discovery of
telomerase and its action, Elizabeth Blackburn (Figure 2) received the Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology in 2 009.
Telomerase and Aging
Cells that undergo cell division continue to have t heir telomeres shortened because most somatic cells do not make telomerase.
This essentially means that telomere shortening is assoc iated with aging. With the advent of modern medicine, preventative health
care, and healthier lifestyles, the human life span ha s increased, and there is an increasing demand for peo ple to look younger and
have a better quality of life as they grow older.
In 2010, scientists found that telomerase can reverse some age-related conditions in mice. This may have potential in regenerative
medicine. Telomerase-deficient mice were used in the se studies; these mice have tissue atrophy, stem cel l depletion, organ
system failure, and impaired tissue injury responses. Telomerase reactivation in these mice caused exten sion of telomeres, reduced
DNA damage, reversed neurodegeneration, and improved t he function of the testes, spleen, and intestines. Thus, telomere
reactivation may have potential for treating age-rela ted diseases in humans.
Cancer is characterized by uncontrolled cell divisi on of abnormal cells. The cells accumulate mutations, p roliferate uncontrollably,
and can migrate to different parts of the body thro ugh a process called metastasis. Scientists have observed that cancerous cells
have considerably shortened telomeres and that telom erase is active in these cells. Interestingly, only after the telomeres were
shortened in the cancer cells did the telomerase be come active. If the action of telomerase in these ce lls can be inhibited by drugs
during cancer therapy, then the cancerous cells could pote ntially be stopped from further division.
The ends of the chromosomes pose a problem during DNA replication as polymerase is unable to extend them wi thout a
primer. Telomerase, an enzyme with a built-in RNA templ ate, extends the ends by copying the RNA template and extending
one end of the chromosome. DNA polymerase can then exte nd the DNA using the primer. In this way, the ends of the
chromosomes are protected. This is important as evid ence indicates telomere length may play a role in r egulating cell division
and the process of aging.
1. Jaskelioff et al., “Telomerase reactivation reverses tiss ue degeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice,” Nature 469 (2011):
102–7. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
11.11: Telomeres is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.[1]
Learning Objectives

11.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366311.12: Introduction to DNA Mutations
Recognize the impact of DNA mutations
In this outcome, we’ll learn just what mutations are and how they’re often connected to our DNA.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Understand what a mutation is and how one generally occurs
Understand the impact of mutations in somatic cells versus gametes
Identify the major types of DNA mutations
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
What is a Mutation?
Mutations in Somatic Cells and in Gametes
Major Types of Mutations
Self Check: DNA Mutations
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
11.12: Introduction to DNA Mutations is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366411.13: What is a Mutation?
Over a lifetime, our DNA can undergo changes or mutations in the sequence of bases: A, C, G and T. This results in changes in the prote ins that are made. This can be a bad or a good thing.
A mutation is a change that occurs in our DNA sequence, ei ther due to mistakes when the DNA is copied or as the result of environmental factors such as UV light and cigarette smoke. Mutations
can occur during DNA replication if errors are made and n ot corrected in time. Mutations can also occur as the result of exposure to environmental factors such as smoking, sunligh t and radiation.
Often cells can recognize any potentially mutation-causing dama ge and repair it before it becomes a fixed mutation.
Mutations contribute to genetic variation within species. Muta tions can also be inherited, particularly if they have a posi tive effect. For example, the disorder sickle cell anaemia is caused by a
mutation in the gene that instructs the building of a prote in called hemoglobin. This causes the red blood cells to be come an abnormal, rigid, sickle shape. However, in African popu lations, having
this mutation also protects against malaria.
However, mutation can also disrupt normal gene activity and cause diseases, like cancer. Cancer is the most common human genetic disease; it is caused by mutations occurring in a number of
growth-controlling genes. Sometimes faulty, cancer-causing genes can e xist from birth, increasing a person’s chance of getting cancer.
An illustration to show an example of a DNA mutation. Image credi t: Genome Research Limited
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
What is a mutation?. Authored by: Genome Research Limited. Located at: http://www.yourgenome.org/facts/what-is-a-mutation. Project: YourGenome. License: CC BY-SA: AttributionShareAlike
11.13: What is a Mutation? is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Libr eTexts.

11.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366511.14: Mutations in Somatic Cells and in Gametes
Let’s begin with a question: What is a gene mutation and how do mutations occur?
A gene mutation is a permanent alteration in the DNA sequence that makes up a gene, such that the sequenc e differs from what is
found in most people. Mutations range in size; they can affect anywhere from a single DNA building block (base pair) to a large
segment of a chromosome that includes multiple genes.
Gene mutations can be classified in two major ways:
Hereditary mutations are inherited from a parent and are present throughout a p erson’s life in virtually every cell in the body.
These mutations are also called germline mutations beca use they are present in the parent’s egg or sperm cells, whic h are also
called germ cells. When an egg and a sperm cell unite, the resulting fertilized egg cell receives DNA from both par ents. If this
DNA has a mutation, the child that grows from the fertilized egg will have the mutation in each of his or her cells.
Acquired (or somatic) mutations occur at some time during a person’s life and are present o nly in certain cells, not in every
cell in the body. These changes can be caused by environm ental factors such as ultraviolet radiation from the sun, or can occur
if a mistake is made as DNA copies itself during cell division. Acquired mutations in somatic cells (cells other than sperm and
egg cells) cannot be passed on to the next generation.
Genetic changes that are described as de novo (new) m utations can be either hereditary or somatic. In so me cases, the mutation
occurs in a person’s egg or sperm cell but is not pre sent in any of the person’s other cells. In other cases, t he mutation occurs in the
fertilized egg shortly after the egg and sperm cells unite. (It is often impossible to tell exactly when a de novo mutation happened.)
As the fertilized egg divides, each resulting cell in the growing embryo will have the mutation. De novo mu tations may explain
genetic disorders in which an affected child has a mu tation in every cell in the body but the parents do not, and there is no family
history of the disorder.
Somatic mutations that happen in a single cell early in embryonic development can lead to a situation c alled mosaicism. These
genetic changes are not present in a parent’s egg or sperm cells, or in the fertilized egg, but happen a b it later when the embryo
includes several cells. As all the cells divide duri ng growth and development, cells that arise from the c ell with the altered gene will
have the mutation, while other cells will not. Dependi ng on the mutation and how many cells are affected, mosaicism may or may
not cause health problems.
Most disease-causing gene mutations are uncommon in the general population. However, other genetic changes oc cur more
frequently. Genetic alterations that occur in more th an 1 percent of the population are called polymorph isms. They are common
enough to be considered a normal variation in the DNA. Polymorphisms are responsible for many of the normal differences
between people such as eye color, hair color, and bloo d type. Although many polymorphisms have no negative e ffects on a person’s
health, some of these variations may influence the risk of developing certain disorders.
Contributors and Attributions
Public domain content
What is a gene mutation and how do mutations occur?. Provided by: NIH. Located at:
https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/mutationsanddisorders/ge nemutation. Project: US National Library of Medicine. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
11.14: Mutations in Somatic Cells and in Gametes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

11.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366611.15: Major Types of Mutations
Figure 1. Xeroderma pigmentosa is a condition in which thymine dimerization from exposure to UV is not repa ired. Exposure to
sunlight results in skin lesions. (credit: James Halpern et al.)
A well-studied example of a mutation is seen in peopl e suffering from xeroderma pigmentosa (Figure 1). Affec ted individuals have
skin that is highly sensitive to UV rays from the sun.
When individuals are exposed to UV, pyrimidine dimer s, especially those of thymine, are formed; people wit h xeroderma
pigmentosa are not able to repair the damage. These are not repaired because of a defect in the nucleoti de excision repair enzymes,
whereas in normal individuals, the thymine dimers are excised and the defect is corrected. The thymine di mers distort the structure
of the DNA double helix, and this may cause problems during DNA replication. People with xeroderma pigmentosa m ay have a
higher risk of contracting skin cancer than those who don ’t have the condition.
Errors during DNA replication are not the only reason why mutations arise in DNA. Mutations, variations in the nucleotide
sequence of a genome, can also occur because of dama ge to DNA. Such mutations may be of two types: induced o r spontaneous.
Induced mutations are those that result from an exposure to chemical s, UV rays, x-rays, or some other environmental agent.
Spontaneous mutations occur without any exposure to any environmental age nt; they are a result of natural reactions taking p lace
within the body.
Mutations may have a wide range of effects. Some mutati ons are not expressed; these are known as silent mutations. Point
mutations are those mutations that affect a single base pair. The most common nucleotide mutations are substitutio ns, in which one
base is replaced by another. These can be of two type s, either transitions or transversions. Transition substitution refers to a purine
or pyrimidine being replaced by a base of the same kind; for example, a purine such as adenine may be re placed by the purine
guanine. Transversion substitution refers to a purine b eing replaced by a pyrimidine, or vice versa; for e xample, cytosine, a
pyrimidine, is replaced by adenine, a purine. Mutatio ns can also be the result of the addition of a base, known as an insertion, or the
removal of a base, also known as deletion. Sometimes a piece of DNA from one chromosome may get moved to ano ther
chromosome or to another region of the same chromosome; t his is also known as translocation.
Mutations in repair genes have been known to cause can cer. Many mutated repair genes have been implicated i n certain forms of
pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and colorectal canc er. Mutations can affect either somatic cells or germ c ells. If many mutations
accumulate in a somatic cell, they may lead to probl ems such as the uncontrolled cell division observed in cancer. If a mutation
takes place in germ cells, the mutation will be passed on to the next generation, as in the case of hemophil ia and xeroderma
pigmentosa.
Causes of Genetic Mutations

11.15.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43666
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=398
DNA polymerase can make mistakes while adding nucleotide s. Most mistakes are corrected, but if they are not, they may result
in a mutation defined as a permanent change in the DNA sequence. Mutations can be of many types, such as substitution,
deletion, insertion, and translocation. Mutations in repair genes may lead to serious cons equences such as cancer. Mutations
can be induced or may occur spontaneously.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
The causes of genetic mutations. Authored by: Ross Firestone. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at:
https://www.khanacademy.org/video/the-causes-of-genetic- mutations. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercialShareAlike
11.15: Major Types of Mutations is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

11.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366711.16: Putting It Together- DNA Structure and Replication
Let’s expand just a bit on how the process of personali zed medicine works. Within any given genome there will be small
differences in the DNA sequence. All humans, for example, a re 99.99% identical and only differ by 0.01%. These sm all differences
account for many features in an individual, including ho w he or she responds to disease treatments.
Personalized Medicine in Practice
Let’s return to our examples from the beginning of the mo dule:
Blood clot treatments: Screening the genome of a patient prior to prescribing Wara fin for blood clots allows clinicians to
determine if the drug will even work and if so, to pinpoint a specific dosage.
Colorectal cancer treatments: In the case of colorectal cancer, the KRAS protein can be e xamined to determine if cetuximab
will be effective. This is an important step as this drug is ineffective in about 40% of patients.
Breast cancer treatments: Anti-breast cancer treatments can be assessed prior to trial- and-error in a patient based on the DNA
sequence of key receptors in the body.
So, should you have your genes tested? Unfortunately, the decision about whether to get a particular geneti c test can be
complicated.
Getting a genetic test usually isn’t difficult. Docto rs generally take a sample of body fluid or
tissue, such as blood, saliva or skin, and send it to a lab. Most genetic tests used today analyze just one o r a few genes, often to help
diagnose disease. Newborns, for example, are routinely sc reened for several genetic disorders by taking a few d rops of blood from
their heels. When life-threatening conditions are caught early, infants can be treated right away to prevent problem s.
Genetic tests are now available for about 2,500 diseases, and that number keeps growing. Your doctor might advi se you to get
tested for specific genetic diseases if they tend to r un in your family or if you have certain symptoms.
“While there are many genetic tests, they vary as to h ow well they predict risk,” says Dr. Lawrence Brody, a geneti c testing expert
at NIH.
For some diseases, such as sickle cell anemia or cystic fibrosis, inheriting 2 copies of abnormal genes means a person will get that
disease. But for other diseases and conditions, the pic ture is more complex. For type 2 diabetes, testing posit ive for some specific
gene variants may help predict risk, but no better than other factors—such as obesity, high blood pres sure and having a close
relative with the disease.
The latest approach to personalized medicine is to g et your whole genome sequenced. That’s still expensiv e, but the cost has
dropped dramatically over the past decade and will l ikely continue to fall. Since your genome essentiall y stays the same over time,
this information might one day become part of your medic al record, so doctors could consult it as needed.
You can start to get a sense of your genetic risks b y putting together your family’s health history. A f ree online tool called My
Family Health Portrait from the U.S. Surgeon General can he lp you and your doctor spot early warning signs of c onditions that run

11.16.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43667in your family.
But personalized medicine isn’t just about genes. Yo u can learn a lot about your health risks by taking a close look at your current
health and habits. Smoking, a poor diet, and lack of exercise can raise your risks for life-threatening h ealth problems, such as heart
disease and cancer. Talk to your health care provider about the steps you can take to understand and red uce your unique health
risks.
Learn More
Visit this site to learn more about how FDA regulations come into play.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Putting It Together: DNA Structure and Replication. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen
Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
adult, africa, african, black, care, cheerful, clinic, doc tor,. Authored by: Ilmicrofono Oggiono. Provided by: www.audio-lucistore.it. Located at: https://flic.kr/p/qtWa9C. License: CC BY: Attribution
Public domain content
Personalized Medicine: Matching Treatments to Your Genes. Authored by: Vicki Contie, Dana Steinberg, Carol Torgan, and
Katherine Wendelsdorf. Provided by: NIH. Located at: https://newsinhealth.nih.gov/issue/dec2013/feature1. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
11.16: Putting It Together- DNA Structure and Replica tion is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

11.17.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4366811.17: Assignment- Which Has More DNA?
Question: Would a kiwifruit and strawberry that are approximate ly the same size also have approximately the same am ount of
DNA?
Background: You have learned that DNA is carried on chromosomes. All mammals are diploid; however, not all plants are di ploid.
The common strawberry is octoploid (8 n) and the cultivated kiwi is hexaploid (6 n). Research the total number of chromosomes in
the cells of each of these fruits and think about how this m ight correspond to the amount of DNA in these fruits’ cell nu clei.
Hypothesis: Hypothesize whether you would be able to detect a diff erence in DNA quantity from similarly sized strawberries and
kiwis. Which fruit do you think would yield more DNA?
Test your hypothesis. Perform the DNA extraction experiment.
Record your observations: Because you are not quantitatively measuring DNA volu me, you can record for each trial whether the
two fruits produced the same or different amounts of DNA as observed by eye. If one or the other fruit produc ed noticeably more
DNA, record this as well. Determine whether your observations a re consistent with several pieces of each fruit.
Analyze your data: Did you notice an obvious difference in the amount o f DNA produced by each fruit? Were your results
reproducible?
Draw a conclusion: Given what you know about the number of chromosomes in each fruit, can you conclude that chromosome
number necessarily correlates to DNA amount? Can you i dentify any drawbacks to this procedure? If you had a ccess to a
laboratory, how could you standardize your comparison and make it more quantitative?
To complete this assessment, address all of the poin ts above in a lab write up. Be sure to include images of your experiment in
progress. See the examples contained here.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment has been proofread and does not contain any majo r spelling or grammatical errors
Assignment includes appropriate references.
Assignment addresses the required points noted above (hypo thesis, observations/data, analysis of data, conclusion).
Rubric
Which Has More DNA?
Outcome: Relate DNA structure to the process of DNA repl ication
Criteria Ratings Pts
Hypothesis addresses
how the DNA stores
genetic information and
the role of
complementary base
pairing in DNA
storage/replication.Hypothesis is testable
and clearly addresses
storage and replication
of genetic information.
5.0 ptsHypothesis is testable
and addresses genetic
information storage and
replication with some
explanation required.
4.0 ptsHypothesis is not
testable or does not
address storage of
genetic information and
replication of DNA
bases.
0.0 pts5 pts
Conclusion sections
addresses how DNA is
used to store genetic
information.Conclusion addresses
storage of genetic
information in detail and
references experimental
findings directly and in
detail.
5.0 ptsConclusion addresses
storage of genetic
information at high level
and mentions
experimental findings.
4.0 ptsConclusion does not
address or incorrectly
addresses storage of
genetic information.
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 10

11.17.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43668Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter. Provided by: Columbia Basin College. Located at: https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC
BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
11.17: Assignment- Which Has More DNA? is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
12: Module 10- DNA Transcription and Translation
12.1: Why It Matters- DNA Transcription and Translation
12.2: Introduction to Transcription
12.3: Steps of Genetic Transcription
12.4: RNA Polymerase
12.5: pre-RNA and mRNA
12.6: RNA Post-Translational Modification
12.7: Introduction to Translation
12.8: Steps of Translation
12.9: Ribosomes
12.10: tRNA
12.11: Codons
12.12: Protein Modifications
12.13: Introduction to Prokaryotic Transcription and Translation
12.14: Prokaryotic Transcription
12.15: Prokaryotic Translation
12.16: Introduction to the Central Dogma
12.17: The Central Dogma
12.18: Putting It Together- DNA Transcription and Transla tion
12: Module 10- DNA Transcription and Translation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

12.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368812.1: Why It Matters- DNA Transcription and Translation
Why describe the conversion of DNA to RNA to proteins?
Figure 1. Before buildings are created, plans are draw n up. The plans direct the construction process.
By now you’re familiar with genes and DNA sequences and how changes in the DNA can have a big impact. But the q uestion still
remains... how? How does DNA cause anything to happen?
Our bodies contain trillions of cells that need to b e constructed in very precise ways. Much like when a const ruction company
creates blueprints before they actually begin a project, yo ur body needs some kind of plan to accomplish this.
DNA is acts as a blueprint. With this plan in every cell, your body is able to convert DNA into action molecules, which are proteins,
by way of an intermediary, RNA. This idea is so centra l to biology that it is often called the central do gma of biology: DNA is
transcribed to RNA which is translated to protein. Thi s multi-step process is one of the reasons for the dive rsity we see in the world
around us.
Learning Outcomes
Outline the process of eukaryotic transcription
Summarize the process of translation
Outline the process of prokaryotic transcription and transl ation
Identify the central dogma of life
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: DNA Transcription and Translation. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen
Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
Public domain content
Joy Oil gas station blueprints. Provided by: Joy Oil Co Ltd. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Joy_Oil_gas_station _blueprints.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
12.1: Why It Matters- DNA Transcription and Translatio n is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

12.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368912.2: Introduction to Transcription
Outline the process of eukaryotic transcription
DNA is copied into RNA in a process called genetic tran scription. To transcribe means to “put down something in writing.” The
information in DNA is transcribed—or rewritten—into a small er version (RNA) that can be used by the cell.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Understand the basic steps in the transcription of DNA into R NA
Describe the role of RNA polymerase
Understand the difference between pre-RNA and mRNA
Describe RNA post-translational modification and its pur pose
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Steps of Genetic Transcription
RNA Polymerase
pre-RNA and mRNA
RNA Post-Translational Modification
Self Check: Transcription
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Transcription of DNA to RNA. Provided by: CK-12. Located at: www.ck12.org/biology/Transcription-of-DNA-toRNA/lesson/Transcription-of-DNA-to-RNA-BIO/. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
12.2: Introduction to Transcription is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369012.3: Steps of Genetic Transcription
Transcription takes place in the nucleus. It uses DNA a s a template to make an RNA (mRNA) molecule. During tra nscription, a
strand of mRNA is made that is complementary to a strand of DNA. Figure 1 shows how this occurs.
Figure 1. Overview of Transcription. Transcription uses the sequence of bases in a strand of DNA to make a comp lementary strand
of mRNA. Triplets are groups of three successive nucleot ide bases in DNA. Codons are complementary groups of ba ses in mRNA.
You can also watch this more detailed video about transcription.
Transcription takes place in three steps: initiation, elo ngation, and termination. The steps are illustrated in Fig ure 2.
Figure 2. Transcription occurs in the three steps—initia tion, elongation, and termination—all shown here.
Step 1: Initiation
Initiation is the beginning of transcription. It occurs when the enzyme RNA polymerase binds to a region of a gene ca lled the
promoter. This signals the DNA to unwind so the enzyme can ‘‘read’’ the bases in one of the DNA strands. The enz yme is now
ready to make a strand of mRNA with a complementary seque nce of bases.
Step 2: Elongation
Elongation is the addition of nucleotides to the mRNA strand. R NA polymerase reads the unwound DNA strand and builds th e
mRNA molecule, using complementary base pairs. There is a brief time during this process when the newly forme d RNA is bound
to the unwound DNA. During this process, an adenine (A) in the DNA bi nds to an uracil (U) in the RNA.

12.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43690Step 3: Termination
Termination is the ending of transcription, and occurs when RNA p olymerase crosses a stop (termination) sequence in t he gene.
The mRNA strand is complete, and it detaches from DNA.
This video provides a review of these steps. You can st op watching the video at 5:35. (After this point, it di scusses translation,
which we’ll discuss in the next outcome.)
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=410
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Transcription of DNA to RNA. Provided by: CK-12. Located at: www.ck12.org/biology/Transcription-of-DNA-toRNA/lesson/Transcription-of-DNA-to-RNA-BIO/. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
All rights reserved content
Transcription and Translation. Authored by: Bozeman Science. Located at: https://youtu.be/h3b9ArupXZg. License: All
Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
12.3: Steps of Genetic Transcription is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369112.4: RNA Polymerase
This section will expand upon the specific role of RNA polymerases during transcription. Read on to learn the role of RNA
polymerases at each stage of transcription.
Initiation of Transcription
Unlike the prokaryotic polymerase that can bind to a DNA template on its own, eukaryotes require several ot her proteins, called
transcription factors, to first bind to the promoter regi on and then help recruit the appropriate polymerase.
The Three Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases
The features of eukaryotic mRNA synthesis are markedly more complex those of prokaryotes. Instead of a sing le polymerase
comprising five subunits, the eukaryotes have three p olymerases that are each made up of 10 subunits or m ore. Each eukaryotic
polymerase also requires a distinct set of transcription f actors to bring it to the DNA template.
RNA polymerase I is located in the nucleolus, a speci alized nuclear substructure in which ribosomal RNA (r RNA) is transcribed,
processed, and assembled into ribosomes (Table 1). Th e rRNA molecules are considered structural RNAs because they have a
cellular role but are not translated into protein. T he rRNAs are components of the ribosome and are essenti al to the process of
translation. RNA polymerase I synthesizes all of the rRNAs except for the 5S rRNA molecule. The “S” designation applies to
“Svedberg” units, a nonadditive value that characterizes the speed at which a particle sediments during centrifugat ion.
Table 1. Locations, Products, and Sensitivities of the Th ree Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases
RNA Polymerase Cellular Compartment Product of Transcript ion α-Amanitin Sensitivity
I Nucleolus All rRNAs except 5S rRNA Insensitive
II NucleusAll protein-coding nuclear premRNAsExtremely sensitive
III Nucleus5S rRNA, tRNAs, and small
nuclear RNAsModerately sensitive
RNA polymerase II is located in the nucleus and synth esizes all protein-coding nuclear pre-mRNAs. Eukaryotic pre-mRNAs
undergo extensive processing after transcription bu t before translation (Figure 1). For clarity, this mod ule’s discussion of
transcription and translation in eukaryotes will use the term “mRNAs” to describe only the mature, processe d molecules that are
ready to be translated. RNA polymerase II is responsible fo r transcribing the overwhelming majority of eukaryoti c genes.
Figure 1. Eukaryotic mRNA contains introns that must be spliced out. A 5′ cap and 3′ poly-A tail are also ad ded.
RNA polymerase III is also located in the nucleus. Thi s polymerase transcribes a variety of structural RNAs that includes the 5S
pre-rRNA, transfer pre-RNAs (pre-tRNAs), and small nuclear pre- RNAs. The tRNAs have a critical role in translation; they serve
as the adaptor molecules between the mRNA template and the growing polypeptide chain. Small nuclear RNAs have a variety of
functions, including “splicing” pre-mRNAs and regulating transcription factors.
A scientist characterizing a new gene can determine wh ich polymerase transcribes it by testing whether the gene is expressed in the
presence of a particular mushroom poison, α-amanitin (Table 1). Interestingly, α-amanitin produced by Amanita phalloides, the

12.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43691Death Cap mushroom, affects the three polymerases very differently. RNA polymerase I is completely insensitive to α-amanitin,
meaning that the polymerase can transcribe DNA in vitr o in the presence of this poison. In contrast, RNA polym erase II is
extremely sensitive to α-amanitin, and RNA polymerase III is moderately sensitive. Knowing the transcribing p olymerase can clue
a researcher into the general function of the gene b eing studied. Because RNA polymerase II transcribes the vast majority of genes,
we will focus on this polymerase in our subsequent discussion s about eukaryotic transcription factors and promoters.
Structure of an RNA Polymerase II Promoter
Eukaryotic promoters are much larger and more compl ex than prokaryotic promoters, but both have a TATA box. For example, in
the mouse thymidine kinase gene, the TATA box is loc ated at approximately -30 relative to the initiatio n (+1) site (Figure 2). For
this gene, the exact TATA box sequence is TATAAAA, as read in the 5′ to 3′ direction on the nontemplate strand. The
thermostability of A–T bonds is low and this helps the DNA template to locally unwind in preparation for transcrip tion.
Figure 2. A generalized promoter of a gene transcribe d by RNA polymerase II is shown. Transcription factors r ecognize the
promoter. RNA polymerase II then binds and forms the t ranscription initiation complex.
The mouse genome includes one gene and two pseudogenes for cytoplasmic thymidine kinase. Pseudogenes are ge nes that have
lost their protein-coding ability or are no longer expressed by the cell. These pseudogenes are copied fr om mRNA and incorporated
into the chromosome. For example, the mouse thymidine k inase promoter also has a conserved CAAT box (GGCCAATCT) at
approximately -80. This sequence is essential and is involved in binding transcription factors. Further up stream of the TATA box,
eukaryotic promoters may also contain one or more GC-rich boxes (GGCG) or octamer boxes (ATTTGCAT). These elements
bind cellular factors that increase the efficiency o f transcription initiation and are often identified in more “active” genes that are
constantly being expressed by the cell.
Transcription Factors for RNA Polymerase II
The complexity of eukaryotic transcription does not end with the polymerases and promoters. An army of bas al transcription
factors, enhancers, and silencers also help to regulate the frequency with which pre-mRNA is synthesized from a gene. Enhancers
and silencers affect the efficiency of transcription but are not necessary for transcription to proceed. Basal transcription factors are
crucial in the formation of a preinitiation complex on the DNA template that subsequently recruits RNA pol ymerase II for
transcription initiation.
The names of the basal transcription factors begin wi th “TFII” (this is the transcription factor for RNA p olymerase II) and are
specified with the letters A–J. The transcription factor s systematically fall into place on the DNA template, with each one further
stabilizing the preinitiation complex and contributing to the recruitment of RNA polymerase II.

12.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43691The processes of bringing RNA polymerases I and III to the DNA template involve slightly less complex colle ctions of
transcription factors, but the general theme is the sa me. Eukaryotic transcription is a tightly regulated p rocess that requires a variety
of proteins to interact with each other and with the DNA strand. Although the process of transcription in euka ryotes involves a
greater metabolic investment than in prokaryotes, it ensures that the cell transcribes precisely the pre -mRNAs that it needs for
protein synthesis.
The Evolution of Promoters
The evolution of genes may be a familiar concept. Muta tions can occur in genes during DNA replication, and t he result may or may
not be beneficial to the cell. By altering an enzym e, structural protein, or some other factor, the pro cess of mutation can transform
functions or physical features. However, eukaryotic pro moters and other gene regulatory sequences may evol ve as well. For
instance, consider a gene that, over many generation s, becomes more valuable to the cell. Maybe the gene enc odes a structural
protein that the cell needs to synthesize in abunda nce for a certain function. If this is the case, it woul d be beneficial to the cell for
that gene’s promoter to recruit transcription factors mo re efficiently and increase gene expression.
Scientists examining the evolution of promoter sequen ces have reported varying results. In part, this is b ecause it is difficult to infer
exactly where a eukaryotic promoter begins and ends. So me promoters occur within genes; others are located v ery far upstream, or
even downstream, of the genes they are regulating. Howeve r, when researchers limited their examination to human core promoter
sequences that were defined experimentally as sequen ces that bind the preinitiation complex, they found that promoters evolve
even faster than protein-coding genes.
It is still unclear how promoter evolution might cor respond to the evolution of humans or other higher o rganisms. However, the
evolution of a promoter to effectively make more or less of a given gene product is an intriguing alter native to the evolution of the
genes themselves.
Promoter Structures for RNA Polymerases I and III
In eukaryotes, the conserved promoter elements diff er for genes transcribed by RNA polymerases I, II, an d III. RNA polymerase I
transcribes genes that have two GC-rich promoter sequenc es in the –45 to +20 region. These sequences alone a re sufficient for
transcription initiation to occur, but promoters with a dditional sequences in the region from –180 to –105 u pstream of the initiation
site will further enhance initiation. Genes that are t ranscribed by RNA polymerase III have upstream promote rs or promoters that
occur within the genes themselves.
Elongation and Termination
Following the formation of the preinitiation complex, the polymerase is released from the other transcrip tion factors, and
elongation is allowed to proceed as it does in prokary otes with the polymerase synthesizing pre-mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction. As
discussed previously, RNA polymerase II transcribes t he major share of eukaryotic genes, so this section will focus on how this
polymerase accomplishes elongation and termination.
Although the enzymatic process of elongation is essent ially the same in eukaryotes and prokaryotes, the DNA te mplate is more
complex. When eukaryotic cells are not dividing, the ir genes exist as a diffuse mass of DNA and proteins ca lled chromatin. The
DNA is tightly packaged around charged histone protein s at repeated intervals. These DNA–histone complexes, c ollectively called
nucleosomes, are regularly spaced and include 146 nuc leotides of DNA wound around eight histones like thread arou nd a spool.
For polynucleotide synthesis to occur, the transcripti on machinery needs to move histones out of the way eve ry time it encounters a
nucleosome. This is accomplished by a special protein complex called FACT, which stands for “facilitates chromatin
transcription.” This complex pulls histones away from the DNA template as the polymerase moves along it. Once the pre-mRNA is
synthesized, the FACT complex replaces the histones to recreate the nucleosomes.
The termination of transcription is different for t he different polymerases. Unlike in prokaryotes, elongati on by RNA polymerase II
in eukaryotes takes place 1,000–2,000 nucleotides bey ond the end of the gene being transcribed. This pre-m RNA tail is
subsequently removed by cleavage during mRNA processin g. On the other hand, RNA polymerases I and III requir e termination
signals. Genes transcribed by RNA polymerase I contain a specific 18-nucleotide sequence that is recognized b y a termination
protein. The process of termination in RNA polymerase III involves an mRNA hairpin similar to rho-independe nt termination of
transcription in prokaryotes.[1]

12.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/436911. H Liang et al., "Fast evolution of core promoters in prima te genomes," Molecular Biology and Evolution 25 (2008): 1239–44.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.4: RNA Polymerase is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369212.5: pre-RNA and mRNA
After transcription, eukaryotic pre-mRNAs must undergo s everal processing steps before they can be translated. Eukaryotic (and
prokaryotic) tRNAs and rRNAs also undergo processing bef ore they can function as components in the protein sy nthesis
machinery.
mRNA Processing
The eukaryotic pre-mRNA undergoes extensive processin g before it is ready to be translated. The additiona l steps involved in
eukaryotic mRNA maturation create a molecule with a m uch longer half-life than a prokaryotic mRNA. Eukaryot ic mRNAs last for
several hours, whereas the typical E. coli mRNA lasts no more than five seconds.
Pre-mRNAs are first coated in RNA-stabilizing proteins; the se protect the pre-mRNA from degradation while it is p rocessed and
exported out of the nucleus. The three most important steps of pre-mRNA processing are the addition of sta bilizing and signaling
factors at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the molecule, and th e removal of intervening sequences that do not spec ify the appropriate amino
acids. In rare cases, the mRNA transcript can be “edit ed” after it is transcribed.
5′ Capping
While the pre-mRNA is still being synthesized, a 7-methylguanosine cap is added to the 5′ end of the growing transcript by a
phosphate linkage. This moiety (functional group) p rotects the nascent mRNA from degradation. In additio n, factors involved in
protein synthesis recognize the cap to help initiate trans lation by ribosomes.
3′ Poly-A Tail
Once elongation is complete, the pre-mRNA is cleaved b y an endonuclease between an AAUAAA consensus sequence and a GUrich sequence, leaving the AAUAAA sequence on the pre-mRNA. An enzyme called poly-A polymerase then adds a string of
approximately 200 A residues, called the poly-A tail. This modification further protects the pre-mRNA fr om degradation and
signals the export of the cellular factors that the transcr ipt needs to the cytoplasm.
Pre-mRNA Splicing
Eukaryotic genes are composed of exons, which correspond to protein-coding sequences (ex-on signifies that they are expressed),
and intervening sequences called introns (intron denotes their intervening role), which may be involved in gene regula tion but are
removed from the pre-mRNA during processing. Intron seque nces in mRNA do not encode functional proteins.
The discovery of introns came as a surprise to resear chers in the 1970s who expected that pre-mRNAs would spe cify protein
sequences without further processing, as they had obse rved in prokaryotes. The genes of higher eukaryotes ve ry often contain one
or more introns. These regions may correspond to regula tory sequences; however, the biological significance of having many
introns or having very long introns in a gene is unc lear. It is possible that introns slow down gene express ion because it takes
longer to transcribe pre-mRNAs with lots of introns. Al ternatively, introns may be nonfunctional sequence r emnants left over from
the fusion of ancient genes throughout evolution. Thi s is supported by the fact that separate exons ofte n encode separate protein
subunits or domains. For the most part, the sequences of i ntrons can be mutated without ultimately affecting the pro tein product.
All of a pre-mRNA’s introns must be completely and pre cisely removed before protein synthesis. If the proc ess errs by even a
single nucleotide, the reading frame of the rejoine d exons would shift, and the resulting protein would be dysfunctional. The
process of removing introns and reconnecting exons is called splicing (Figure 1). Introns are removed and degraded while th e premRNA is still in the nucleus. Splicing occurs by a sequenc e-specific mechanism that ensures introns will be remo ved and exons
rejoined with the accuracy and precision of a single nucleotide. The splicing of pre-mRNAs is conducted by c omplexes of proteins
and RNA molecules called spliceosomes.
Practice Question

12.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43692
Figure 1. Pre-mRNA splicing involves the precise remova l of introns from the primary RNA transcript. The spli cing process is
catalyzed by protein complexes called spliceosomes that are composed of proteins and RNA molecules called snRN As.
Spliceosomes recognize sequences at the 5′ and 3′ end of the intron.
Errors in splicing are implicated in cancers and other hu man diseases. What kinds of mutations might lead to s plicing errors?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”454729″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”454729″]Think of different possible outcomes if splicing errors occur. Mutations in the spliceosome recognition
sequence at each end of the intron, or in the prote ins and RNAs that make up the spliceosome, may impair s plicing. Mutations may
also add new spliceosome recognition sites. Splicing e rrors could lead to introns being retained in splice d RNA, exons being
excised, or changes in the location of the splice site.[/hidd en-answer]
Note that more than 70 individual introns can be pre sent, and each has to undergo the process of splicin g—in addition to 5′ capping
and the addition of a poly-A tail—just to generate a sin gle, translatable mRNA molecule.
See how introns are removed during RNA splicing at this websi te.
Figure 2. Trypanosoma brucei is the causative agent of sleeping sickness in humans. Th e mRNAs of this pathogen must be
modified by the addition of nucleotides before prote in synthesis can occur. (credit: modification of work by Torsten
Ochsenreiter)
The trypanosomes are a group of protozoa that includ e the pathogen Trypanosoma brucei, which causes sleeping sickness in
humans (Figure 2). Trypanosomes, and virtually all ot her eukaryotes, have organelles called mitochondria t hat supply the cell with
chemical energy. Mitochondria are organelles that ex press their own DNA and are believed to be the remnant s of a symbiotic
relationship between a eukaryote and an engulfed prok aryote. The mitochondrial DNA of trypanosomes exhibit an interesting
exception to The Central Dogma: their pre-mRNAs do not have the correct information to specify a functiona l protein. Usually, this
is because the mRNA is missing several U nucleotides. T he cell performs an additional RNA processing step call ed RNA editing to
remedy this.
Other genes in the mitochondrial genome encode 40- t o 80-nucleotide guide RNAs. One or more of these molecul es interacts by
complementary base pairing with some of the nucleoti des in the pre-mRNA transcript. However, the guide RNA h as more A
nucleotides than the pre-mRNA has U nucleotides to bin d with. In these regions, the guide RNA loops out. The 3′ ends of guide
RNAs have a long poly-U tail, and these U bases are inser ted in regions of the pre-mRNA transcript at which th e guide RNAs areTry It

12.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43692looped. This process is entirely mediated by RNA molecu les. That is, guide RNAs—rather than proteins—serve as the catalysts in
RNA editing.
RNA editing is not just a phenomenon of trypanosomes. In the mitochondria of some plants, almost all pre-m RNAs are edited.
RNA editing has also been identified in mammals such as rats, rabbits, and even humans. What could be the e volutionary reason
for this additional step in pre-mRNA processing? One p ossibility is that the mitochondria, being remnants of ancient prokaryotes,
have an equally ancient RNA-based method for regulatin g gene expression. In support of this hypothesis, edits made to premRNAs differ depending on cellular conditions. Although s peculative, the process of RNA editing may be a holdo ver from a
primordial time when RNA molecules, instead of proteins, were responsible for catalyzing reactions.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.5: pre-RNA and mRNA is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369312.6: RNA Post-Translational Modification
Gene expression can be regulated at various stages after a n RNA transcript has been produced.
Some transcripts can undergo alternative splicing. This regulated process makes different mRNAs and proteins from t he
same initial RNA transcript.
Some mRNAs are targeted by small regulatory RNAs, including miRNAs, which can cause mRNA degradation or block
translation.
A protein’s activity may be regulated after translatio n by mechanisms such as proteolysis (“snipping out” of piec es) and
addition of chemical groups.
The genes that a eukaryotic cell turns “on” largely determine its identity and properties. For instance, a photoreceptor cell in your
eye can detect light because it expresses genes for light-sensitive proteins, as well as as genes for neur otransmitters that allow
signals to be relayed to the brain.
In eukaryotic cells like photoreceptors, gene expre ssion is often controlled primarily at the level of transcription. However, that
doesn’t mean transcription is the last chance for re gulation. Later stages of gene expression can also b e regulated, including the
following:
RNA processing, such as splicing, capping, and addition of a poly-A tail
Messenger RNA (mRNA) translation and lifetime in the cytosol
Protein modifications, such as addition of chemical group s or removal of amino acids
In the sections below, we’ll discuss some common types of gene r egulation that occur after an RNA transcript has been mad e.
Regulation of RNA processing
When a eukaryotic gene is transcribed in the nucleus, the primary transcript (freshly made RNA molecule) i sn’t yet considered a
messenger RNA. Instead, it’s an “immature” molecule called a pre-mRNA.
The pre-mRNA has to go through some modifications to become a mature mRNA molecule that can leave the nuc leus and be
translated. These include splicing, capping, and addit ion of a poly-A tail, all of which can potentially b e regulated – sped up,
slowed down, or altered to result in a different product.
Alternative splicing
Most pre-mRNA molecules have sections that are removed from the molecule, called introns, and sections that are linked or
together to make the final mRNA, called exons. This process is called splicing.
In the process of alternative splicing, different portions of an mRNA can be selected for use as exons. This allows either of two (or
more) mRNA molecules to be made from one pre-mRNA.
Figure 1. Image modified from “Eukaryotic Post-transcri ptional Gene Regulation,” by OpenStax College, Biol ogy (CC BY 3.0).
Alternative splicing is not a random process. Instead, i t’s typically controlled by regulatory proteins. The proteins bind to specific
sites on the pre-mRNA and “tell” the splicing factors which exons should be used. Different cell types may e xpress different
regulatory proteins, so different exon combinations can be u sed in each cell type, leading to the production of diff erent proteins.Learning Objectives

12.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43693Small regulatory RNA
Once an mRNA has left the nucleus, it may or may not be translated many times to make proteins. Two key de terminants of how
much protein is made from an mRNA are its “lifespan” (how long it floats around in the cytosol) and how rea dily the translation
machinery, such as the ribosome, can attach to it.
A recently discovered class of regulators, called smal l regulatory RNAs, can control mRNA lifespan and transla tion. Let’s see how
this works.
microRNAs
microRNAs (miRNAs) were among the first small regulatory RNAs to be discove red. A miRNA is first transcribed as a long RNA
molecule, which forms base pairs with itself and folds over to make a hairpin. Next, the hairpin is chopped up by enzymes,
releasing a small double-stranded fragment of about 20 nucleotides. One of the strands in this fragment is t he mature miRNA,
which binds to a specific protein to make an RNA-protein co mplex.
Figure 2. Image modifed from “ miRNA biogenesis,” by Narayanese (CC BY-SA 3.0). The modified image i s licensed under a CC
BY-SA 3.0 license.
The miRNA directs the protein complex to “matching” mRNA molecules (ones that form base pairs with the miRNA). When the
RNA-protein complex binds:
If the miRNA and its target match perfectly, an enzyme in the RNA-protein complex will typically chop the mRNA in half,
leading to its breakdown.
If the miRNA and its target have some mismatches, the RNA-prot ein complex may instead bind to the mRNA and keep it from
being translated.
These are not the only ways that miRNAs inhibit expressi on of their targets, and scientists are still investiga ting their many modes
of action.
1. Carthew, R. W. and Sontheimer, E. J. (2009). Origins and mec hanisms of miRNAs and siRNAs. Cell, 136(4), 642–655.
[1]http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.01.035. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Regulation after transcription. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/generegulation/gene-regulation-in-eukaryotes/a/regulati on-after-transcription. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-[1]

12.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43693ShareAlike
12.6: RNA Post-Translational Modification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369412.7: Introduction to Translation
Summarize the process of translation
RNA undergoes genetic translation, a process that produces pr oteins.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Outline the basic steps of translation
Describe the composition and role of ribosomes in transl ation, focusing on rRNA
Understand the role of tRNA in translation
Describe a codon and how they are used in translation
Describe how proteins may be modified after translation
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Steps of Translation
Ribosomes
tRNA
Codons
Protein Modifications
Self Check: Translation
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
12.7: Introduction to Translation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369512.8: Steps of Translation
As with mRNA synthesis, protein synthesis can be divide d into three phases: initiation, elongation, and ter mination. The process of
translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we’ll explore how translation occurs in E. coli, a representative
prokaryote, and specify any differences between prokaryoti c and eukaryotic translation.
Initiation of Translation
Protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initi ation complex. In E. coli, this complex involves the small 30S ribosome, the
mRNA template, three initiation factors (IFs; IF-1, IF- 2, and IF-3), and a special initiator tRNA, called
\text{tRNA}^{Met}_{f}. The
initiator tRNA interacts with the start codon AUG (or rar ely, GUG), links to a formylated methionine called fMet, and can also bind
IF-2. Formylated methionine is inserted by
\text{fMet} - \text{tRNA}^{\text {Met}}_{\text f} at the beginning of every polypeptide chain
synthesized by E. coli, but it is usually clipped off after translation is complete. When an in-frame AUG is encountered during
translation elongation, a non-formylated methionine is inserted by a regular Met-tRNA.
In E. coli mRNA, a sequence upstream of the first AUG codon, calle d the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (AGGAGG), interacts with
the rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome. This int eraction anchors the 30S ribosomal subunit at the co rrect location on the
mRNA template. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), which is a p urine nucleotide triphosphate, acts as an energy source during
translation—both at the start of elongation and during the ribosome’s translocation.
In eukaryotes, a similar initiation complex forms, comprising mRNA, the 40S small ribosomal subunit, IFs, and nucleoside
triphosphates (GTP and ATP). The charged initiator tRNA, called Met-tRNAi, does not bind fMet in eukaryotes, but is distinct
from other Met-tRNAs in that it can bind IFs.
Instead of depositing at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizes the 7-m ethylguanosine cap at
the 5′ end of the mRNA. A cap-binding protein (CBP) an d several other IFs assist the movement of the ribosom e to the 5′ cap.
Once at the cap, the initiation complex tracks along the mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction, searching for th e AUG start codon. Many
eukaryotic mRNAs are translated from the first AUG, but th is is not always the case. According to Kozak’s rules, the nucleotides
around the AUG indicate whether it is the correct start codon. Kozak’s rules state that the following consensus sequence must
appear around the AUG of vertebrate genes: 5′-gccRccAUGG-3′. The R (for purine) indicates a site that can be ei ther A or G, but
cannot be C or U. Essentially, the closer the sequence is to this consensus, the higher the efficiency of translatio n.
Once the appropriate AUG is identified, the other protei ns and CBP dissociate, and the 60S subunit binds to the complex of MettRNAi, mRNA, and the 40S subunit. This step completes the initi ation of translation in eukaryotes.
Translation, Elongation, and Termination
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongati on are the same, so we will review elongation from the perspective of E. coli.
The 50S ribosomal subunit of E. coli consists of three compartments: the A (aminoacyl) s ite binds incoming charged aminoacyl
tRNAs. The P (peptidyl) site binds charged tRNAs carrying a mino acids that have formed peptide bonds with the g rowing
polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociated from their corresponding tRNA. The E (exit) site releases d issociated tRNAs so that
they can be recharged with free amino acids. There i s one exception to this assembly line of tRNAs: in E. coli,
\text{fMet}-\text{tRNA}^{\text {Met}}_{\text f} is capable of entering the P site directly without fi rst entering the A site. Similarly, the eukaryotic
Met-tRNAi, with help from other proteins of the initiati on complex, binds directly to the P site (Figure 1). I n both cases, this
creates an initiation complex with a free A site ready to acc ept the tRNA corresponding to the first codon after the AUG.Met

12.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43695
Figure 1. Ribosome mRNA translation
During translation elongation, the mRNA template prov ides specificity. As the ribosome moves along the mRNA, ea ch mRNA
codon comes into register, and specific binding with the corresponding charged tRNA anticodon is ensured. I f mRNA were not
present in the elongation complex, the ribosome would b ind tRNAs nonspecifically.
Elongation proceeds with charged tRNAs entering the A si te and then shifting to the P site followed by the E site with each singlecodon “step” of the ribosome. Ribosomal steps are ind uced by conformational changes that advance the rib osome by three bases in
the 3′ direction. The energy for each step of the rib osome is donated by an elongation factor that hydro lyzes GTP. Peptide bonds
form between the amino group of the amino acid attac hed to the A-site tRNA and the carboxyl group of the a mino acid attached to
the P-site tRNA. The formation of each peptide bond is ca talyzed by peptidyl transferase, an RNA-based enzyme that is
integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit. The energ y for each peptide bond formation is derived from GT P hydrolysis, which is
catalyzed by a separate elongation factor. The amino acid bound to the P-site tRNA is also linked to the g rowing polypeptide chain.
As the ribosome steps across the mRNA, the former P-site t RNA enters the E site, detaches from the amino acid, a nd is expelled
(Figure 2). Amazingly, the E. coli translation apparatus takes only 0.05 seconds to add e ach amino acid, meaning that a 200-amino
acid protein can be translated in just 10 seconds.

12.8.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43695
Figure 2. Translation begins when an initiator tRNA an ticodon recognizes a codon on mRNA. The large ribosom al subunit joins the
small subunit, and a second tRNA is recruited. As the mR NA moves relative to the ribosome, the polypeptide ch ain is formed.
Entry of a release factor into the A site terminates t ranslation and the components dissociate.
Many antibiotics inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. For example, tetracycline blocks the A site on the b acterial ribosome, and
chloramphenicol blocks peptidyl transfer. What speci fic effect would you expect each of these antibiotics to have on protein
synthesis?
Tetracycline would directly affect:
a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
b. ribosome assembly
c. growth of the protein chain
[reveal-answer q=”10129″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”10129″]Answer a. Tetracycline would direct ly affect tRNA binding to the ribosome.
[/hidden-answer]
Chloramphenicol would directly affect
a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
b. ribosome assembly
c. growth of the protein chainPractice Questions

12.8.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43695[reveal-answer q=”10029″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”10029″]Answer c. Chloramphenicol would di rectly affect growth of the protein chain.[/hidden-ans wer]
Termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is encountered. Upon aligning with the A site,
these nonsense codons are recognized by release facto rs in prokaryotes and eukaryotes that instruct pepti dyl transferase to add a
water molecule to the carboxyl end of the P-site amin o acid. This reaction forces the P-site amino acid to detach from its tRNA,
and the newly made protein is released. The small an d large ribosomal subunits dissociate from the mRNA an d from each other;
they are recruited almost immediately into another t ranslation initiation complex. After many ribosomes h ave completed
translation, the mRNA is degraded so the nucleotides can be r eused in another transcription reaction.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.8: Steps of Translation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369612.9: Ribosomes
Figure 1. A peptide bond links the carboxyl end of on e amino acid with the amino end of another, expelli ng one water molecule.
For simplicity in this image, only the functional grou ps involved in the peptide bond are shown. The R and R′ designations refer to
the rest of each amino acid structure.
The synthesis of proteins consumes more of a cell’s e nergy than any other metabolic process. In turn, prote ins account for more
mass than any other component of living organisms (wi th the exception of water), and proteins perform virtu ally every function of
a cell. The process of translation, or protein synthe sis, involves the decoding of an mRNA message into a poly peptide product.
Amino acids are covalently strung together by interl inking peptide bonds in lengths ranging from approxi mately 50 amino acid
residues to more than 1,000. Each individual amino ac id has an amino group (NH) and a carboxyl (COOH) group. Po lypeptides
are formed when the amino group of one amino acid fo rms an amide (i.e., peptide) bond with the carboxyl g roup of another amino
acid (Figure 1). This reaction is catalyzed by ribosomes and generates one water molecule.
Protein Synthesis Machinery
In addition to the mRNA template, many molecules and macromolecules contribute to the process of translati on. The composition
of each component may vary across species; for instanc e, ribosomes may consist of different numbers of rR NAs and polypeptides
depending on the organism. However, the general struct ures and functions of the protein synthesis machiner y are comparable from
bacteria to human cells. Translation requires the inp ut of an mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzym atic factors.
Click through the steps of this PBS interactive to see prot ein synthesis in action.
Polysomes
Even before an mRNA is translated, a cell must invest e nergy to build each of its ribosomes. In E. coli, there are between 10,000
and 70,000 ribosomes present in each cell at any giv en time. A ribosome is a complex macromolecule compose d of structural and
catalytic rRNAs, and many distinct polypeptides. In euka ryotes, the nucleolus is completely specialized for th e synthesis and
assembly of rRNAs.
Ribosomes exist in the cytoplasm in prokaryotes and in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum in e ukaryotes.
Mitochondria and chloroplasts also have their own ribos omes in the matrix and stroma, which look more similar to prokaryotic
ribosomes (and have similar drug sensitivities) than the ribosomes just outside their outer membranes in the cytoplasm. Ribosomes
dissociate into large and small subunits when they ar e not synthesizing proteins and reassociate during the initiation of translation.
In E. coli, the small subunit is described as 30S, and the large subunit is 50S, for a total of 70S (recall that Svedber g units are not
additive). Mammalian ribosomes have a small 40S subunit and a large 60S subunit, for a total of 80S. The small subunit is
responsible for binding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit sequentially binds tRNAs. Each mRNA mol ecule is
simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synt hesizing protein in the same direction: reading the mRNA from 5′ to 3′ and
synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus. The complete mRNA/poly-ribosome struc ture is called a
polysome.
tRNAs
The tRNAs are structural RNA molecules that were transcri bed from genes by RNA polymerase III. Depending on the species, 40
to 60 types of tRNAs exist in the cytoplasm. Serving as adaptors, specific tRNAs bind to sequences on the mRNA te mplate and add2

12.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43696the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide cha in. Therefore, tRNAs are the molecules that actually “ translate” the language
of RNA into the language of proteins.
Of the 64 possible mRNA codons—or triplet combinations of A, U, G, and C—three specify the termination of prote in synthesis
and 61 specify the addition of amino acids to the po lypeptide chain. Of these 61, one codon (AUG) also encodes the initiation of
translation. Each tRNA anticodon can base pair with on e of the mRNA codons and add an amino acid or termina te translation,
according to the genetic code. For instance, if the sequence CUA occurred on an mRNA template in the prope r reading frame, it
would bind a tRNA expressing the complementary sequence, GAU, wh ich would be linked to the amino acid leucine.
As the adaptor molecules of translation, it is surprisin g that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a sm all package. Consider
that tRNAs need to interact with three factors:
1. They must be recognized by the correct aminoacyl synth etase.
2. They must be recognized by ribosomes.
3. They must bind to the correct sequence in mRNA.
Aminoacyl tRNA Synthetases
The process of pre-tRNA synthesis by RNA polymerase II I only creates the RNA portion of the adaptor molecul e. The
corresponding amino acid must be added later, once t he tRNA is processed and exported to the cytoplasm. Th rough the process of
tRNA “charging,” each tRNA molecule is linked to its c orrect amino acid by a group of enzymes called amino acyl tRNA
synthetases. At least one type of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase exists for each of the 20 amino acids; the exact numb er of aminoacyl
tRNA synthetases varies by species. These enzymes first bind and hydrolyze ATP to catalyze a high-energy bond b etween an amino
acid and adenosine monophosphate (AMP); a pyrophosphat e molecule is expelled in this reaction. The activated amino acid is then
transferred to the tRNA, and AMP is released.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.9: Ribosomes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4367912.10: tRNA
Processing of tRNAs and rRNAs
Figure 1. This is a space-filling model of a tRNA molec ule that adds the amino acid phenylalanine to a grow ing polypeptide chain.
The anticodon AAG binds the Codon UUC on the mRNA. T he amino acid phenylalanine is attached to the other end of the tRNA.
The tRNAs and rRNAs are structural molecules that have r oles in protein synthesis; however, these RNAs are not themselves
translated. Pre-rRNAs are transcribed, processed, and asse mbled into ribosomes in the nucleolus. Pre-tRNAs are tran scribed and
processed in the nucleus and then released into the cytop lasm where they are linked to free amino acids for prote in synthesis.
Most of the tRNAs and rRNAs in eukaryotes and prokaryotes are first transcribed as a long precursor molecule tha t spans multiple
rRNAs or tRNAs. Enzymes then cleave the precursors into subunits corresponding to each structural RNA. Some of th e bases of
pre-rRNAs are methylated; that is, a –CH moiety (methyl functional group) is added for stability. Pre-tRNA mol ecules also
undergo methylation. As with pre-mRNAs, subunit excision occu rs in eukaryotic pre-RNAs destined to become tRNAs or rRNAs.
Mature rRNAs make up approximately 50 percent of each ribosome. Some of a ribosome’s RNA molecules are purely structural,
whereas others have catalytic or binding activities. Matu re tRNAs take on a three-dimensional structure through intramolecular
hydrogen bonding to position the amino acid binding site a t one end and the anticodon at the other end (Figure 1).
The anticodon is a three-nucleotide sequence in a tRNA t hat interacts with an mRNA codon through complementar y base pairing.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.10: tRNA is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.3

12.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368012.11: Codons
Given the different numbers of “letters” in the mRNA a nd protein “alphabets,” scientists theorized that comb inations of nucleotides
corresponded to single amino acids. Nucleotide doublets would not be sufficient to specify every amino acid because there are only
16 possible two-nucleotide combinations (42). In contra st, there are 64 possible nucleotide triplets (43), wh ich is far more than the
number of amino acids. Scientists theorized that amino acids were encoded by nucleotide triplets and that t he genetic code was
degenerate. In other words, a given amino acid could be encoded by more than one nucleotide triplet. This was later confirmed
experimentally; Francis Crick and Sydney Brenner used the chemi cal mutagen proflavin to insert one, two, or three nucleotides into
the gene of a virus. When one or two nucleotides were in serted, protein synthesis was completely abolished. When t hree
nucleotides were inserted, the protein was synthesized a nd functional. This demonstrated that three nucleoti des specify each amino
acid. These nucleotide triplets are called codons. The insertion of one or two nucleotides completely changed the triplet reading
frame, thereby altering the message for every subseque nt amino acid (Figure 1). Though insertion of three nucleotides caused an
extra amino acid to be inserted during translation, the in tegrity of the rest of the protein was maintained.
Figure 1. The deletion of two nucleotides shifts the re ading frame of an mRNA and changes the entire protei n message, creating a
nonfunctional protein or terminating protein synthesi s altogether.
Scientists painstakingly solved the genetic code by translating synthetic mRNAs in vitro and sequencing the proteins they specified
(Figure 2).
Figure 2. This figure shows the genetic code for transla ting each nucleotide triplet in mRNA into an amino acid or a termination
signal in a nascent protein. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
In addition to instructing the addition of a specific amino acid to a polypeptide chain, three of the 64 codons terminate protein
synthesis and release the polypeptide from the tran slation machinery. These triplets are called nonsense codons, or stop codons.
Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In additi on to specifying the amino acid methionine, it also serves as the start
codon to initiate translation. The reading frame for tran slation is set by the AUG start codon near the 5′ end of the mRNA.
The genetic code is universal. With a few exceptions, virtually all species use the same genetic code f or protein synthesis.
Conservation of codons means that a purified mRNA en coding the globin protein in horses could be transfer red to a tulip cell, and
the tulip would synthesize horse globin. That there is only one genetic code is powerful evidence that al l of life on Earth shares a
common origin, especially considering that there are about 1084 possible combinations of 20 amino acids and 64 tr iplet codons.
Transcribe a gene and translate it to protein using complem entary pairing and the genetic code at this site.

12.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43680Degeneracy is believed to be a cellular mechanism to r educe the negative impact of random mutations. Codo ns that specify the
same amino acid typically only differ by one nucleo tide. In addition, amino acids with chemically similar side chains are encoded
by similar codons. This nuance of the genetic code e nsures that a single-nucleotide substitution mutatio n might either specify the
same amino acid but have no effect or specify a simi lar amino acid, preventing the protein from being r endered completely
nonfunctional.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.11: Codons is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368112.12: Protein Modifications
During and after translation, individual amino acids m ay be chemically modified, signal sequences may be app ended, and the new
protein “folds” into a distinct three-dimensional s tructure as a result of intramolecular interactions. A signal sequence is a short tail
of amino acids that directs a protein to a specific cellular compartment. These sequences at the amino end or the carboxyl end of
the protein can be thought of as the protein’s “tra in ticket” to its ultimate destination. Other cellula r factors recognize each signal
sequence and help transport the protein from the cyt oplasm to its correct compartment. For instance, a spe cific sequence at the
amino terminus will direct a protein to the mitochon dria or chloroplasts (in plants). Once the protein reach es its cellular destination,
the signal sequence is usually clipped off.
Many proteins fold spontaneously, but some proteins req uire helper molecules, called chaperones, to prevent them from
aggregating during the complicated process of foldin g. Even if a protein is properly specified by its co rresponding mRNA, it could
take on a completely dysfunctional shape if abnormal tempe rature or pH conditions prevent it from folding correct ly.
Chemical Modifications, Protein Activity, and Longevity
Proteins can be chemically modified with the addition of groups including methyl, phosphate, acetyl, and ub iquitin groups. The
addition or removal of these groups from proteins re gulates their activity or the length of time they ex ist in the cell. Sometimes
these modifications can regulate where a protein is f ound in the cell—for example, in the nucleus, the cyt oplasm, or attached to the
plasma membrane.
Figure 1. Proteins with ubiquitin tags are marked for d egradation within the proteasome.
Chemical modifications occur in response to external stimuli such as stress, the lack of nutrients, heat, or ultraviolet light exposure.
These changes can alter epigenetic accessibility, trans cription, mRNA stability, or translation—all resulting in changes in
expression of various genes. This is an efficient way f or the cell to rapidly change the levels of specifi c proteins in response to the
environment. Because proteins are involved in every stage of gene regulation, the phosphorylation of a p rotein (depending on the
protein that is modified) can alter accessibility to the chromosome, can alter translation (by altering t ranscription factor binding or
function), can change nuclear shuttling (by influenc ing modifications to the nuclear pore complex), can alter RNA stability (by
binding or not binding to the RNA to regulate its sta bility), can modify translation (increase or decrease), or can change posttranslational modifications (add or remove phosphates or other chemical modifications).
The addition of an ubiquitin group to a protein mar ks that protein for degradation. Ubiquitin acts like a flag indicating that the
protein lifespan is complete. These proteins are moved to the proteasome, an organelle that functions to remove proteins, to be
degraded (Figure 1). One way to control gene expression, the refore, is to alter the longevity of the protein.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.12: Protein Modifications is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368212.13: Introduction to Prokaryotic Transcription and Translation
Outline the process of prokaryotic transcription and translation
The prokaryotes, which include bacteria and archaea, are mostly single-celled organisms that, by definit ion, lack membrane-bound
nuclei and other organelles. A bacterial chromosome is a covalently closed circle that, unlike eukaryo tic chromosomes, is not
organized around histone proteins. The central region of the cell in which prokaryotic DNA resides is calle d the nucleoid. In
addition, prokaryotes often have abundant plasmids, which are shorter circular DNA molecules that may on ly contain one or a few
genes. Plasmids can be transferred independently of the bacterial chromosome during cell division and often carry traits such as
antibiotic resistance. Because of these unique featu res, transcription and gene regulation is somewhat di fferent between prokaryotic
cells and eukaryotic ones.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Understand the basic steps in the transcription of DNA into R NA in prokaryotic cells
Understand the basics of prokaryotic translation and how i t differs from eukaryotic translation
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Prokaryotic Transcription
Prokaryotic Translation
Self Check: Prokaryotic Transcription and Translation
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to Prokaryotic Transcription and Translati on. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by:
Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.13: Introduction to Prokaryotic Transcription and Translation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by LibreTexts.

12.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368312.14: Prokaryotic Transcription
Prokaryotes do not have membrane-enclosed nuclei. There fore, the processes of transcription, translation, and mRNA degradation
can all occur simultaneously. The intracellular leve l of a bacterial protein can quickly be amplified b y multiple transcription and
translation events occurring concurrently on the same DNA template. Prokaryotic transcription often covers mo re than one gene
and produces polycistronic mRNAs that specify more than one pr otein.
Our discussion here will exemplify transcription by desc ribing this process in Escherichia coli, a well-studied bacterial species.
Although some differences exist between transcription in E. coli and transcription in archaea, an understanding of E. coli
transcription can be applied to virtually all bacteri al species.
Prokaryotic RNA Polymerase
Prokaryotes use the same RNA polymerase to transcribe a ll of their genes. In E. coli, the polymerase is composed of five
polypeptide subunits, two of which are identical. Four of these subunits, denoted α, α, β, and β′ comprise the polymerase core
enzyme. These subunits assemble every time a gene is transc ribed, and they disassemble once transcription is comp lete. Each
subunit has a unique role; the two α-subunits are necessary to assemble the polymerase on t he DNA; the β-subunit binds to the
ribonucleoside triphosphate that will become part of the nascent “recently born” mRNA molecule; and the β′ binds the DNA
template strand. The fifth subunit, σ, is involved only in transcription initiation. It co nfers transcriptional specificity such that the
polymerase begins to synthesize mRNA from an appropri ate initiation site. Without σ, the core enzyme would transcribe from
random sites and would produce mRNA molecules that spec ified protein gibberish. The polymerase comprised o f all five subunits
is called the holoenzyme (a holoenzyme is a biochemically active compound compr ised of an enzyme and its coenzyme).
Prokaryotic Promoters
Figure 1. The σ subunit of prokaryotic RNA polymerase recognizes consensus sequences found in the promoter regi on upstream of
the transcription start sight. The σ subunit dissociates f rom the polymerase after transcription has been initia ted.
A promoter is a DNA sequence onto which the transcription machine ry binds and initiates transcription. In most cases, p romoters
exist upstream of the genes they regulate. The specifi c sequence of a promoter is very important because it determines whether the
corresponding gene is transcribed all the time, some o f the time, or infrequently. Although promoters vary among prokaryotic
genomes, a few elements are conserved. At the -10 and -35 regions upstream of the initiation site, there a re two promoter
consensus sequences, or regions that are similar across all promot ers and across various bacterial species (Figure 1).
The -10 consensus sequence, called the -10 region, is TATAAT. The -35 sequence, TTGACA, is recognized and boun d by σ. Once
this interaction is made, the subunits of the core e nzyme bind to the site. The A–T-rich -10 region facili tates unwinding of the DNA
template, and several phosphodiester bonds are made. T he transcription initiation phase ends with the produc tion of abortive
transcripts, which are polymers of approximately 10 nucle otides that are made and released.
View this MolecularMovies animation to see the first part of transcription and the base se quence repetition of the TATA box.
Elongation and Termination in Prokaryotes
The transcription elongation phase begins with the r elease of the σ subunit from the polymerase. The dissociation of σ allows the
core enzyme to proceed along the DNA template, synthes izing mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction at a rate of ap proximately 40
nucleotides per second. As elongation proceeds, the DNA is continuously unwound ahead of the core enzyme and rewound behind
it (Figure 2). The base pairing between DNA and RNA is n ot stable enough to maintain the stability of the m RNA synthesis

12.14.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43683components. Instead, the RNA polymerase acts as a stabl e linker between the DNA template and the nascent RNA st rands to ensure
that elongation is not interrupted prematurely.
Figure 2. Click for a larger image. During elongatio n, the prokaryotic RNA polymerase tracks along the DN A template, synthesizes
mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction, and unwinds and rewi nds the DNA as it is read.
Prokaryotic Termination Signals
Once a gene is transcribed, the prokaryotic polymera se needs to be instructed to dissociate from the DNA te mplate and liberate the
newly made mRNA. Depending on the gene being transcribed, there are two kinds of termination signals. One is pro tein-based and
the other is RNA-based. Rho-dependent termination is controlled by the rho protein, which tracks alon g behind the polymerase
on the growing mRNA chain. Near the end of the gene, th e polymerase encounters a run of G nucleotides on th e DNA template and
it stalls. As a result, the rho protein collides with t he polymerase. The interaction with rho releases the mRNA from the
transcription bubble.
Rho-independent termination is controlled by specific sequences in the DNA template strand. As the polymerase nears the end of
the gene being transcribed, it encounters a region r ich in C–G nucleotides. The mRNA folds back on itself, an d the complementary
C–G nucleotides bind together. The result is a stable hairpin that causes the polymerase to stall as soon as it beg ins to transcribe a
region rich in A–T nucleotides. The complementary U–A region of the mRNA transcript forms only a weak inter action with the
template DNA. This, coupled with the stalled polymerase, i nduces enough instability for the core enzyme to bre ak away and
liberate the new mRNA transcript.
Upon termination, the process of transcription is comp lete. By the time termination occurs, the prokaryoti c transcript would already
have been used to begin synthesis of numerous copie s of the encoded protein because these processes can o ccur concurrently. The
unification of transcription, translation, and even mRNA degradation is possible because all of these proc esses occur in the same 5′
to 3′ direction, and because there is no membranous c ompartmentalization in the prokaryotic cell (Figure 3). In contrast, the
presence of a nucleus in eukaryotic cells precludes sim ultaneous transcription and translation.
Figure 3. Multiple polymerases can transcribe a single b acterial gene while numerous ribosomes concurrently tr anslate the mRNA
transcripts into polypeptides. In this way, a specific p rotein can rapidly reach a high concentration in th e bacterial cell.
Visit this BioStudio animation to see the process of prokar yotic transcription.

12.14.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43683
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=432
Which subunit of the E. coli polymerase confers specificity to transcription?
a. α
b. β
c. β′
d. σ
[reveal-answer q=”861545″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”861545″]The σ subunit of the E. coli polymerase confers specificity to transcription.
[/hidden-answer]
The -10 and -35 regions of prokaryotic promoters are call ed consensus sequences because ________.
a. they are identical in all bacterial species
b. they are similar in all bacterial species
c. they exist in all organisms
d. they have the same function in all organisms
[reveal-answer q=”827251″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”827251″]The -10 and -35 regions of prokaryotic promoters are called consensus sequences because they
are similar in all bacterial species.[/hidden-answer]
In prokaryotes, mRNA synthesis is initiated at a promot er sequence on the DNA template comprising two consens us sequences
that recruit RNA polymerase. The prokaryotic polymera se consists of a core enzyme of four protein subuni ts and a σ protein
that assists only with initiation. Elongation synthesiz es mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction at a rate of 40 nu cleotides per second.
Termination liberates the mRNA and occurs either by rho protein interaction or by the formation of an mRNA hairp in.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.14: Prokaryotic Transcription is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Practice Questions
Learning Objectives

12.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368412.15: Prokaryotic Translation
Translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we will explore how translation occurs in E. coli, a representative
prokaryote, and specify any differences between bacterial and eukaryotic translation.
Initiation
The initiation of protein synthesis begins with the formation of an initiation complex. In E. coli, this complex involves the small
30S ribosome, the mRNA template, three initiation facto rs that help the ribosome assemble correctly, guanosi ne triphosphate (GTP)
that acts as an energy source, and a special initiato r tRNA carrying N-formyl-methionine (fMet-tRNAf) (Figure 1). The
initiator tRNA interacts with the start codon AUG of the m RNA and carries a formylated methionine (fMet). Becaus e of its
involvement in initiation, fMet is inserted at the be ginning (N terminus) of every polypeptide chain synt hesized by E. coli. In E.
coli mRNA, a leader sequence upstream of the first AUG codon, c alled the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (also known as the
ribosomal binding site AGGAGG), interacts through complemen tary base pairing with the rRNA molecules that compos e the
ribosome. This interaction anchors the 30S ribosomal subunit at the correct location on the mRNA template. At this point, the 50S
ribosomal subunit then binds to the initiation complex, forming an intact ribosome.
In eukaryotes, initiation complex formation is similar, with the following differences:
The initiator tRNA is a different specialized tRNA carryi ng methionine, called Met-tRNAi
Instead of binding to the mRNA at the Shine-Dalgarno sequen ce, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizes the 5′ cap of the
eukaryotic mRNA, then tracks along the mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction until the AUG start codon is recognized. At this poin t,
the 60S subunit binds to the complex of Met-tRNAi, mRNA, and the 40S subunit.
Figure 1. Translation in bacteria begins with the form ation of the initiation complex, which includes the small ribosomal subunit,
the mRNA, the initiator tRNA carrying N-formyl-meth ionine, and initiation factors. Then the 50S subunit b inds, forming an intact
ribosome.Met

12.15.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43684Elongation
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongation of translation are the same. In E. coli, the binding of the 50S ribosomal
subunit to produce the intact ribosome forms three f unctionally important ribosomal sites: The A (aminoacyl) site binds incoming
charged aminoacyl tRNAs. The P (peptidyl) site binds charged tRNAs carrying amino acids that have fo rmed peptide bonds with
the growing polypeptide chain but have not yet disso ciated from their corresponding tRNA. The E (exit) site releases dissociated
tRNAs so that they can be recharged with free amino aci ds. There is one notable exception to this assembly l ine of tRNAs: During
initiation complex formation, bacterial fMet−tRNA or eukaryotic Met-tRNAi enters the P site directly without first entering the
A site, providing a free A site ready to accept the tRNA c orresponding to the first codon after the AUG.
Elongation proceeds with single-codon movements of th e ribosome each called a translocation event. During each translocation
event, the charged tRNAs enter at the A site, then shift t o the P site, and then finally to the E site for remo val. Ribosomal
movements, or steps, are induced by conformational cha nges that advance the ribosome by three bases in th e 3′ direction. Peptide
bonds form between the amino group of the amino acid attached to the A-site tRNA and the carboxyl group o f the amino acid
attached to the P-site tRNA. The formation of each pept ide bond is catalyzed by peptidyl transferase, an RNA-based ribozyme
that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit. Th e amino acid bound to the P-site tRNA is also linked to the growing
polypeptide chain. As the ribosome steps across the mRNA, t he former P-site tRNA enters the E site, detaches from the amino acid,
and is expelled. Several of the steps during elongatio n, including binding of a charged aminoacyl tRNA to the A site and
translocation, require energy derived from GTP hydroly sis, which is catalyzed by specific elongation factor s. Amazingly, the E. coli
translation apparatus takes only 0.05 seconds to add each amino acid, meaning that a 200 amino-acid prot ein can be translated in
just 10 seconds.
Termination
The termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is encountered for which there is no
complementary tRNA. On aligning with the A site, these nonsense codons are recognized by release factors in prokaryotes and
eukaryotes that result in the P-site amino acid deta ching from its tRNA, releasing the newly made polypeptid e. The small and large
ribosomal subunits dissociate from the mRNA and from each other; they are recruited almost immediately in to another translation
init iation complex.
In summary, there are several key features that disti nguish prokaryotic gene expression from that seen i n eukaryotes. These are
illustrated in Figure 2 and listed in Table 1.
Figure 2. (a) In prokaryotes, the processes of transcript ion and translation occur simultaneously in the cytopl asm, allowing for a
rapid cellular response to an environmental cue. (b) In eukaryotes, transcription is localized to the nucle us and translation is
localized to the cytoplasm, separating these processes an d necessitating RNA processing for stability.fMet

12.15.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43684Table 1. Comparison of Translation in Bacteria Versus E ukaryotes
Property Bacteria Eukaryotes
Ribosomes70S
30S (small subunit) with 16S rNA
subunit
50S (large subunit) with 5S and 23S
rRNA subunits80S
40S (small subunit) with 18S rRNA
subunit
60S (large subunit) with 5S, 5.8S, and
28S rRNA subunits
Amino acid carried by initiator tRNA fMet Met
Shine-Dalgarno sequence in mRNA Present Absent
Simultaneous transcription and translation Yes No
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
12.15: Prokaryotic Translation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368512.16: Introduction to the Central Dogma
Identify the central dogma of life
As you have learned, information flow in an organism ta kes place from DNA to RNA to protein. DNA dictates the s tructure of
mRNA in a process known as transcription, and RNA dicta tes the structure of protein in a process known as tran slation. This is
known as the Central Dogma of Life, which holds true for all organisms.
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
The Central Dogma
Self Check: Central Dogma
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Introduction to the Central Dogma. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License:
CC BY: Attribution
12.16: Introduction to the Central Dogma is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.17.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368612.17: The Central Dogma
As you have learned, information flow in an organism takes place from DNA to RNA to protein:
DNA is transcribed to RNA via complementary base pairing rules (but with U instead of T in the transcript)
The RNA transcript, specifically mRNA, is then translated to an amino acid polypeptide
Final folding and modifications of the polypeptide lead to funct ional proteins that actually do things in cells
This is known as the Central Dogma of Life, which holds true for all organisms.
Figure 1. Click for a larger image. Instructions on DNA are transcribed onto messenger RNA. Ribosomes are able to read the genetic information inscribed on a strand of messenger RNA and use this
information to string amino acids together into a protein.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the bottom of thi s page.
Click here for a text-only version of the activity.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
The Central Dogma. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f21b5eabd @10.8. License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at
http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
The Central Dogma of Life. Provided by: Lumen Learning. Located at: www.oppia.org/explore/exjRkfVQADh2. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
12.17: The Central Dogma is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTe xts.

12.18.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4368712.18: Putting It Together- DNA Transcription and Translation
As we’ve seen, transcription and translation are essent ial processes that enable life. These processes, also cal led the central dogma,
are how our bodies—and all living organisms on earth—are built.
This video compares transcription and translation to some thing you may be a little more familiar with: creating a Ho t Pocket.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=440
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Putting It Together: DNA Transcription and Translation. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by:
Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
All rights reserved content
DNA, Hot Pockets, and The Longest Word Ever: Crash Course Biol ogy #11. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at:
https://youtu.be/itsb2SqR-R0. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
12.18: Putting It Together- DNA Transcription and Tra nslation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
13: Module 11- Gene Expression
13.1: Why It Matters- Gene Expression
13.2: Introduction to Regulation of Gene Expression
13.3: Expression of Genes
13.4: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
13.5: Introduction to Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
13.6: Gene Regulation in Prokaryotes
13.7: Repressors
13.8: Activators and Inducers
13.9: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation at Work
13.10: Introduction to Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
13.11: Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
13.12: Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
13.13: Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
13.14: Putting It Together- Gene Expression
13.15: Assignment- How Mutations Work
13: Module 11- Gene Expression is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370413.1: Why It Matters- Gene Expression
Why explain the regulation of gene expression?
Cancer is one of the top ten causes of death in the United States. It is not a single disease but includ es many different diseases. In
cancer cells, mutations modify cell-cycle control, an d cells don’t stop growing as they normally would. Mutat ions can also alter the
growth rate or the progression of the cell through the cell c ycle.
Thus, cancer can be described as a disease of altered gene expression. Changes at every level of eukaryotic gene expression can be
detected in some form of cancer at some point in time. In order to understand how changes to gene expressio n can cause cancer, it
is critical to understand how each stage of gene regu lation works in normal cells. By understanding the me chanisms of control in
normal, non-diseased cells, it will be easier for scien tists to understand what goes wrong in disease states including complex ones
like cancer.
Learning Outcomes
Explain how DNA stores genetic information
Explain the role of complementary base pairing in the p recise replication process of DNA
Recognize the impact of DNA mutations
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: Gene Expression. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.1: Why It Matters- Gene Expression is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370513.2: Introduction to Regulation of Gene Expression
Define the term regulation as it applies to genes
For a cell to function properly, necessary proteins m ust be synthesized at the proper time. All cells contro l or regulate the synthesis
of proteins from information encoded in their DNA. The p rocess of turning on a gene to produce RNA and protei n is called gene
expression. Whether in a simple unicellular organism or a comp lex multi-cellular organism, each cell controls when and how its
genes are expressed. For this to occur, there must be a mechanism to control when a gene is expressed to make RNA and protein,
how much of the protein is made, and when it is time to st op making that protein because it is no longer needed.
The regulation of gene expression conserves energy a nd space. It would require a significant amount of e nergy for an organism to
express every gene at all times, so it is more energy ef ficient to turn on the genes only when they are requi red. In addition, only
expressing a subset of genes in each cell saves spac e because DNA must be unwound from its tightly coiled s tructure to transcribe
and translate the DNA. Cells would have to be enormous if ever y protein were expressed in every cell all the time.
The control of gene expression is extremely complex. Malfunctions in this process are detrimental to the cell and can lead to the
development of many diseases, including cancer.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Discuss why every cell does not express all of its genes
Compare prokaryotic and eukaryotic gene regulation
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Expression of Genes
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
Self Check: Regulation of Gene Expression
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Outcome: Regulation of Gene Expression. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.2: Introduction to Regulation of Gene Expression is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

13.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370613.3: Expression of Genes
For a cell to function properly, necessary proteins m ust be synthesized at the proper time. All cells contro l or regulate the synthesis
of proteins from information encoded in their DNA. The p rocess of turning on a gene to produce RNA and protei n is called gene
expression. Whether in a simple unicellular organism or a comp lex multi-cellular organism, each cell controls when and how its
genes are expressed. For this to occur, there must be a mechanism to control when a gene is expressed to make RNA and protein,
how much of the protein is made, and when it is time to st op making that protein because it is no longer needed.
The regulation of gene expression conserves energy a nd space. It would require a significant amount of e nergy for an organism to
express every gene at all times, so it is more energy ef ficient to turn on the genes only when they are requi red. In addition, only
expressing a subset of genes in each cell saves spac e because DNA must be unwound from its tightly coiled s tructure to transcribe
and translate the DNA. Cells would have to be enormous if ever y protein were expressed in every cell all the time.
The control of gene expression is extremely complex. Malfunctions in this process are detrimental to the cell and can lead to the
development of many diseases, including cancer.
Gene regulation makes cells different
Gene regulation is how a cell controls which genes, out of the many ge nes in its genome, are “turned on” (expressed). Thank s to
gene regulation, each cell type in your body has a d ifferent set of active genes—despite the fact that almost all the cells of your
body contain the exact same DNA. These different patter ns of gene expression cause your various cell types t o have different sets
of proteins, making each cell type uniquely specialized to do its job.
For example, one of the jobs of the liver is to remove toxic substances like alcohol from the bloodstream. To do this, liver cells
express genes encoding subunits (pieces) of an enzyme called alcohol dehydrogenase. This enzyme breaks alc ohol down into a
non-toxic molecule. The neurons in a person’s brain d on’t remove toxins from the body, so they keep these ge nes unexpressed, or
“turned off.” Similarly, the cells of the liver don’t send signals using neurotransmitters, so they keep ne urotransmitter genes turned
off (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Different cells have different genes “turned on.”
There are many other genes that are expressed differ ently between liver cells and neurons (or any two cell types in a multicellular
organism like yourself).

13.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43706How do cells “decide” which genes to turn on?
Now there’s a tricky question! Many factors that can a ffect which genes a cell expresses. Different cell ty pes express different sets
of genes, as we saw above. However, two different cells of the same type may also have different gene expression patterns
depending on their environment and internal state.
Broadly speaking, we can say that a cell’s gene expressio n pattern is determined by information from both in side and outside the
cell.
Examples of information from inside the cell: the proteins it inherited from its mother cell, whether its DNA is damaged, and
how much ATP it has.
Examples of information from outside the cell: chemical signals from other cells, mechanical si gnals from the extracellular
matrix, and nutrient levels.
How do these cues help a cell “decide” what genes to ex press? Cells don’t make decisions in the sense that yo u or I would. Instead,
they have molecular pathways that convert information —such as the binding of a chemical signal to its rece ptor—into a change in
gene expression.
As an example, let’s consider how cells respond to growth factors. A growth factor is a chemical signal from a n eighboring cell that
instructs a target cell to grow and divide. We could say that the cell “notices” the growth factor and “de cides” to divide, but how do
these processes actually occur?
Figure 2. Growth factor prompting cell division
The cell detects the growth factor through physical bi nding of the growth factor to a receptor protein on the c ell surface.
Binding of the growth factor causes the receptor to change s hape, triggering a series of chemical events in the cell th at activate
proteins called transcription factors.
The transcription factors bind to certain sequences of DNA in the nucleus and cause transcription of cell division- related genes.
The products of these genes are various types of proteins t hat make the cell divide (drive cell growth and/or push t he cell
forward in the cell cycle).
This is just one example of how a cell can convert a source of information into a change in gene express ion. There are many others,
and understanding the logic of gene regulation is an area of ongoing research in biology today.
Growth factor signaling is complex and involves the ac tivation of a variety of targets, including both tran scription factors and nontranscription factor proteins.

13.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43706Gene regulation is the process of controlling which genes in a cell’s DNA are expressed (used to make a functional product
such as a protein).
Different cells in a multicellular organism may express ve ry different sets of genes, even though they contain the same
DNA.
The set of genes expressed in a cell determines the s et of proteins and functional RNAs it contains, giving it i ts unique
properties.
In eukaryotes like humans, gene expression involves ma ny steps, and gene regulation can occur at any of these st eps.
However, many genes are regulated primarily at the level of transcription.
[reveal-answer q=”915423″]Show References[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”915423″]
Alcohol dehydrogenase. (2016, January 6). Retrieved Apri l 26, 2016 from Wikipedia:
https://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Alcohol_dehydrogenase.
Cooper, G. M. (2000). Regulation of transcription in euk aryotes. In The cell: A molecular approach. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer
Associates. Retrieved from www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK9904/.
Kimball, John W. (2014, April 19). The human and chimpa nzee genomes. In Kimball’ s biology pages. Retrieved from
http://www.biology-pages.info/H/HominoidClade.html.
OpenStax College, Biology. (2016, March 23). Eukaryotic transcription gene regulation. In _OpenStax CNX. Retrieve d from
http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....cription-Gene-.
OpenStax College, Biology. (2016, March 23). Regulation of gene expression. In _OpenStax CNX. Retrieved from
http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....ene-Expression
Phillips, T. (2008). Regulation of transcription and gene expression in eukaryotes. Nature Education, 1(1), 199. Retrieved from
http://www.nature.com/scitable/topic...ession-in-1086.
Purves, W. K., Sadava, D. E., Orians, G. H., and Heller, H.C. (2003). Transcriptional regulation of gene expression. In Life: The
science of biology (7th ed., pp. 290-296). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
Reece, J. B., Urry, L. A., Cain, M. L., Wasserman, S. A., Minorsky, P. V., and Jackson, R. B. (2011). Eukaryotic gene expre ssion is
regulated at many stages. In Campbell Biology (10th ed., pp. 365-373). San Francisco, CA: Pearson.
[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Overview: Eukaryotic gene regulation. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at:
https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/gene-regulati on/gene-regulation-in-eukaryotes/a/overview-of-eukar yotic-generegulation. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
13.3: Expression of Genes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

13.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370713.4: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
To understand how gene expression is regulated, we must first understand how a gene codes for a functional pro tein in a cell. The
process occurs in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell s, just in slightly different manners.
Prokaryotic organisms are single-celled organisms tha t lack a cell nucleus, and their DNA therefore floats freely in the cell
cytoplasm. To synthesize a protein, the processes of t ranscription and translation occur almost simultaneousl y. When the resulting
protein is no longer needed, transcription stops. As a result, the primary method to control what type of p rotein and how much of
each protein is expressed in a prokaryotic cell is t he regulation of DNA transcription. All of the subsequen t steps occur
automatically. When more protein is required, more tr anscription occurs. Therefore, in prokaryotic cells, the control of gene
expression is mostly at the transcriptional level.
Eukaryotic cells, in contrast, have intracellular or ganelles that add to their complexity. In eukaryoti c cells, the DNA is contained
inside the cell’s nucleus and there it is transcribed into RNA. The newly synthesized RNA is then transported ou t of the nucleus
into the cytoplasm, where ribosomes translate the RNA into protein. The processes of transcription and tr anslation are physically
separated by the nuclear membrane; transcription oc curs only within the nucleus, and translation occurs only outside the nucleus in
the cytoplasm. The regulation of gene expression can occur at all stages of the process (Figure 1). Regulat ion may occur when the
DNA is uncoiled and loosened from nucleosomes to bind transcription factors (epigenetic level), when the RNA is transcribed
(transcriptional level), when the RNA is processed and exported to the cytoplasm after it is transcribed (post-transcriptional
level), when the RNA is translated into protein (translation al level), or after the protein has been made (post-translational level).
Figure 1. Prokaryotic transcription and translation occ ur simultaneously in the cytoplasm, and regulation occ urs at the
transcriptional level. Eukaryotic gene expression is re gulated during transcription and RNA processing, which take place in the
nucleus, and during protein translation, which takes p lace in the cytoplasm. Further regulation may occur through post-translational
modifications of proteins.
The differences in the regulation of gene expression between prokaryotes and eukaryotes are summarized in Table 1. The
regulation of gene expression is discussed in detail in subse quent modules.

13.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43707Table 1. Differences in the Regulation of Gene Expressio n of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Organisms
Prokaryotic organisms Eukaryotic organisms
Lack nucleus Contain nucleus
DNA is found in the cytoplasm DNA is confined to the nucl ear compartment
RNA transcription and protein formation occur almost
simultaneouslyRNA transcription occurs prior to protein formation, and it takes
place in the nucleus. Translation of RNA to protein o ccurs in the
cytoplasm.
Gene expression is regulated primarily at the transcrip tional levelGene expression is regulated at many levels (epigenetic,
transcriptional, nuclear shuttling, post-transcriptiona l,
translational, and post-translational)
Evolution of Gene Regulation
Prokaryotic cells can only regulate gene expression by controlling the amount of transcription. As eukaryoti c cells evolved, the
complexity of the control of gene expression increa sed. For example, with the evolution of eukaryotic cells came
compartmentalization of important cellular componen ts and cellular processes. A nuclear region that cont ains the DNA was formed.
Transcription and translation were physically separat ed into two different cellular compartments. It ther efore became possible to
control gene expression by regulating transcription i n the nucleus, and also by controlling the RNA levels and protein translation
present outside the nucleus.
Some cellular processes arose from the need of the org anism to defend itself. Cellular processes such as gene silencing developed
to protect the cell from viral or parasitic infecti ons. If the cell could quickly shut off gene expressio n for a short period of time, it
would be able to survive an infection when other orga nisms could not. Therefore, the organism evolved a ne w process that helped it
survive, and it was able to pass this new development to offspring.
Practice Questions
Control of gene expression in eukaryotic cells occurs at wh ich level(s)?
a. only the transcriptional level
b. epigenetic and transcriptional levels
c. epigenetic, transcriptional, and translational levels
d. epigenetic, transcriptional, post-transcriptional, tr anslational, and post-translational levels
[reveal-answer q=”386227″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”386227″]Answer d. Control of gene exp ression in eukaryotic cells occurs at epigenetic, tra nscriptional, posttranscriptional, translational, and post-translational lev els.
[/hidden-answer]
Post-translational control refers to the:
a. regulation of gene expression after transcription
b. regulation of gene expression after translation
c. control of epigenetic activation
d. period between transcription and translation
[reveal-answer q=”960802″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”960802″]Answer b. Post-translational co ntrol refers to the regulation of gene expression af ter
translation[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously

13.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43707Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.4: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene Regulation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

13.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370813.5: Introduction to Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
Discuss different components of prokaryotic gene regulation
The DNA of prokaryotes is organized into a circular c hromosome supercoiled in the nucleoid region of the cell cytoplasm. Proteins
that are needed for a specific function are encoded together in blocks called operons. For example, all of the genes needed to use
lactose as an energy source are coded next to each other i n the lactose (or lac) operon.
In prokaryotic cells, there are three types of regu latory molecules that can affect the expression of o perons: repressors, activators,
and inducers. Repressors are proteins that suppress transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus, whereas activators
are proteins that increase the transcription of a g ene in response to an external stimulus. Finally, inducers are small molecules that
either activate or repress transcription depending on the needs of the cell and the availability of substrate.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Understand the basic steps in gene regulation in prokaryo tic cells
Explain the roles of repressors in negative gene regulatio n
Explain the role of activators and inducers in positiv e gene regulation
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Gene Regulation in Prokaryotes
Repressors
Activators and Inducers
Self Check: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Outcome: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.5: Introduction to Prokaryotic Gene Regulation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

13.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370913.6: Gene Regulation in Prokaryotes
In bacteria and archaea, structural proteins with re lated functions—such as the genes that encode the enz ymes that catalyze the
many steps in a single biochemical pathway—are usuall y encoded together within the genome in a block call ed an operon and are
transcribed together under the control of a single promoter. This forms a polycistronic transcript (Figure 1). The p romoter then has
simultaneous control over the regulation of the tran scription of these structural genes because they will eit her all be needed at the
same time, or none will be needed.
Figure 1. In prokaryotes, structural genes of related f unction are often organized together on the genome and transcribed together
under the control of a single promoter. The operon’s regulatory region includes both the promoter and the operator. If a repressor
binds to the operator, then the structural genes will not be transcribed. Alternatively, activators may bin d to the regulatory region,
enhancing transcription.
French scientists François Jacob (1920–2013) and Jacques Monod at the Pasteur Institute were the first to show the org anization
of bacterial genes into operons, through their stud ies on the lac operon of E. coli. They found that in E. coli, all of the structural
genes that encode enzymes needed to use lactose as an energy source lie next to each other in the lactose (or lac) operon under the
control of a single promoter, the lac promoter. For this work, they won the Nobel Prize in Physiology o r Medicine in 1965.
Although eukaryotic genes are not organized into oper ons, prokaryotic operons are excellent models for lear ning about gene
regulation generally. There are some gene clusters i n eukaryotes that function similar to operons. Many of t he principles can be
applied to eukaryotic systems and contribute to our u nderstanding of changes in gene expression in eukary otes that can result
pathological changes such as cancer.
Each operon includes DNA sequences that influence its own transcription; these are located in a region calle d the regulatory region.
The regulatory region includes the promoter and the region surrounding the promoter, to which transcription factors, proteins
encoded by regulatory genes, can bind. Transcription f actors influence the binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter and allow
its progression to transcribe structural genes. A repressor is a transcription factor that suppresses transcript ion of a gene in
response to an external stimulus by binding to a DNA seq uence within the regulatory region called the operator, which is located
between the RNA polymerase binding site of the promote r and the transcriptional start site of the first str uctural gene. Repressor
binding physically blocks RNA polymerase from transcr ibing structural genes. Conversely, an activator is a transcription factor
that increases the transcription of a gene in respo nse to an external stimulus by facilitating RNA poly merase binding to the
promoter. An inducer, a third type of regulatory molecule, is a small mole cule that either activates or represses transcription b y
interacting with a repressor or an activator.
In prokaryotes, there are examples of operons whose gene products are required rather consistently and who se expression,
therefore, is unregulated. Such operons are constitutively expressed, meaning they are transcribed and translated conti nuously to
provide the cell with constant intermediate levels o f the protein products. Such genes encode enzymes inv olved in housekeeping
functions required for cellular maintenance, includ ing DNA replication, repair, and expression, as well as e nzymes involved in core

13.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43709metabolism. In contrast, there are other prokaryotic operons that are expressed only when needed and are r egulated by repressors,
activators, and inducers.
Practice Questions
What are the parts in the DNA sequence of an operon?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”665976″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”665976″]An operon is composed of a p romoter, an operator, and the structural genes. They mu st occur in that
order.
[/hidden-answer]
What types of regulatory molecules are there?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”665979″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”665979″]There are three types of regu latory molecules: repressors, activators, and inducers.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.6: Gene Regulation in Prokaryotes is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371013.7: Repressors
Tryptophan Operon: A Repressor Operon
Bacteria such as E. coli need amino acids to survive. Tryptophan is one such amino acid that E. coli can ingest from the
environment. E. coli can also synthesize tryptophan using enzymes that a re encoded by five genes. These five genes are next t o
each other in what is called the tryptophan (trp) operon (Figure 1). If tryptophan is present in the environm ent, then E. coli does
not need to synthesize it and the switch controlling the activation of the genes in the trp operon is switched off. However, when
tryptophan availability is low, the switch controlling the operon is turned on, transcription is initiated, the genes are expressed, and
tryptophan is synthesized.
Figure 1. The five genes that are needed to synthesize tryptophan in E. coli are located next to each other in the trp operon. When
tryptophan is plentiful, two tryptophan molecules bin d the repressor protein at the operator sequence. This physically blocks the
RNA polymerase from transcribing the tryptophan genes. When tryptophan is absent, the repressor protein does n ot bind to the
operator and the genes are transcribed.
A DNA sequence that codes for proteins is referred to a s the coding region. The five coding regions for the tryptophan biosynthesis
enzymes are arranged sequentially on the chromosome in the operon. Just before the coding region is the transcriptional start
site. This is the region of DNA to which RNA polymerase binds to initiate transcription. The promoter sequence is upstream of the
transcriptional start site; each operon has a sequence within or near the promoter to which proteins (activ ators or repressors) can
bind and regulate transcription.
A DNA sequence called the operator sequence is encoded between the promoter region and the first trp coding gene. This operator
contains the DNA code to which the repressor protein ca n bind. When tryptophan is present in the cell, two tr yptophan molecules
bind to the trp repressor, which changes shape to bind to the trp operator. Binding of the tryptophan–repressor comple x at the
operator physically prevents the RNA polymerase from binding, and transcribing the downstream genes.
When tryptophan is not present in the cell, the repr essor by itself does not bind to the operator; there fore, the operon is active and
tryptophan is synthesized. Because the repressor prot ein actively binds to the operator to keep the gene s turned off, the trp operon
is negatively regulated and the proteins that bind to the operator to silence trp expression are negative regulators.
Watch this video to learn more about the trp operon.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the transcript for “operon Trp” here (opens in new windo w).

13.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43710Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.7: Repressors is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371113.8: Activators and Inducers
Catabolite Activator Protein (CAP): An Activator Regulator
Just as the trp operon is negatively regulated by tryptophan molecules, the re are proteins that bind to the operator sequences that act
as a positive regulator to turn genes on and activate them. For example, when glucose is scarce, E. coli bacteria can turn to other
sugar sources for fuel. To do this, new genes to process these alternate sugars must be transcribed. When gluco se levels drop, cyclic
AMP (cAMP) begins to accumulate in the cell. The cAMP mol ecule is a signaling molecule that is involved in gl ucose and energy
metabolism in E. coli. When glucose levels decline in the cell, accumula ting cAMP binds to the positive regulator catabolite
activator protein (CAP), a protein that binds to the promoters of operons that control the processing of alternative sugars. When
cAMP binds to CAP, the complex binds to the promoter reg ion of the genes that are needed to use the alternat e sugar sources
(Figure 1). In these operons, a CAP binding site is loc ated upstream of the RNA polymerase binding site in t he promoter. This
increases the binding ability of RNA polymerase to the pro moter region and the transcription of the genes.
Figure 1. When glucose levels fall, E. coli may use other sugars for fuel but must transcribe new g enes to do so. As glucose
supplies become limited, cAMP levels increase. This cAMP binds to the CAP protein, a positive regulator that binds to an operator
region upstream of the genes required to use other suga r sources.
Lactose Operon: An Inducer Operon
The third type of gene regulation in prokaryotic ce lls occurs through inducible operons, which have proteins that bind to activate
or repress transcription depending on the local envi ronment and the needs of the cell. The lac operon is a typical inducible operon.
As mentioned previously, E. coli is able to use other sugars as energy sources when g lucose concentrations are low. To do so, the
cAMP–CAP protein complex serves as a positive regulator to induce transcription. One such sugar source is lactos e. The lac
operon encodes the genes necessary to acquire and process the lactose from the local environment. CAP binds to the operator
sequence upstream of the promoter that initiates tra nscription of the lac operon. However, for the lac operon to be activated, two
conditions must be met. First, the level of glucose m ust be very low or non-existent. Second, lactose must be present. Only when
glucose is absent and lactose is present will the lac operon be transcribed. This makes sense for the cell, because it would be
energetically wasteful to create the proteins to process l actose if glucose was plentiful or lactose was not available.
Transcription of the lac operon is carefully regulated so that its expression only occurs when glucose is limited and lactose is
present to serve as an alternative fuel source.Practice Question

13.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43711
In E. coli, the trp operon is on by default, while the lac operon is off. Why do you think this is the case?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”703127″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”703127″]Tryptophan is an amino aci d essential for making proteins, so the cell always needs to have some
on hand. However, if plenty of tryptophan is present, it is wasteful to make more, and the expression of the trp receptor is
repressed. Lactose, a sugar found in milk, is not always available. It makes no sense to make the enzymes nec essary to digest
an energy source that is not available, so the lac opero n is only turned on when lactose is present.[/hidden-answe r]
If glucose is absent, then CAP can bind to the operator sequence to activate transcription. If lactose is abs ent, then the repressor
binds to the operator to prevent transcription. If e ither of these requirements is met, then transcriptio n remains off. Only when both
conditions are satisfied is the lac operon transcribed (Table 1).
Table 1. Signals that Induce or Repress Transcription of the lac Operon
Glucose CAP binds Lactose Repressor binds Transcription
+ − − + No
+ − + − Some
− + − + No
− + + − Yes

13.8.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43711Watch an animated tutorial about the workings of lac operon here.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the transcript for “Operon LAC” here (link opens in new wi ndow).
If glucose is absent, but so is lactose, the lac operon will be ________.
1. activated
2. repressed
3. activated, but only partially
4. mutated
[reveal-answer q=”88859″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”88859″]Answer b. If glucose is absent, but so is lactose, the lac operon will be repressed.
[/hidden-answer]
Describe how transcription in prokaryotic cells can be altered by external stimulation such as excess lact ose in the
environment.
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”742266″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”742266″]Environmental stimuli can increase or induce transcription in prokaryotic cel ls. In this example,
lactose in the environment will induce the transcrip tion of the lac operon, but only if glucose is not available in th e
environment.
[/hidden-answer]
What is the difference between a repressible and an induc ible operon?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”353005″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”353005″]A repressible operon uses a protein bound to the promoter region of a gene to k eep the gene
repressed or silent. This repressor must be actively re moved in order to transcribe the gene. An inducible operon is either
activated or repressed depending on the needs of the ce ll and what is available in the local environment.[/hid den-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.8: Activators and Inducers is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Practice Questions

13.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371213.9: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation at Work
As we’ve just learned, there are three types of regulat ory molecules that can affect the expression of oper ons: repressors, activators,
and inducers.
Repressors are proteins that suppress transcription of a gene in re sponse to an external stimulus. In other words, a repressor
keeps a gene “off.”
Activators are proteins that increase the transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus. In other words, an activ ator
turns a gene “on.”
Inducers are small molecules that either activate or repress tran scription depending on the needs of the cell and the ava ilability
of substrate. Inducers basically help speed up or slow down “o n” or “off” by binding to a repressor or activator. In oth er words:
they don’t work alone.
In the interactive below, we will focus on the differences between activators and repressors:
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Click here for a text-only version of the activity.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Prokaryotic Gene Regulation at Work. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Activators and Repressors. Provided by: Lumen Learning. Located at: www.oppia.org/explore/5HfYP2FK5YCD. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
13.9: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation at Work is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369813.10: Introduction to Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
Discuss different components and types of epigenetic gene regulation
Eukaryotic gene expression is more complex than prok aryotic gene expression because the processes of trans cription and
translation are physically separated. Unlike prokaryo tic cells, eukaryotic cells can regulate gene express ion at many different
levels. Eukaryotic gene expression begins with contro l of access to the DNA. This form of regulation, called epigenetic regulation,
occurs even before transcription is initiated.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Explain the process of epigenetic regulation
Discuss the role of transcription factors in gene regula tion
Understand RNA splicing and explain its role in regulating gene expression
Describe the importance of RNA stability in gene regulati on
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
Post-Translational Control of Gene Expression
Self Check: Eukaryotic Gene Regulation
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Outcome: Eukaryotic Gene Regulation. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.10: Introduction to Eukaryotic Gene Regulation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

13.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4369913.11: Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
The human genome encodes over 20,000 genes; each of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes encodes thousands of genes. The
DNA in the nucleus is precisely wound, folded, and comp acted into chromosomes so that it will fit into the nucleus. It is also
organized so that specific segments can be accessed as needed by a specific cell type.
The first level of organization, or packing, is the wind ing of DNA strands around histone proteins. Histones pa ckage and order
DNA into structural units called nucleosome complexes, which can control the access of proteins to the DNA regi ons (Figure 1a).
Under the electron microscope, this winding of DNA aroun d histone proteins to form nucleosomes looks like sma ll beads on a
string (Figure 1b). These beads (histone proteins) can mov e along the string (DNA) and change the structure of the mol ecule.
Figure 1. DNA is folded around histone proteins to crea te (a) nucleosome complexes. These nucleosomes control t he access of
proteins to the underlying DNA. When viewed through an electron microscope (b), the nucleosomes look like beads on a string.
(credit “micrograph”: modification of work by Chris Woodcock)
If DNA encoding a specific gene is to be transcribed into RNA, the nucleosomes surrounding that region of DNA can slide down
the DNA to open that specific chromosomal region and allow for the transcriptional machinery (RNA polymera se) to initiate
transcription (Figure 2). Nucleosomes can move to open the chromosome structure to expose a segment of DNA, but do so in a
very controlled manner.

13.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43699Practice Question
Figure 2. Nucleosomes can slide along DNA. When nucleoso mes are spaced closely together (top), transcription fa ctors cannot
bind and gene expression is turned off. When the nucle osomes are spaced far apart (bottom), the DNA is exposed. Transcription
factors can bind, allowing gene expression to occur. M odifications to the histones and DNA affect nucleosome spacing.
In females, one of the two X chromosomes is inactivate d during embryonic development because of epigeneti c changes to the
chromatin. What impact do you think these changes would h ave on nucleosome packing?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”670204″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”670204″]The nucleosomes would pack mor e tightly together.[/hidden-answer]
How the histone proteins move is dependent on signals f ound on both the histone proteins and on the DNA. These signals are tags
added to histone proteins and DNA that tell the histone s if a chromosomal region should be open or closed (Fi gure 3 depicts
modifications to histone proteins and DNA). These tags ar e not permanent, but may be added or removed as need ed. They are
chemical modifications (phosphate, methyl, or acetyl g roups) that are attached to specific amino acids in the protein or to the
nucleotides of the DNA. The tags do not alter the DNA base sequence, but they do alter how tightly wound the DNA is around the
histone proteins. DNA is a negatively charged molecule; therefore, changes in the charge of the histone will change how tightly
wound the DNA molecule will be. When unmodified, the his tone proteins have a large positive charge; by addi ng chemical
modifications like acetyl groups, the charge becomes l ess positive.
The DNA molecule itself can also be modified. This occu rs within very specific regions called CpG islands. T hese are stretches
with a high frequency of cytosine and guanine dinucl eotide DNA pairs (CG) found in the promoter regions of genes. When this
configuration exists, the cytosine member of the pair can be methylated (a methyl group is added). This mo dification changes how
the DNA interacts with proteins, including the histone proteins that control access to the region. Highly meth ylated
(hypermethylated) DNA regions with deacetylated histones ar e tightly coiled and transcriptionally inactive.

13.11.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43699
Figure 3. Histone proteins and DNA nucleotides can be m odified chemically. Modifications affect nucleosome sp acing and gene
expression. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
This type of gene regulation is called epigenetic reg ulation. Epigenetic means “around genetics.” The chan ges that occur to the
histone proteins and DNA do not alter the nucleotide sequence and are not permanent. Instead, these change s are temporary
(although they often persist through multiple round s of cell division) and alter the chromosomal struct ure (open or closed) as
needed. A gene can be turned on or off depending upo n the location and modifications to the histone pro teins and DNA. If a gene is
to be transcribed, the histone proteins and DNA are m odified surrounding the chromosomal region encoding t hat gene. This opens
the chromosomal region to allow access for RNA polymer ase and other proteins, called transcription factors, to bind to the
promoter region, located just upstream of the gene, an d initiate transcription. If a gene is to remain tur ned off, or silenced, the
histone proteins and DNA have different modifications that signal a closed chromosomal configuration. In this closed
configuration, the RNA polymerase and transcription factors do not have access to the DNA and transcriptio n cannot occur (Figure
2).
View this video that describes how epigenetic regulation co ntrols gene expression.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
In Summary: Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
In eukaryotic cells, the first stage of gene expressi on control occurs at the epigenetic level. Epigenetic mechanisms control access
to the chromosomal region to allow genes to be turned on or off. These mechanisms control how DNA is packed in to the nucleus
by regulating how tightly the DNA is wound around histon e proteins. The addition or removal of chemical mod ifications (or flags)
to histone proteins or DNA signals to the cell to open or close a chromosomal region. Therefore, eukaryotic cells can control
whether a gene is expressed by controlling accessibili ty to transcription factors and the binding of RNA po lymerase to initiate
transcription.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.11: Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370013.12: Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
Like prokaryotic cells, the transcription of genes in eukaryotes requires the actions of an RNA polymerase to bind to a sequence
upstream of a gene to initiate transcription. However, unlike prokaryotic cells, the eukaryotic RNA polyme rase requires other
proteins, or transcription factors, to facilitate t ranscription initiation. Transcription factors are p roteins that bind to the promoter
sequence and other regulatory sequences to control the transcription of the target gene. RNA polymerase b y itself cannot initiate
transcription in eukaryotic cells. Transcription facto rs must bind to the promoter region first and recruit RNA polymerase to the site
for transcription to be established.
View the process of transcription—the making of RNA from a DNA t emplate:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=466
Promoter and the Transcription Machinery
Genes are organized to make the control of gene expr ession easier. The promoter region is immediately ups tream of the coding
sequence. This region can be short (only a few nucleoti des in length) or quite long (hundreds of nucleotid es long). The longer the
promoter, the more available space for proteins to b ind. This also adds more control to the transcription process. The length of the
promoter is gene-specific and can differ dramatical ly between genes. Consequently, the level of control of gene expression can also
differ quite dramatically between genes. The purpose of the promoter is to bind transcription factors tha t control the initiation of
transcription.

13.12.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43700
Figure 1. An enhancer is a DNA sequence that promotes t ranscription. Each enhancer is made up of short DNA seq uences called
distal control elements. Activators bound to the distal control elements interact with mediator proteins and transcription factors.
Two different genes may have the same promoter but di fferent distal control elements, enabling differentia l gene expression.
Within the promoter region, just upstream of the tra nscriptional start site, resides the TATA box. This bo x is simply a repeat of
thymine and adenine dinucleotides (literally, TATA repeats). RNA polymerase binds to the transcription init iation complex,
allowing transcription to occur. To initiate transcri ption, a transcription factor (TFIID) is the first to b ind to the TATA box. Binding
of TFIID recruits other transcription factors, includi ng TFIIB, TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH to the TATA box. Once t his complex is
assembled, RNA polymerase can bind to its upstream seque nce. When bound along with the transcription factors, RNA polymerase
is phosphorylated. This releases part of the protein f rom the DNA to activate the transcription initiation complex and places RNA
polymerase in the correct orientation to begin tran scription; DNA-bending protein brings the enhancer, which can be quite a
distance from the gene, in contact with transcription factor s and mediator proteins (Figure 1).
In addition to the general transcription factors, oth er transcription factors can bind to the promoter to regulate gene transcription.
These transcription factors bind to the promoters of a specific set of genes. They are not general transcr iption factors that bind to
every promoter complex, but are recruited to a speci fic sequence on the promoter of a specific gene. Th ere are hundreds of
transcription factors in a cell that each bind speci fically to a particular DNA sequence motif. When tran scription factors bind to the
promoter just upstream of the encoded gene, it is refe rred to as a cis-acting element, because it is on the same chromosome just
next to the gene. The region that a particular transc ription factor binds to is called the transcription factor binding site. Transcription
factors respond to environmental stimuli that cause t he proteins to find their binding sites and initiat e transcription of the gene that
is needed.
Enhancers and Transcription
In some eukaryotic genes, there are regions that hel p increase or enhance transcription. These regions, call ed enhancers, are not
necessarily close to the genes they enhance. They can be located upstream of a gene, within the coding re gion of the gene,
downstream of a gene, or may be thousands of nucleotides awa y.
Enhancer regions are binding sequences, or sites, fo r transcription factors. When a DNA-bending protein bind s, the shape of the
DNA changes (Figure 1). This shape change allows for the interaction of the activators bound to the enhance rs with the
transcription factors bound to the promoter region a nd the RNA polymerase. Whereas DNA is generally depicte d as a straight line
in two dimensions, it is actually a three-dimensional ob ject. Therefore, a nucleotide sequence thousands of nucl eotides away can
fold over and interact with a specific promoter.

13.12.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43700Turning Genes Off: Transcriptional Repressors
Like prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells also have mechanisms to prevent transcription. Transcriptiona l repressors can bind to
promoter or enhancer regions and block transcription. Like the transcriptional activators, repressors respo nd to external stimuli to
prevent the binding of activating transcription factors.
To start transcription, general transcription factor s, such as TFIID, TFIIH, and others, must first bind to the TATA box and
recruit RNA polymerase to that location. The binding of additional regulatory transcription factors to cis-acting elements will
either increase or prevent transcription. In addition to promoter sequences, enhancer regions help augment transcription.
Enhancers can be upstream, downstream, within a gene i tself, or on other chromosomes. Transcription factors b ind to enhancer
regions to increase or prevent transcription.
The binding of ________ is required for transcription to start.
a. a protein
b. DNA polymerase
c. RNA polymerase
d. a transcription factor
[reveal-answer q=”670222″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”670222″]Answer c. The binding of RNA polym erase is required for transcription to start.
[/hidden-answer]
What will result from the binding of a transcription factor to an enhancer region?
a. decreased transcription of an adjacent gene
b. increased transcription of a distant gene
c. alteration of the translation of an adjacent gene
d. initiation of the recruitment of RNA polymerase
[reveal-answer q=”829037″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”829037″]Answer b. Increased transcript ion of a distant gene will result from the binding o f a transcription
factor to an enhancer region.
[/hidden-answer]
A mutation within the promoter region can alter transcrip tion of a gene. Describe how this can happen.
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”332179″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”332179″]A mutation in the promoter region can change the binding site for a transcrip tion factor that
normally binds to increase transcription. The mutati on could either decrease the ability of the transcri ption factor to bind,
thereby decreasing transcription, or it can increase the ability of the transcription factor to bind, thus increas ing transcription.
[/hidden-answer]
What could happen if a cell had too much of an activating tr anscription factor present?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”162780″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”162780″]If too much of an activati ng transcription factor were present, then transcriptio n would be
increased in the cell. This could lead to dramatic altera tions in cell function. [/hidden-answer]Learning Objectives
Practice Questions

13.12.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43700Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.12: Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370113.13: Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression
RNA is transcribed, but must be processed into a matu re form before translation can begin. This processin g after an RNA molecule
has been transcribed, but before it is translated into a protein, is called post-transcriptional modificatio n. As with the epigenetic and
transcriptional stages of processing, this post-transc riptional step can also be regulated to control gene expression in the cell. If the
RNA is not processed, shuttled, or translated, then no prot ein will be synthesized.
RNA splicing, the first stage of post-transcriptional regulation
In eukaryotic cells, the RNA transcript often contains regions, called introns, that are removed prior to tran slation. The regions of
RNA that code for protein are called exons (Figure 1). After an RNA molecule has been transcribed, but prior to its departure from
the nucleus to be translated, the RNA is processed and the introns are removed by splicing.
Figure 1. Pre-mRNA can be alternatively spliced to cre ate different proteins.
Figure 2. There are five basic modes of alternative spl icing.
In the 1970s, genes were first observed that exhibit ed alternative RNA splicing. Alternative RNA splicing is a mechanism that
allows different protein products to be produced from one gene when different combinations of introns, and sometimes exons, are
removed from the transcript (Figure 2). This alternati ve splicing can be haphazard, but more often it is co ntrolled and acts as a
mechanism of gene regulation, with the frequency of d ifferent splicing alternatives controlled by the cel l as a way to control the
production of different protein products in differe nt cells or at different stages of development. Alter native splicing is now
understood to be a common mechanism of gene regulati on in eukaryotes; according to one estimate, 70 per cent of genes in humans
are expressed as multiple proteins through alternativ e splicing.
How could alternative splicing evolve? Introns have a beginning and ending recognition sequence; it is e asy to imagine the failure
of the splicing mechanism to identify the end of an i ntron and instead find the end of the next intron, t hus removing two introns and
the intervening exon. In fact, there are mechanisms i n place to prevent such intron skipping, but mutatio ns are likely to lead to their
failure. Such “mistakes” would more than likely produce a nonfunctional protein. Indeed, the cause of many genetic diseases is
alternative splicing rather than mutations in a sequ ence. However, alternative splicing would create a prot ein variant without the
loss of the original protein, opening up possibiliti es for adaptation of the new variant to new functions. Gene duplication has playedTry It

13.13.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43701an important role in the evolution of new functions in a similar way by providing genes that may evolve wit hout eliminating the
original, functional protein.
Visualize how mRNA splicing happens by watching the process i n action in this video:
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=468
Control of RNA Stability
Before the mRNA leaves the nucleus, it is given two pr otective “caps” that prevent the end of the strand from degrading during its
journey. The 5′ cap, which is placed on the 5′ end of the mRNA, is usually composed of a methylated guanosine triphosphate
molecule (GTP). The poly-A tail, which is attached to the 3′ end, is usually composed of a series of adenine nucleotides. Once the
RNA is transported to the cytoplasm, the length of ti me that the RNA resides there can be controlled. Each RNA molecule has a
defined lifespan and decays at a specific rate. Thi s rate of decay can influence how much protein is in the cell. If the decay rate is
increased, the RNA will not exist in the cytoplasm as l ong, shortening the time for translation to occur. Con versely, if the rate of
decay is decreased, the RNA molecule will reside in the cytoplasm longer and more protein can be translated. This rate of decay is
referred to as the RNA stability. If the RNA is stable, it wil l be detected for longer periods of time in the cytoplas m.
Binding of proteins to the RNA can influence its stabi lity. Proteins, called RNA-binding proteins, or RBPs, can bind to the regions
of the RNA just upstream or downstream of the protein-c oding region. These regions in the RNA that are not t ranslated into protein
are called the untranslated regions, or UTRs. They are not introns (those have been remove d in the nucleus). Rather, these are
regions that regulate mRNA localization, stability, a nd protein translation. The region just before the pr otein-coding region is called
the 5′ UTR, whereas the region after the coding region is called the 3′ UTR (Figure 3). The binding of RBPs to these regions can
increase or decrease the stability of an RNA molecule, de pending on the specific RBP that binds.
Figure 3. The protein-coding region of mRNA is flanke d by 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs). The presenc e of RNA-binding
proteins at the 5′ or 3′ UTR influences the stability of the RNA molecule.
RNA Stability and microRNAs
In addition to RBPs that bind to and control (increa se or decrease) RNA stability, other elements called m icroRNAs can bind to the
RNA molecule. These microRNAs, or miRNAs, are short RNA molecules that are only 21– 24 nucleotides in length. The miRNAs
are made in the nucleus as longer pre-miRNAs. These pre-m iRNAs are chopped into mature miRNAs by a protein calle d dicer.
Like transcription factors and RBPs, mature miRNAs recog nize a specific sequence and bind to the RNA; however, miRNAs also
associate with a ribonucleoprotein complex called th e RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). RISC binds along with the
miRNA to degrade the target mRNA. Together, miRNAs and the RISC complex rapidly destroy the RNA molecule.

13.13.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43701Post-transcriptional control can occur at any stage af ter transcription, including RNA splicing, nuclear shu ttling, and RNA
stability. Once RNA is transcribed, it must be processe d to create a mature RNA that is ready to be translate d. This involves the
removal of introns that do not code for protein. Spl iceosomes bind to the signals that mark the exon/in tron border to remove
the introns and ligate the exons together. Once this o ccurs, the RNA is mature and can be translated. RNA is c reated and
spliced in the nucleus, but needs to be transported t o the cytoplasm to be translated. RNA is transported to the cytoplasm
through the nuclear pore complex. Once the RNA is in t he cytoplasm, the length of time it resides there be fore being degraded,
called RNA stability, can also be altered to control the overall amount of protein that is synthesized. The RNA stability can be
increased, leading to longer residency time in the c ytoplasm, or decreased, leading to shortened time an d less protein synthesis.
RNA stability is controlled by RNA-binding proteins (RPBs) and microRNAs (miRNAs). These RPBs and miRNAs bind to
the 5′ UTR or the 3′ UTR of the RNA to increase or dec rease RNA stability. Depending on the RBP, the stabilit y can be
increased or decreased significantly; however, miRNAs alway s decrease stability and promote decay.
Which of the following are involved in post-transcripti onal control?
a. control of RNA splicing
b. control of RNA shuttling
c. control of RNA stability
d. all of the above
[reveal-answer q=”681081″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”681081″]Answer d. All of the above (co ntrol of RNA splicing, RNA shuttling, and RNA stability) are
involved in post-transcriptional control.
[/hidden-answer]
Binding of an RNA binding protein will ________ the stabi lity of the RNA molecule.
a. increase
b. decrease
c. neither increase nor decrease
d. either increase or decrease
[reveal-answer q=”464261″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”464261″]Answer d. Binding of an RNA b inding protein will either increase or decrease the s tability of the
RNA molecule.
[/hidden-answer]
Describe how RBPs can prevent miRNAs from degrading an RNA molecule.
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”16680″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”16680″]RNA binding proteins (RBP) bi nd to the RNA and can either increase or decrease th e stability of
the RNA. If they increase the stability of the RNA molec ule, the RNA will remain intact in the cell for a long er period of time
than normal. Since both RBPs and miRNAs bind to the RNA m olecule, RBP can potentially bind first to the RNA an d prevent
the binding of the miRNA that will degrade it.
[/hidden-answer]
How can external stimuli alter post-transcriptional con trol of gene expression?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”598728″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]Learning Objectives
Practice Questions

13.13.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43701[hidden-answer a=”598728″]External stimuli can modif y RNA-binding proteins (i.e., through phosphorylation of proteins) to
alter their activity.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.13: Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

13.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370213.14: Putting It Together- Gene Expression
Let’s return to our earlier look at cancer: One exam ple of a gene modification that alters the growth ra te is increased
phosphorylation of cyclin B, a protein that control s the progression of a cell through the cell cycle and serves as a cell-cycle
checkpoint protein.
For cells to move through each phase of the cell cycl e, the cell must pass through checkpoints. This ensures th at the cell has
properly completed the step and has not encountered any mutation that will alter its function. Many prote ins, including cyclin B,
control these checkpoints. The phosphorylation of c yclin B, a post-translational event, alters its functio n. As a result, cells can
progress through the cell cycle unimpeded, even if mut ations exist in the cell and its growth should be termin ated.
Cancer Treatment
Cancer therapies are designed to target actively di viding cells. Besides cancer cells, what other cells act ively divide in humans?
One of the most physically obvious side effects of can cer treatments is hair loss. This is because the livin g cells in the hair root
continually divide to make hair grow longer. These c ells therefore are often impacted by broad scale can cer treatments like
chemotherapy drugs and radiation localized to the h ead. Shortly after cancer treatments, a patient’s bloo d count may also drop. This
is due to the rapid division of blood cells througho ut a person’s life. Unlike hair cells though, blood ce lls divide fairly often and
rapidly. Hence, the blood count often returns to normal m uch faster than hair regrows.
Scientists are using what is known about the regulation of gene expression in disease states, including canc er, to develop new
ways to treat and prevent disease development. Many scient ists are designing drugs on the basis of the gene expre ssion patterns
within individual tumors. This idea, that therapy and medicines can be tailored to an individual, has giv en rise to the field of
personalized medicine. With an increased understandi ng of gene regulation and gene function, medicines can be designed to
specifically target diseased cells without harming hea lthy cells. Some new medicines, called targeted therapi es, have exploited
the overexpression of a specific protein or the mutat ion of a gene to develop a new medication to treat d isease. One such
example is the use of anti-EGF receptor medications to treat the subset of breast cancer tumors that have ver y high levels of the
EGF protein. Undoubtedly, more targeted therapies will b e developed as scientists learn more about how gene ex pression
changes can cause cancer.
As scientists learn more about cell division and the uni que ways it malfunctions in cancer cells, they are able to develop targeted
therapies. These drugs are still chemotherapies, but th ey are often focused on a particular feature of diff erent types of cancer cells,
making them less likely to target non-cancerous divi ding cells. This reduces global side effects. Unfortun ately, our understanding of
cancer is still incomplete. Therefore, every day cancer r esearchers and clinicians work to manage and treat these horrible diseases.
Read more at www.cancer.org
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Putting It Together: Gene Expression. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
13.14: Putting It Together- Gene Expression is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Try It

13.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4370313.15: Assignment- How Mutations Work
For this hands on activity you should download the “ Mutations: Changing the Genetic Code ” simulation from MOLO.
Complete all 7 pages of the simulation, answering al l the questions and taking the snapshots as directed. For each snapshot you
should explain what your image is showing. When you h ave completed the simulation, click on the button a t the bottom of the
screen that says Create a report for printing and submission. Choose to Print without login and enter your name in the
appropriate field. Instead of school, please enter the term. When the next screen pops up, hit the print b utton. Instead of printing
though, you can choose to save the file as a PDF. Then return he re to submit your PDF document.
Note there are no optional questions for you; all questio ns in the simulation are required even if marked “optional.”
This document shows you an example submission; please note that it only includes answers to a few q uestions and a single
snapshot to give you an idea of how to complete this assign ment.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment includes 6 snapshots.
Assignment includes answer to all 13 questions.
Rubric
How Mutations Work
Outcome: Describe the conversion of DNA to RNA to prot eins. Explain the regulation of gene expression.
Criteria Ratings Pts
Outline the process of
genetic transcription.Answered all 3 questions
correctly and included
snapshots.
5.0 ptsAnswered at least 2 of 3
questions correctly and
included snapshots.
4.0 ptsDid not answer
questions 1–3 correctly
and/or did not include all
snapshots.
0.0 pts5 pts
Summarize the process
of genetic translation.Answered 9–10
questions correctly and
included snapshots.
5.0 ptsAnswered 8 questions
correctly and included
snapshots.
4.0 ptsAnswered less than 8
questions correctly
and/or did not include all
snapshots.
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 10
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter. Provided by: Columbia Basin College. Located at: https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC
BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Mutations: Changing the Genetic Code (a 7-page activity). Authored by: Concord Consortium. Located at:
http://molo.concord.org/database/activities/102.html. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
13.15: Assignment- How Mutations Work is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
14: Module 12- Trait Inheritance
14.1: Why It Matters- Trait Inheritance
14.2: Introduction to the Father of Genetics
14.3: Mendel’s Experiments and Heredity
14.4: Characteristics and Traits
14.5: Laws of Inheritance
14.6: Heredity
14.7: Introduction to Beyond Dominance and Recessiveness
14.8: Non-Mendelian Inheritance
14.9: Non-Mendelian Punnett Squares
14.10: Multiple Alleles
14.11: Introduction to Heredity and Disease
14.12: Penetrance and Expressivity
14.13: Pedigrees and Disease
14.14: Pedigree Flowchart
14.15: Genetic Disorder and Pedigrees
14.16: Introduction to Genetics and the Environment
14.17: Epistasis
14.18: Polygenic Inheritance and Environmental Effects
14.19: Effect of the Environment
14.20: Pleiotropy and Human Disorders
14.21: Putting It Together- Trait Inheritance
14.22: Assignment- Dragon Genetics
14: Module 12- Trait Inheritance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372414.1: Why It Matters- Trait Inheritance
Why complete monohybrid and dihybrid crosses and family pedigrees, and explain the inheritance of
various traits?
Take a moment to pause and think about yourself and your family. How much do you look like your parents? W hat about the other
members of your family: aunts, uncles, cousins, ful l siblings, half-siblings? Why do some family members look nearly identical to
each other, while other family members seem as if they don’t share two traits? The answer to this boils down t o how traits are
inherited.
Parents pass on traits to their children. Traits like bl ood type, cleft chin, dimples, and widow’s peaks are al l inherited in a fairly
straight-forward, simple fashion. However, the inheritanc e of other traits is much more complex and harder t o understand: these
traits include height, skin color, and eye color. Th ese more complex paths of inheritance are what cause some siblings to look so
different from each other—despite having the same two pare nts.
Unfortunately, genetics also plays a role in the inheri tance of some diseases such as Huntingdon’s, sickle ce ll anemia, and TaySachs disease. A degree in genetics can be used in ca reers ranging from a forensic examiner, a genetic cou nselor, a medical
geneticist, a statistical geneticist, to a clinical techni cian.
Genetic counselors use their understanding of the rul es of heredity to help gauge the risks of genetic d iseases. They may advise
a couple of their risks for passing on certain geneti c disorders, order genetic testing, and then explain the chances that some
genetic diseases will show up in any offspring. Genetic counselors are there to help potential parents unde rstand risk factors
and the prognosis of genetic disorders, including basic treatment and management plans in the case of certain disor ders.
Learning Outcomes
Identify the impact of Gregor Mendel on the field of geneti cs and apply Mendel’s two laws of genetics
Explain complications to the phenotypic expression of genot ype, including mutations
Explain the conventions of a family pedigree and predict whether a disease will be passed through a family in one o f three
modes
Discuss the role environment plays on phenotypes
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: Trait Inheritance. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License:
CC BY: Attribution
14.1: Why It Matters- Trait Inheritance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Try It

14.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372814.2: Introduction to the Father of Genetics
Identify the impact of Gregor Mendel on the field of genetics and apply Mendel’s two laws of genetics
Gregor Mendel is often referred to as the Father of Ge netics. But just what did he do to earn this honorary t itle? In this outcome
we’ll examine the work he did and how his work still impacts ge netics today.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Describe Mendel’s study of garden peas and hereditary
Understand how the inheritance of a genotype generates a phenotype
Apply the law of segregation
Apply the law of independent assortment
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Mendel’s Experiments and Heredity
Characteristics and Traits
Laws of Inheritance
Heredity
Self Check: The Father of Genetics
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
14.2: Introduction to the Father of Genetics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372914.3: Mendel’s Experiments and Heredity
Figure 1. Experimenting with thousands of garden peas, Mendel uncovered the fundamentals of genetics. (credi t: modification of
work by Jerry Kirkhart)
Genetics is the study of heredity. Johann Gregor Mend el set the framework for genetics long before chromos omes or genes had
been identified, at a time when meiosis was not well un derstood. Mendel selected a simple biological system a nd conducted
methodical, quantitative analyses using large sample si zes. Because of Mendel’s work, the fundamental principle s of heredity were
revealed. We now know that genes, carried on chromosome s, are the basic functional units of heredity with the capability to be
replicated, expressed, or mutated. Today, the postulat es put forth by Mendel form the basis of classical, or Mendelian, genetics. Not
all genes are transmitted from parents to offspring a ccording to Mendelian genetics, but Mendel’s experiment s serve as an excellent
starting point for thinking about inheritance.
Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of Probability
Figure 2. Johann Gregor Mendel is considered the father of genetics.
Johann Gregor Mendel (1822–1884) (Figure 2) was a lifel ong learner, teacher, scientist, and man of faith. As a young adult, he
joined the Augustinian Abbey of St. Thomas in Brno in wh at is now the Czech Republic. Supported by the monastery, he taught
physics, botany, and natural science courses at the se condary and university levels. In 1856, he began a deca de-long research
pursuit involving inheritance patterns in honeybees and plants, ultimately settling on pea plants as his p rimary model system (a
system with convenient characteristics used to study a specific biological phenomenon to be applied to othe r systems). In 1865,
Mendel presented the results of his experiments with n early 30,000 pea plants to the local Natural History Soc iety. He
demonstrated that traits are transmitted faithfully f rom parents to offspring independently of other trai ts and in dominant and
recessive patterns. In 1866, he published his work, Experiments in Plant Hybridization, in the proceedings of the Natural History
Society of Brünn.
Mendel’s work went virtually unnoticed by the scientifi c community that believed, incorrectly, that the proc ess of inheritance
involved a blending of parental traits that produce d an intermediate physical appearance in offspring; this hypothetical process
appeared to be correct because of what we know now as co ntinuous variation. Continuous variation results from the action of
many genes to determine a characteristic like human height. Offspring appear to be a “blend” of their pa rents’ traits when we look
at characteristics that exhibit continuous variation. The blending theory of inheritance asserted that the original parental traits
were lost or absorbed by the blending in the offsprin g, but we now know that this is not the case. Mendel was t he first researcher to
see it. Instead of continuous characteristics, Mendel wo rked with traits that were inherited in distinct classe s (specifically, violet

14.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43729versus white flowers); this is referred to as discontinuous variation. Mendel’s choice of these kinds of traits allowed him to see
experimentally that the traits were not blended in t he offspring, nor were they absorbed, but rather that t hey kept their distinctness
and could be passed on. In 1868, Mendel became abbot of the monastery and exchanged his scientific pursu its for his pastoral
duties. He was not recognized for his extraordinary sc ientific contributions during his lifetime. In fact, i t was not until 1900 that his
work was rediscovered, reproduced, and revitalized by scie ntists on the brink of discovering the chromosomal basis of heredity.
Mendel’s Model System
Mendel’s seminal work was accomplished using the garden pea, Pisum sativum, to study inheritance. This species naturally selffertilizes, such that pollen encounters ova within in dividual flowers. The flower petals remain sealed tig htly until after pollination,
preventing pollination from other plants. The result is highly inbred, or “true-breeding,” pea plants. Thes e are plants that always
produce offspring that look like the parent. By expe rimenting with true-breeding pea plants, Mendel avoid ed the appearance of
unexpected traits in offspring that might occur if the plants were not true breeding. The garden pea also grows to maturity within
one season, meaning that several generations could b e evaluated over a relatively short time. Finally, l arge quantities of garden peas
could be cultivated simultaneously, allowing Mendel to co nclude that his results did not come about simply by cha nce.
Mendelian Crosses
Mendel performed hybridizations, which involve mating two true-breeding individuals that have different traits. In the pea, which
is naturally self-pollinating, this is done by manua lly transferring pollen from the anther of a mature p ea plant of one variety to the
stigma of a separate mature pea plant of the second variety. In plants, pollen carries the male gametes (sperm) to the stigma, a
sticky organ that traps pollen and allows the sperm t o move down the pistil to the female gametes (ova) be low. To prevent the pea
plant that was receiving pollen from self-fertilizing and confounding his results, Mendel painstakingly remov ed all of the anthers
from the plant’s flowers before they had a chance to matur e.
Plants used in first-generation crosses were called P, or parental generation one, plants (Figure 3). Mendel coll ected the seeds
belonging to the P plants that resulted from each c ross and grew them the following season. These offspring were called the F, or
the first filial (filial = offspring, daughter or son), generation. Once Mendel examined the characteristics in the F generation of
plants, he allowed them to self-fertilize naturally. He then collected and grew the seeds from the F plan ts to produce the F, or
second filial, generation. Mendel’s experiments exten ded beyond the F generation to the F and F generatio ns, and so on, but it
was the ratio of characteristics in the P −F −F genera tions that were the most intriguing and became the b asis for Mendel’s
postulates.0
0 1
1 2
2 3 4
0 1 2

14.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43729
Figure 3. In one of his experiments on inheritance pat terns, Mendel crossed plants that were true-breeding fo r violet flower color
with plants true-breeding for white flower color (th e P generation). The resulting hybrids in the F gener ation all had violet
flowers. In the F generation, approximately three qu arters of the plants had violet flowers, and one quart er had white flowers.
Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics of Heredity
In his 1865 publication, Mendel reported the results of his crosses involving seven different characterist ics, each with two
contrasting traits. A trait is defined as a variation in the physical appearan ce of a heritable characteristic. The characteristics
included plant height, seed texture, seed color, flowe r color, pea pod size, pea pod color, and flower pos ition. For the characteristic
of flower color, for example, the two contrasting trai ts were white versus violet. To fully examine each charac teristic, Mendel
generated large numbers of F and F plants, reporting resu lts from 19,959 F plants alone. His findings were consistent.
What results did Mendel find in his crosses for flower color? First, Mendel confirmed that he had plants that bred true for white or
violet flower color. Regardless of how many generation s Mendel examined, all self-crossed offspring of pare nts with white flowers
had white flowers, and all self-crossed offspring of pa rents with violet flowers had violet flowers. In additi on, Mendel confirmed
that, other than flower color, the pea plants were physica lly identical.0 1
1 2 2

14.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43729Once these validations were complete, Mendel applied the pollen from a plant with violet flowers to the stigma of a plant with
white flowers. After gathering and sowing the seeds that r esulted from this cross, Mendel found that 100 percent o f the F hybrid
generation had violet flowers. Conventional wisdom at that time would have predicted the hybrid flowers to be pale violet or for
hybrid plants to have equal numbers of white and vio let flowers. In other words, the contrasting parental t raits were expected to
blend in the offspring. Instead, Mendel’s results demon strated that the white flower trait in the F generati on had completely
disappeared.
Importantly, Mendel did not stop his experimentation there. He allowed the F plants to self-fertilize and f ound that, of F generation plants, 705 had violet flowers and 224 had white flowers. This was a ratio of 3.15 violet flowers per one white flower, or
approximately 3:1. When Mendel transferred pollen fr om a plant with violet flowers to the stigma of a pla nt with white flowers and
vice versa, he obtained about the same ratio regard less of which parent, male or female, contributed whi ch trait. This is called a
reciprocal cross —a paired cross in which the respective traits of the male and female in one cross become the respective tr aits of
the female and male in the other cross. For the other six characteristics Mendel examined, the F and F gene rations behaved in the
same way as they had for flower color. One of the two tr aits would disappear completely from the F generation o nly to reappear in
the F generation at a ratio of approximately 3:1 (Table 1).
Table 1. The Results of Mendel’s Garden Pea Hybridizati ons
Characteristic Contrasting P Traits F Offspring Traits F Offspring Traits F Trait Ratios
Flower color Violet vs. white 100 percent violet705 violet
224 white3.15:1
Flower position Axial vs. terminal 100 percent axial651 axial
207 terminal3.14:1
Plant height Tall vs. dwarf 100 percent tall787 tall
277 dwarf2.84:1
Seed texture Round vs. wrinkled 100 percent round5,474 round
1,850 wrinkled2.96:1
Seed color Yellow vs. green 100 percent yellow6,022 yellow
2,001 green3.01:1
Pea pod texture Inflated vs. constricted 100 percent inf lated882 inflated
299 constricted2.95:1
Pea pod color Green vs. yellow 100 percent green428 green
152 yellow2.82:1
Upon compiling his results for many thousands of plan ts, Mendel concluded that the characteristics could be divided into expressed
and latent traits. He called these, respectively, dom inant and recessive traits. Dominant traits are those that are inherited
unchanged in a hybridization. Recessive traits become latent, or disappear, in the offspring of a hybridization. The recessive trait
does, however, reappear in the progeny of the hybrid o ffspring. An example of a dominant trait is the viole t-flower trait. For this
same characteristic (flower color), white-colored flowe rs are a recessive trait. The fact that the recessive trait reappeared in the F
generation meant that the traits remained separate (not blended) in the plants of the F generation. Mende l also proposed that plants
possessed two copies of the trait for the flower-color characteristic, and that each parent transmitted one of its two copies to its
offspring, where they came together. Moreover, the phys ical observation of a dominant trait could mean that the genetic
composition of the organism included two dominant ver sions of the characteristic or that it included one dominant and one
recessive version. Conversely, the observation of a rece ssive trait meant that the organism lacked any domin ant versions of this
characteristic.
So why did Mendel repeatedly obtain 3:1 ratios in his crosses? To understand how Mendel deduced the basic me chanisms of
inheritance that lead to such ratios, we must first revie w the laws of probability.1
1 2
1 2
0 1 2 2

14.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43729Probability Basics
Probabilities are mathematical measures of likelihood. The empirical probability of an event is calculat ed by dividing the number
of times the event occurs by the total number of op portunities for the event to occur. It is also possib le to calculate theoretical
probabilities by dividing the number of times that a n event is expected to occur by the number of times that it could occur.
Empirical probabilities come from observations, like th ose of Mendel. Theoretical probabilities come from k nowing how the events
are produced and assuming that the probabilities of individual outcomes are equal. A probability of one for some event indicates
that it is guaranteed to occur, whereas a probabilit y of zero indicates that it is guaranteed not to occ ur. An example of a genetic
event is a round seed produced by a pea plant. In hi s experiment, Mendel demonstrated that the probabili ty of the event “round
seed” occurring was one in the F offspring of true-br eeding parents, one of which has round seeds and one of which has wrinkled
seeds. When the F plants were subsequently self-cross ed, the probability of any given F offspring having round seeds was now
three out of four. In other words, in a large populat ion of F offspring chosen at random, 75 percent were expected to have round
seeds, whereas 25 percent were expected to have wrinkled seeds. Using large numbers of crosses, Mendel was able to calculate
probabilities and use these to predict the outcomes of ot her crosses.
The Product Rule and Sum Rule
Mendel demonstrated that the pea-plant characteristi cs he studied were transmitted as discrete units from parent to offspring. As
will be discussed, Mendel also determined that differe nt characteristics, like seed color and seed texture, were transmitted
independently of one another and could be considered in separate probability analyses. For instance, perfo rming a cross between a
plant with green, wrinkled seeds and a plant with yello w, round seeds still produced offspring that had a 3: 1 ratio of green:yellow
seeds (ignoring seed texture) and a 3:1 ratio of ro und:wrinkled seeds (ignoring seed color). The characte ristics of color and texture
did not influence each other.
The product rule of probability can be applied to this phenome non of the independent transmission of characteristi cs. The product
rule states that the probability of two independent ev ents occurring together can be calculated by multip lying the individual
probabilities of each event occurring alone. To dem onstrate the product rule, imagine that you are roll ing a six-sided die (D) and
flipping a penny (P) at the same time. The die may rol l any number from 1–6 (D#), whereas the penny may turn up heads (PH) or
tails (PT). The outcome of rolling the die has no eff ect on the outcome of flipping the penny and vice v ersa. There are 12 possible
outcomes of this action (Table 2), and each event is expect ed to occur with equal probability.
Table 2. Twelve Equally Likely Outcomes of Rolling a D ie and Flipping a Penny
Rolling Die Flipping Penny
D1 PH
D1 PT
D2 PH
D2 PT
D3 PH
D3 PT
D4 PH
D4 PT
D5 PH
D5 PT
D6 PH
D6 PT1
1 2

14.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43729Of the 12 possible outcomes, the die has a 2/12 (or 1 /6) probability of rolling a two, and the penny has a 6/12 (or 1/2) probability of
coming up heads. By the product rule, the probabili ty that you will obtain the combined outcome 2 and h eads is: (D2) x (PH) =
(1/6) x (1/2) or 1/12 (Table 3). Notice the word “and” in the description of the probability. The “and” is a signal to apply the
product rule. For example, consider how the product rul e is applied to the dihybrid cross: the probability o f having both dominant
traits in the F2progeny is the product of the probabilitie s of having the dominant trait for each characteristic, as shown here:
On the other hand, the sum rule of probability is applied when considering two mutual ly exclusive outcomes that can come about
by more than one pathway. The sum rule states that the probability of the occurrence of one event or the other event, of two
mutually exclusive events, is the sum of their indivi dual probabilities. Notice the word “or” in the descri ption of the probability.
The “or” indicates that you should apply the sum rul e. In this case, let’s imagine you are flipping a pen ny (P) and a quarter (Q).
What is the probability of one coin coming up heads and one coin coming up tails? This outcome can be a chieved by two cases: the
penny may be heads (PH) and the quarter may be tails (QT), or the quarter may be heads (QH) and the penny ma y be tails (PT).
Either case fulfills the outcome. By the sum rule, we cal culate the probability of obtaining one head and on e tail as [(PH) × (QT)] +
[(QH) × (PT)] = [(1/2) × (1/2)] + [(1/2) × (1/2)] = 1/ 2 (Table 3). You should also notice that we used the p roduct rule to calculate
the probability of PH and QT, and also the probability of PT and QH, before we summed them. Again, the sum rule ca n be applied
to show the probability of having just one dominant trait i n the F2 generation of a dihybrid cross:
Table 3. The Product Rule and Sum Rule
Product Rule Sum Rule
For independent events A and B, the probability (P) of them both
occurring (A and B) is (PA × PB)For mutually exclusive events A and B, the probability (P) that at
least one occurs (A or B) is (PA + PB)
To use probability laws in practice, it is necessary to work with large sample sizes because small sample siz es are prone to
deviations caused by chance. The large quantities of p ea plants that Mendel examined allowed him calculate the probabilities of the
traits appearing in his F generation. As you will lea rn, this discovery meant that when parental traits were k nown, the offspring’s
traits could be predicted accurately even before fertili zation.
Working with garden pea plants, Mendel found that crosse s between parents that differed by one trait produced F offspring
that all expressed the traits of one parent. Observabl e traits are referred to as dominant, and non-express ed traits are described
as recessive. When the offspring in Mendel’s experime nt were self-crossed, the F offspring exhibited the do minant trait or the
recessive trait in a 3:1 ratio, confirming that the r ecessive trait had been transmitted faithfully from the original P parent.
Reciprocal crosses generated identical F and F offs pring ratios. By examining large sample sizes, Mendel showed that his
crosses behaved reproducibly according to the laws of pro bability, and that the traits were inherited as independent events.
Two rules in probability can be used to find the expec ted proportions of offspring of different traits fr om different crosses. To
find the probability of two or more independent even ts occurring together, apply the product rule and m ultiply the probabilities
of the individual events. The use of the word “and” su ggests the appropriate application of the product r ule. To find the
probability of two or more events occurring in combi nation, apply the sum rule and add their individual probabilities together.
The use of the word “or” suggests the appropriate applic ation of the sum rule.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
14.3: Mendel’s Experiments and Heredity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
Learning Objectives
1 2

14.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373014.4: Characteristics and Traits
The seven characteristics that Mendel evaluated in hi s pea plants were each expressed as one of two version s, or traits. The
physical expression of characteristics is accomplish ed through the expression of genes carried on chromo somes. The genetic
makeup of peas consists of two similar or homologous copies o f each chromosome, one from each parent. Each pair of ho mologous
chromosomes has the same linear order of genes. In o ther words, peas are diploid organisms in that they have two copies of each
chromosome. The same is true for many other plants an d for virtually all animals. Diploid organisms utilize meiosis to produce
haploid gametes, which contain one copy of each homologous chromosome that unite at fertilization to create a diplo id zygote.
For cases in which a single gene controls a single chara cteristic, a diploid organism has two genetic copies that may or may not
encode the same version of that characteristic. Gene v ariants that arise by mutation and exist at the same relative locations on
homologous chromosomes are called alleles. Mendel exa mined the inheritance of genes with just two allele f orms, but it is
common to encounter more than two alleles for any given gene in a natural population.
Phenotypes and Genotypes
Two alleles for a given gene in a diploid organism ar e expressed and interact to produce physical charact eristics. The observable
traits expressed by an organism are referred to as i ts phenotype. An organism’s underlying genetic makeup, consistin g of both
physically visible and non-expressed alleles, is cal led its genotype. Mendel’s hybridization experiments demonstrate the difference
between phenotype and genotype. When true-breeding pl ants in which one parent had yellow pods and one had gr een pods were
cross-fertilized, all of the F hybrid offspring had yellow pods. That is, the hybrid offspring were phenot ypically identical to the
true-breeding parent with yellow pods. However, we know t hat the allele donated by the parent with green pods was not simply lost
because it reappeared in some of the F offspring. T herefore, the F plants must have been genotypically d ifferent from the parent
with yellow pods.
The P plants that Mendel used in his experiments were e ach homozygous for the trait he was studying. Diploid organisms that are
homozygous at a given gene, or locus, have two identical alleles for that gene on their homologous chromosomes. Mende l’s
parental pea plants always bred true because both of t he gametes produced carried the same trait. When P pl ants with contrasting
traits were cross-fertilized, all of the offspring were heterozygous for the contrasting trait, meaning that their genotype reflected
that they had different alleles for the gene being examined.
Dominant and Recessive Alleles
Our discussion of homozygous and heterozygous organism s brings us to why the F heterozygous offspring were id entical to one of
the parents, rather than expressing both alleles. In a ll seven pea-plant characteristics, one of the two c ontrasting alleles was
dominant, and the other was recessive. Mendel called the dominant allele the expressed unit factor; the rece ssive allele was referred
to as the latent unit factor. We now know that these so-called unit factors are actually genes on homologo us chromosome pairs. For
a gene that is expressed in a dominant and recessive pattern, homozygous dominant and heterozygous orga nisms will look identical
(that is, they will have different genotypes but the s ame phenotype). The recessive allele will only be obser ved in homozygous
recessive individuals (Table 1).1
2 1

14.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43730Table 1. Human Inheritance in Dominant and Recessive Pa tterns
Dominant Traits Recessive Traits
Achondroplasia Albinism
Brachydactyly Cystic fibrosis
Huntington’s disease Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Marfan syndrome Galactosemia
Neurofibromatosis Phenylketonuria
Widow’s peak Sickle-cell anemia
Wooly hair Tay-Sachs disease
Several conventions exist for referring to genes and a lleles. For the purposes of this chapter, we will abbrevi ate genes using the first
letter of the gene’s corresponding dominant trait. Fo r example, violet is the dominant trait for a pea pl ant’s flower color, so the
flower-color gene would be abbreviated as V (note that it is customary to italicize gene design ations). Furthermore, we will use
uppercase and lowercase letters to represent dominan t and recessive alleles, respectively. Therefore, we wou ld refer to the genotype
of a homozygous dominant pea plant with violet flower s as VV, a homozygous recessive pea plant with white flowers as vv, and a
heterozygous pea plant with violet flowers as Vv.
Punnett Square Approach for a Monohybrid Cross
When fertilization occurs between two true-breeding p arents that differ in only one characteristic, the p rocess is called a
monohybrid cross, and the resulting offspring are monohybrids. Mendel performed seven monohybrid crosses involving
contrasting traits for each characteristic. On the b asis of his results in F and F generations, Mendel po stulated that each parent in
the monohybrid cross contributed one of two paired un it factors to each offspring, and every possible combi nation of unit factors
was equally likely.
To demonstrate a monohybrid cross, consider the case of true-breeding pea plants with yellow versus green p ea seeds. The
dominant seed color is yellow; therefore, the parental genotypes were YY for the plants with yellow seeds and yy for the plants with
green seeds, respectively. A Punnett square, devised by the British geneticist Reginald Punnett, can be drawn that applies the rules
of probability to predict the possible outcomes of a genetic cross or mating and their expected frequenc ies. To prepare a Punnett
square, all possible combinations of the parental all eles are listed along the top (for one parent) and s ide (for the other parent) of a
grid, representing their meiotic segregation into hap loid gametes. Then the combinations of egg and sperm are made in the boxes in
the table to show which alleles are combining. Each bo x then represents the diploid genotype of a zygote, o r fertilized egg, that
could result from this mating. Because each possibil ity is equally likely, genotypic ratios can be dete rmined from a Punnett square.
If the pattern of inheritance (dominant or recessiv e) is known, the phenotypic ratios can be inferred a s well. For a monohybrid cross
of two true-breeding parents, each parent contributes one type of allele. In this case, only one genotype is possible. All offspring are
Yy and have yellow seeds (Figure 1).1 2

14.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43730
Figure 1. In the P generation, pea plants that are tr ue-breeding for the dominant yellow phenotype are c rossed with plants with the
recessive green phenotype. This cross produces F heterozy gotes with a yellow phenotype. Punnett square analysis can be used to
predict the genotypes of the F generation.
A self-cross of one of the Yy heterozygous offspring can be represented in a 2 × 2 Punnett square because each parent can donate
one of two different alleles. Therefore, the offspri ng can potentially have one of four allele combinat ions: YY, Yy, yY, or yy (Figure
1). Notice that there are two ways to obtain the Yy genotype: a Y from the egg and a y from the sperm, or a y from the egg and a Y
from the sperm. Both of these possibilities must be coun ted. Recall that Mendel’s pea-plant characteristics behaved in the same
way in reciprocal crosses. Therefore, the two possible heterozygous combinations produce offspring that ar e genotypically and
phenotypically identical despite their dominant and recessive alleles deriving from different parents. They are grouped together.
Because fertilization is a random event, we expect ea ch combination to be equally likely and for the off spring to exhibit a ratio of
YY:Yy:yy genotypes of 1:2:1 (Figure 1). Furthermore, because the YY and Yy offspring have yellow seeds and are phenotypically
identical, applying the sum rule of probability, we exp ect the offspring to exhibit a phenotypic ratio of 3 yellow:1 green. Indeed,
working with large sample sizes, Mendel observed approx imately this ratio in every F generation resulting f rom crosses for
individual traits.
Mendel validated these results by performing an F cros s in which he self-crossed the dominant- and recessive- expressing F
plants. When he self-crossed the plants expressing gr een seeds, all of the offspring had green seeds, confirmi ng that all green seeds
had homozygous genotypes of yy. When he self-crossed the F plants expressing yello w seeds, he found that one-third of the plants
bred true, and two-thirds of the plants segregated at a 3:1 ratio of yellow:green seeds. In this case, the tru e-breeding plants had
homozygous (YY) genotypes, whereas the segregating plants correspond ed to the heterozygous (Yy) genotype. When these plants
self-fertilized, the outcome was just like the F self-fe rtilizing cross.
Test Cross Distinguishes the Dominant Phenotype
Beyond predicting the offspring of a cross between kn own homozygous or heterozygous parents, Mendel also deve loped a way to
determine whether an organism that expressed a domin ant trait was a heterozygote or a homozygote. Called the test cross, this
technique is still used by plant and animal breeders. In a test cross, the dominant-expressing organism is crossed with an organism
that is homozygous recessive for the same characteri stic. If the dominant-expressing organism is a homozy gote, then all F
offspring will be heterozygotes expressing the domina nt trait (Figure 2). Alternatively, if the dominant e xpressing organism is a0
3 2

14.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43730heterozygote, the F offspring will exhibit a 1:1 ratio of heterozygotes and recessive homozygotes (Figure 2). The test cross further
validates Mendel’s postulate that pairs of unit factor s segregate equally.
Figure 2. A test cross can be performed to determine wh ether an organism expressing a dominant trait is a homo zygote or a
heterozygote.
In pea plants, round peas (R) are dominant to wrinkled peas (r). You do a test cross between a pea plant with wrinkled peas
(genotype rr) and a plant of unknown genotype that has round peas. You end up with three plants, all which have round pe as. From
this data, can you tell if the round pea parent plan t is homozygous dominant or heterozygous? If the rou nd pea parent plant is
heterozygous, what is the probability that a random sample of 3 progeny peas will all be round?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”837873″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”837873″]You cannot be sure if the p lant is homozygous or heterozygous as the data set is too small: by random
chance, all three plants might have acquired only th e dominant gene even if the recessive one is present. If the round pea parent is
heterozygous, there is a one-eighth probability that a r andom sample of three progeny peas will all be round.[/hi dden-answer]
Many human diseases are genetically inherited. A hea lthy person in a family in which some members suffer from a recessive
genetic disorder may want to know if he or she has the disease-causing gene and what risk exists of passing the disorder on to his
or her offspring. Of course, doing a test cross in hu mans is unethical and impractical. Instead, geneticists u se pedigree analysis to
study the inheritance pattern of human genetic diseases (Figure 3).1
Practice Question
Practice Question

14.4.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43730
Figure 3. Pedigree Analysis for Alkaptonuria
Alkaptonuria is a recessive genetic disorder in which two amino acids, phenylalanine and tyrosine, are not p roperly metabolized.
Affected individuals may have darkened skin and brown urine, and may suffer joint damage and other complic ations. In this
pedigree, individuals with the disorder are indicated in blue and have the genotype aa. Unaffected indivi duals are indicated in
yellow and have the genotype AA or Aa. Note that it is of ten possible to determine a person’s genotype from th e genotype of their
offspring. For example, if neither parent has the diso rder but their child does, they must be heterozygou s. Two individuals on the
pedigree have an unaffected phenotype but unknown ge notype. Because they do not have the disorder, they must have at least one
normal allele, so their genotype gets the “A?” designation.
What are the genotypes of the individuals labeled 1, 2 and 3?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”567889″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”567889″]Individual 1 has the genot ype aa. Individual 2 has the genotype Aa. Individual 3 has the genotype Aa.
[/hidden-answer]
When true-breeding or homozygous individuals that di ffer for a certain trait are crossed, all of the offs pring will be
heterozygotes for that trait. If the traits are inhe rited as dominant and recessive, the F offspring will all exhibit the same
phenotype as the parent homozygous for the dominant trait. If these heterozygous offspring are self-cross ed, the resulting F
offspring will be equally likely to inherit gametes carrying the dominant or recessive trait, giving ri se to offspring of which one
quarter are homozygous dominant, half are heterozygo us, and one quarter are homozygous recessive. Because homozygous
dominant and heterozygous individuals are phenotypi cally identical, the observed traits in the F offspri ng will exhibit a ratio
of three dominant to one recessive.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
14.4: Characteristics and Traits is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

14.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373114.5: Laws of Inheritance
Mendel generalized the results of his pea-plant exper iments into four postulates, some of which are sometim es called “laws,” that
describe the basis of dominant and recessive inherit ance in diploid organisms. As you will learn, more co mplex extensions of
Mendelism exist that do not exhibit the same F phenot ypic ratios (3:1). Nevertheless, these laws summarize t he basics of classical
genetics.
Pairs of Unit Factors, or Genes
Mendel proposed first that paired unit factors of her edity were transmitted faithfully from generation to generation by the
dissociation and reassociation of paired factors du ring gametogenesis and fertilization, respectively. After he crossed peas with
contrasting traits and found that the recessive trait resurfaced in the F generation, Mendel deduced that hereditary factors must be
inherited as discrete units. This finding contradicted th e belief at that time that parental traits were blended in the offspring.
Alleles Can Be Dominant or Recessive
Figure 1. The child in the photo expresses albinism, a r ecessive trait.
Mendel’s law of dominance states that in a heterozygote, one trait will conceal the presence of another trait for the same
characteristic. Rather than both alleles contributing to a phenotype, the dominant allele will be express ed exclusively. The recessive
allele will remain “latent” but will be transmitted t o offspring by the same manner in which the dominant al lele is transmitted. The
recessive trait will only be expressed by offspring th at have two copies of this allele (Figure 1), and these offspring will breed true
when self-crossed.
Since Mendel’s experiments with pea plants, other researc hers have found that the law of dominance does not a lways hold true.
Instead, several different patterns of inheritance have been found to exist, which we will explore this later in the m odule.
Equal Segregation of Alleles
Observing that true-breeding pea plants with contrastin g traits gave rise to F generations that all express ed the dominant trait and
F generations that expressed the dominant and recess ive traits in a 3:1 ratio, Mendel proposed the law of segregation. This law
states that paired unit factors (genes) must segregat e equally into gametes such that offspring have an e qual likelihood of inheriting
either factor. For the F generation of a monohybrid cross, the following three possible combinations of geno types could result:
homozygous dominant, heterozygous, or homozygous recess ive. Because heterozygotes could arise from two diffe rent pathways
(receiving one dominant and one recessive allele fro m either parent), and because heterozygotes and homo zygous dominant
individuals are phenotypically identical, the law supp orts Mendel’s observed 3:1 phenotypic ratio. The equa l segregation of alleles
is the reason we can apply the Punnett square to accu rately predict the offspring of parents with known ge notypes. The physical
basis of Mendel’s law of segregation is the first div ision of meiosis, in which the homologous chromosomes with their different
versions of each gene are segregated into daughter nuclei. The role of the meiotic segregation of chrom osomes in sexual
reproduction was not understood by the scientific communi ty during Mendel’s lifetime.
Independent Assortment
Mendel’s law of independent assortment states that genes do not influence each other with r egard to the sorting of alleles into
gametes, and every possible combination of alleles for every gene is equally likely to occur. The independe nt assortment of genes2

14.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43731can be illustrated by the dihybrid cross, a cross between two true-breeding parents that e xpress different traits for two
characteristics. Consider the characteristics of see d color and seed texture for two pea plants, one that has green, wrinkled seeds
(yyrr) and another that has yellow, round seeds (YYRR). Because each parent is homozygous, the law of segre gation indicates that
the gametes for the green/wrinkled plant all are yr, and the gametes for the yellow/round plant are all YR. Therefore, the F
generation of offspring all are YyRr (Figure 2).
Figure 2. This dihybrid cross of pea plants involves the genes for seed color and texture.
In pea plants, purple flowers (P) are dominant to white f lowers (p) and yellow peas (Y) are dominant to green pe as (y). What
are the possible genotypes and phenotypes for a cross between PpYY and ppYy pea plants? How many squares do you need to
do a Punnett square analysis of this cross?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”733053″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”733053″]The possible genotypes are PpYY, PpYy, ppYY, and ppYy. The former two genotypes would
result in plants with purple flowers and yellow peas, whi le the latter two genotypes would result in plants wit h white flowers
with yellow peas, for a 1:1 ratio of each phenotype. You only need a 2 × 2 Punnett square (four squares total) to do this
analysis because two of the alleles are homozygous.[/hi dden-answer]
For the F generation, the law of segregation requires that each gamete receive either an R allele or an r allele along with either a Y
allele or a y allele. The law of independent assortment states tha t a gamete into which an r allele sorted would be equally likely to
contain either a Y allele or a y allele. Thus, there are four equally likely gametes that can be formed when the YyRr heterozygote is
self-crossed, as follows: YR, Yr, yR, and yr. Arranging these gametes along the top and left of a 4 × 4 Punnett square (Figure 2)
gives us 16 equally likely genotypic combinations. Fr om these genotypes, we infer a phenotypic ratio of 9 r ound/yellow:3
round/green:3 wrinkled/yellow:1 wrinkled/green (Figure 2). These are the offspring ratios we would expect, as suming we
performed the crosses with a large enough sample size.
Because of independent assortment and dominance, the 9:3:3:1 dihybrid phenotypic ratio can be collapsed into two 3:1 ratios,
characteristic of any monohybrid cross that follows a dominant and recessive pattern. Ignoring seed color and considering only1
Practice Question

14.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43731seed texture in the above dihybrid cross, we would ex pect that three quarters of the F generation offspr ing would be round, and
one quarter would be wrinkled. Similarly, isolating onl y seed color, we would assume that three quarters of th e F offspring would
be yellow and one quarter would be green. The sorting of alleles for texture and color are independent e vents, so we can apply the
product rule. Therefore, the proportion of round and yellow F offspring is expected to be (3/4) × (3/4) = 9/16, and the proportion
of wrinkled and green offspring is expected to be (1 /4) × (1/4) = 1/16. These proportions are identical to those obtained using a
Punnett square. Round, green and wrinkled, yellow offspr ing can also be calculated using the product rule, a s each of these
genotypes includes one dominant and one recessive ph enotype. Therefore, the proportion of each is calcula ted as (3/4) × (1/4) =
3/16.
The law of independent assortment also indicates that a cross between yellow, wrinkled (YYrr) and green, round (yyRR) parents
would yield the same F and F offspring as in the YYRR x yyrr cross.
The physical basis for the law of independent assortm ent also lies in meiosis I, in which the different ho mologous pairs line up in
random orientations. Each gamete can contain any co mbination of paternal and maternal chromosomes (and therefore the genes on
them) because the orientation of tetrads on the metaphase p lane is random.
In pea plants, purple flowers (P) are dominant to white flowers (p) and yellow peas (Y) are dominant to green peas (y). What are
the possible genotypes and phenotypes for a cross betwe en PpYY and ppYy pea plants? How many squares do you nee d to do a
Punnett square analysis of this cross? The possible ge notypes are PpYY, PpYy, ppYY, and ppYy. The former two genoty pes would
result in plants with purple flowers and yellow peas, whi le the latter two genotypes would result in plants wit h white flowers with
yellow peas, for a 1:1 ratio of each phenotype. You o nly need a 2 × 2 Punnett square (four squares total) t o do this analysis because
two of the alleles are homozygous.
Forked-Line Method
When more than two genes are being considered, the Pu nnett-square method becomes unwieldy. For instance, exam ining a cross
involving four genes would require a 16 × 16 grid con taining 256 boxes. It would be extremely cumbersome t o manually enter
each genotype. For more complex crosses, the forked-line and probability methods are preferred.
To prepare a forked-line diagram for a cross between F heterozygotes resulting from a cross between AABBCC and aabbcc
parents, we first create rows equal to the number of genes being considered, and then segregate the allel es in each row on forked
lines according to the probabilities for individual monohybrid crosses (Figure 3). We then multiply the values along each forked
path to obtain the F offspring probabilities. Note t hat this process is a diagrammatic version of the pr oduct rule. The values along
each forked pathway can be multiplied because each ge ne assorts independently. For a trihybrid cross, the F p henotypic ratio is
27:9:9:9:3:3:3:1.
Figure 3. The forked-line method can be used to analy ze a trihybrid cross. Here, the probability for color in the F generation
occupies the top row (3 yellow:1 green). The probabi lity for shape occupies the second row (3 round:1 wrin ked), and the
probability for height occupies the third row (3 tal l:1 dwarf). The probability for each possible combina tion of traits is calculated by
multiplying the probability for each individual tra it. Thus, the probability of F offspring having yello w, round, and tall traits is 3 ×
3 × 3, or 27.2
1 2

14.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43731Probability Method
While the forked-line method is a diagrammatic appr oach to keeping track of probabilities in a cross, the probability method gives
the proportions of offspring expected to exhibit ea ch phenotype (or genotype) without the added visual as sistance. Both methods
make use of the product rule and consider the allele s for each gene separately. Earlier, we examined the p henotypic proportions for
a trihybrid cross using the forked-line method; now we will use the probability method to examine the geno typic proportions for a
cross with even more genes.
For a trihybrid cross, writing out the forked-line me thod is tedious, albeit not as tedious as using the Pun nett-square method. To
fully demonstrate the power of the probability metho d, however, we can consider specific genetic calculatio ns. For instance, for a
tetrahybrid cross between individuals that are hetero zygotes for all four genes, and in which all four ge nes are sorting
independently and in a dominant and recessive patter n, what proportion of the offspring will be expected t o be homozygous
recessive for all four alleles? Rather than writing o ut every possible genotype, we can use the probabilit y method. We know that for
each gene, the fraction of homozygous recessive offspr ing will be 1/4. Therefore, multiplying this fraction for each of the four
genes, (1/4) × (1/4) × (1/4) × (1/4), we determine that 1/256 of the offspring will be quadruply homozygous recess ive.
For the same tetrahybrid cross, what is the expected prop ortion of offspring that have the dominant phenotype at all four loci? We
can answer this question using phenotypic proportions, but let’s do it the hard way—using genotypic propor tions. The question
asks for the proportion of offspring that are 1) ho mozygous dominant at A or heterozygous at A, and 2) homozygous at B or
heterozygous at B, and so on. Noting the “or” and “and” in each circum stance makes clear where to apply the sum and product
rules. The probability of a homozygous dominant at A is 1/4 and the probability of a heterozygote at A is 1/2. The probability of the
homozygote or the heterozygote is 1/4 + 1/2 = 3/4 usi ng the sum rule. The same probability can be obtain ed in the same way for
each of the other genes, so that the probability of a dominant phenotype at A and B and C and D is, using the product rule, equal to
3/4 × 3/4 × 3/4 × 3/4, or 27/64. If you are ever un sure about how to combine probabilities, returning to the forked-line method
should make it clear.
Rules for Multihybrid Fertilization
Predicting the genotypes and phenotypes of offspring fr om given crosses is the best way to test your knowledg e of Mendelian
genetics. Given a multihybrid cross that obeys independ ent assortment and follows a dominant and recessive pattern, several
generalized rules exist; you can use these rules to che ck your results as you work through genetics calculatio ns (Table 1). To apply
these rules, first you must determine n, the number of heterozygous gene pairs (the number of genes segregating two alleles each).
For example, a cross between AaBb and AaBb heterozygotes has an n of 2. In contrast, a cross between AABb and AABb has an n of
1 because A is not heterozygous.
Table 1. General Rules for Multihybrid Crosses
General Rule Number of Heterozygous Gene Pairs
Number of different F gametes 2 n
Number of different F genotypes 3 n
Given dominant and recessive inheritance, the number of different
F phenotypes2n
Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent Assortment
Although all of Mendel’s pea characteristics behaved a ccording to the law of independent assortment, we now k now that some
allele combinations are not inherited independently of each other. Genes that are located on separate non- homologous
chromosomes will always sort independently. However, each chromosome contains hundreds or thousands of genes, organized
linearly on chromosomes like beads on a string. The segregation of alleles into gametes can be influenc ed by linkage, in which
genes that are located physically close to each othe r on the same chromosome are more likely to be inhe rited as a pair. However,
because of the process of recombination, or “crossover,” it is possible for two genes on the same chromosome to behave
independently, or as if they are not linked. To underst and this, let’s consider the biological basis of gene li nkage and recombination.1

14.5.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43731Homologous chromosomes possess the same genes in the sa me linear order. The alleles may differ on homologou s chromosome
pairs, but the genes to which they correspond do not. In preparation for the first division of meiosis, homo logous chromosomes
replicate and synapse. Like genes on the homologs al ign with each other. At this stage, segments of homologous chromosomes
exchange linear segments of genetic material (Figure 4). This process is called recombination, or crossover, a nd it is a common
genetic process. Because the genes are aligned during recombination, the gene order is not altered. Inste ad, the result of
recombination is that maternal and paternal alleles are combined onto the same chromosome. Across a given chromosome, several
recombination events may occur, causing extensive shuf fling of alleles.
Figure 4. The process of crossover, or recombination, oc curs when two homologous chromosomes align during meiosi s and
exchange a segment of genetic material. Here, the al leles for gene C were exchanged. The result is two rec ombinant and two nonrecombinant chromosomes.
When two genes are located in close proximity on the same chromosome, they are considered linked, and the ir alleles tend to be
transmitted through meiosis together. To exemplify th is, imagine a dihybrid cross involving flower color a nd plant height in which
the genes are next to each other on the chromosome. If one homologous chromosome has alleles for tall pl ants and red flowers, and
the other chromosome has genes for short plants and yellow flowers, then when the gametes are formed, the tall and red alleles will
go together into a gamete and the short and yellow al leles will go into other gametes. These are called the parental genotypes
because they have been inherited intact from the pa rents of the individual producing gametes. But unlik e if the genes were on
different chromosomes, there will be no gametes with ta ll and yellow alleles and no gametes with short and re d alleles. If you
create the Punnett square with these gametes, you will s ee that the classical Mendelian prediction of a 9:3:3:1 outcome of a
dihybrid cross would not apply. As the distance between two genes increases, the probability of one or more cro ssovers between
them increases, and the genes behave more like they are on separate chromosomes. Geneticists have used the proportion of
recombinant gametes (the ones not like the parents) as a measure of how far apart genes are on a chromos ome. Using this
information, they have constructed elaborate maps of ge nes on chromosomes for well-studied organisms, including h umans.
Mendel’s seminal publication makes no mention of linkag e, and many researchers have questioned whether he enc ountered linkage
but chose not to publish those crosses out of concer n that they would invalidate his independent assortm ent postulate. The garden
pea has seven chromosomes, and some have suggested that his choice of seven characteristics was not a coincid ence. However,
even if the genes he examined were not located on sep arate chromosomes, it is possible that he simply did n ot observe linkage
because of the extensive shuffling effects of recombin ation.

14.5.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43731To better appreciate the amount of labor and ingenu ity that went into Mendel’s experiments, proceed thro ugh one of Mendel’s
dihybrid crosses.
Question: What will be the offspring of a dihybrid cross?
Background: Consider that pea plants mature in one growing season, and you have access to a large garden in which you can
cultivate thousands of pea plants. There are severa l true-breeding plants with the following pairs of tra its: tall plants with
inflated pods, and dwarf plants with constricted pods. B efore the plants have matured, you remove the pollen- producing organs
from the tall/inflated plants in your crosses to preve nt self-fertilization. Upon plant maturation, the plant s are manually crossed
by transferring pollen from the dwarf/constricted plan ts to the stigmata of the tall/inflated plants.
Hypothesis: Both trait pairs will sort independently according to Mendelian laws. When the true-breeding parents are cr ossed,
all of the F offspring are tall and have inflated p ods, which indicates that the tall and inflated trai ts are dominant over the
dwarf and constricted traits, respectively. A self-cross o f the F heterozygotes results in 2,000 F progeny.
Test the hypothesis: Because each trait pair sorts independently, the rat ios of tall:dwarf and inflated:constricted are each
expected to be 3:1. The tall/dwarf trait pair is cal led T/t, and the inflated/constricted trait pair is designa ted I/i. Each member of
the F generation therefore has a genotype of TtIi. Construct a grid analogous to Figure 5, in which you cross two TtIi
individuals. Each individual can donate four combinat ions of two traits: TI, Ti, tI, or ti, meaning that there are 16 possibilities
of offspring genotypes. Because the T and I alleles are dominant, any individual having one or two of those alleles will express
the tall or inflated phenotypes, respectively, regardle ss if they also have a t or i allele. Only individuals that are tt or ii will
express the dwarf and constricted alleles, respectively. As shown in Figure 5, you predict that you will observe the following
offspring proportions: tall/inflated: tall/constric ted: dwarf/inflated: dwarf/constricted in a 9:3:3:1 ratio. Notice from the grid
that when considering the tall/dwarf and inflated/constri cted trait pairs in isolation, they are each inherited in 3:1 ratios.
Figure 5. This figure shows all possible combinations of o ffspring resulting from a dihybrid cross of pea plants t hat are
heterozygous for the tall/dwarf and inflated/constric ted alleles.
Test the hypothesis: You cross the dwarf and tall plants and then self-cro ss the offspring. For best results, this is repeated wit h
hundreds or even thousands of pea plants. What special preca utions should be taken in the crosses and in growing the plant s?
Analyze your data: You observe the following plant phenotypes in the F g eneration: 2706 tall/inflated, 930 tall/constricted, 8 88
dwarf/inflated, and 300 dwarf/constricted. Reduce these f indings to a ratio and determine if they are consis tent with Mendelian
laws.Testing the Hypothesis of Independent Assortment
1 2

14.5.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43731Form a conclusion: Were the results close to the expected 9:3:3:1 pheno typic ratio? Do the results support the prediction? Wh at
might be observed if far fewer plants were used, given that alleles segregate randomly into gametes? Try t o imagine growing that
many pea plants, and consider the potential for expe rimental error. For instance, what would happen if it was extremely windy one
day?
Mendel postulated that genes (characteristics) are in herited as pairs of alleles (traits) that behave in a dominant and recessive
pattern. Alleles segregate into gametes such that each gamete is equally likely to receive either one of t he two alleles present in
a diploid individual. In addition, genes are assorted into gametes independently of one another. That is, alleles are generally not
more likely to segregate into a gamete with a partic ular allele of another gene. A dihybrid cross demons trates independent
assortment when the genes in question are on differen t chromosomes or distant from each other on the same chromosome. For
crosses involving more than two genes, use the forked l ine or probability methods to predict offspring geno types and
phenotypes rather than a Punnett square.
Although chromosomes sort independently into gametes during meiosis, Mendel’s law of independent assortment refers to
genes, not chromosomes, and a single chromosome may car ry more than 1,000 genes. When genes are located in close
proximity on the same chromosome, their alleles tend to be inherited together. This results in offspring ra tios that violate
Mendel’s law of independent assortment. However, recombin ation serves to exchange genetic material on homolog ous
chromosomes such that maternal and paternal alleles m ay be recombined on the same chromosome. This is why al leles on a
given chromosome are not always inherited together. Recombination is a random event occurring anywhere on a chromosome.
Therefore, genes that are far apart on the same chromo some are likely to still assort independently because of recombination
events that occurred in the intervening chromosomal spa ce.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
14.5: Laws of Inheritance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

14.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373214.6: Heredity
Watch this video for a nice summary of Mendel’s contributi on to the field of genetics and how a genotype leads to a phen otype.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=486
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
Heredity: Crash Course Biology #9. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at: https://youtu.be/CBezq1fFUEA. License: All
Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
14.6: Heredity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373314.7: Introduction to Beyond Dominance and Recessiveness
Explain complications to the phenotypic expression of genotype, including mutations
Mendel’s experiments with pea plants suggested the followi ng:
1. Two “units” or alleles exist for every gene.
2. Alleles maintain their integrity in each generation (no blending).
3. In the presence of the dominant allele, the recessive a llele is hidden and makes no contribution to the phenotype.
Therefore, recessive alleles can be “carried” and no t expressed by individuals. Such heterozygous individu als are sometimes
referred to as “carriers.” Further genetic studies in ot her plants and animals have shown that much more compl exity exists, but that
the fundamental principles of Mendelian genetics stil l hold true. In the sections to follow, we consider so me of the extensions of
Mendelism. If Mendel had chosen an experimental system that exhibited these genetic complexities, it’s possible that he would not
have understood what his results meant.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Explain how a trait with incomplete dominance will appear in a population
Explain how a trait with codominant inheritance will appear i n a population
Explain how a trait with sex-linkage will appear in a populat ion
Explain how mutli-allele inheritance will impact a trai t within in a population
Describe the impacts of penetrance and expressivity on a trait’s expression in a population
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Variations of Dominance
Sex-Linked Traits
Multiple Alleles
Penetrance and Expressivity
Self Check: Beyond Dominance and Recessiveness
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
14.7: Introduction to Beyond Dominance and Recessiven ess is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

14.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373414.8: Non-Mendelian Inheritance
Incomplete Dominance
Figure 1. These pink flowers of a heterozygote snapdrag on result from incomplete dominance. (credit: “storeb ukkebruse”/Flickr)
Mendel’s results, that traits are inherited as dominant and recessive pairs, contradicted the view at that t ime that offspring exhibited
a blend of their parents’ traits. However, the heterozyg ote phenotype occasionally does appear to be interme diate between the two
parents. For example, in the snapdragon, Antirrhinum majus (Figure 1), a cross between a homozygous parent with wh ite flowers
(C C) and a homozygous parent with red flowers (C C) will produce offspring with pink flowers (C C). (Note that different
genotypic abbreviations are used for Mendelian exten sions to distinguish these patterns from simple domin ance and recessiveness.)
This pattern of inheritance is described as incomplete dominance, denoting the expression of two contrasting alleles such that the
individual displays an intermediate phenotype. The allele for red flowers is incompletely dominant over t he allele for white
flowers. However, the results of a heterozygote self-cros s can still be predicted, just as with Mendelian domina nt and recessive
crosses. In this case, the genotypic ratio would be 1 C C:2 C C:1 C C, and the phenotypic ratio would be 1:2:1 for
red:pink:white.
Incomplete dominance can be seen in several types of f lowers, including pink tulips, carnations and roses— any pink flowers in
these are due to the mixing of red and white alleles. Incomplete dominance can also be observed in some a nimals, such as rabbits.
When a long-furred Angora breeds with a short-furred R ex, the offspring have medium-length fur. Tail leng th in dogs is similarly
impacted by genes that display incomplete dominance patter ns.
Codominant Inheritance
Figure 2. Red Roan Horse
A variation on incomplete dominance is codominance, in which both alleles for the same characteristic a re simultaneously
expressed in the heterozygote. An example of codominan ce is the MN blood groups of humans. The M and N alleles are expressed
in the form of an M or N antigen present on the surfa ce of red blood cells. Homozygotes (L L and L L) express either the M or
the N allele, and heterozygotes (L L) express both alleles equally. In a self-cross betwee n heterozygotes expressing a codominantW W R R R W
R R R W W W
M M N N
M N

14.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43734trait, the three possible offspring genotypes are phen otypically distinct. However, the 1:2:1 genotypic rati o characteristic of a
Mendelian monohybrid cross still applies.
Codominance can also be seen in human blood types: t he AB blood type is a result of both the I allele and the I allele being
codominant. The roan coat color in horses is also a n example of codominance. A “red” roan results from the mating of a chestnut
parent and a white parent (Figure 2). We know this is codominance because individual hairs are either che stnut or they are white,
leading to the red roan overall appearance.
So what’s the difference between incomplete dominance and codominant inheritance? While they are very sim ilar, the key
difference is this: in incomplete dominance, the two traits are blended together, whereas in codominance, both traits are
expressed.
We’ve already discussed incomplete dominance in flowers (Figure 1). What do you think a flower would look like if the red
and white phenotypes were codominant instead?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”528012″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”528012″]The flower would have both red a nd white petals, like this Rhododendron:
Figure 3. Codominance is shown in this rhododendron.
[/hidden-answer]
Sex-Linked Traits
In humans, as well as in many other animals and some plants, the sex of the individual is determined by sex chromosomes. The sex
chromosomes are one pair of non-homologous chromosom es. Until now, we have only considered inheritance patt erns among nonsex chromosomes, or autosomes. In addition to 22 homologous pairs of autosomes, hu man females have a homologous pair of X
chromosomes, whereas human males have an XY chromosome pair. Although the Y chromosome contains a small regio n of
similarity to the X chromosome so that they can pair during meiosis, the Y chromosome is much shorter and con tains many fewer
genes. When a gene being examined is present on the X chromos ome, but not on the Y chromosome, it is said to be X-linked.A B
Practice Question

14.8.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43734
Figure 4. In Drosophila, the gene for eye color is loc ated on the X chromosome. Clockwise from top left are brown, cinnabar,
sepia, vermilion, white, and red. Red eye color is wi ld-type and is dominant to white eye color.
Eye color in Drosophila was one of the first X-linked traits to be identified. Thomas Hunt Morgan mapped this trait to the X
chromosome in 1910. Like humans, Drosophila males have an XY chromosome pair, and females are XX. In flies, the wild-type
eye color is red (X) and it is dominant to white eye color (X) (Figure 4). Because of the location of the eye-color gene,
reciprocal crosses do not produce the same offspring ratios. Males are said to be hemizygous, because they have only one allele for
any X-linked characteristic. Hemizygosity makes the desc riptions of dominance and recessiveness irrelevant f or XY males.
Drosophila males lack a second allele copy on the Y chromosome; that is, their genotype can only be X Y or X Y. In co ntrast,
females have two allele copies of this gene and can be X X, X X, or X X.
In an X-linked cross, the genotypes of F and F offspr ing depend on whether the recessive trait was express ed by the male or the
female in the P generation. With regard to Drosophila eye color, when the P male expresses the white-eye phen otype and the
female is homozygous red-eyed, all members of the F ge neration exhibit red eyes. The F females are hetero zygous (X X), and
the males are all X Y, having received their X chromo some from the homozygous dominant P female and their Y chromosome
from the P male. A subsequent cross between the X X fem ale and the X Y male would produce only red-eyed fema les (with
X X or X X genotypes) and both red- and white-eyed male s (with X Y or X Y genotypes). Now, consider a cross betwee n a
homozygous white-eyed female and a male with red eyes (Figure 5). The F generation would exhibit only heter ozygous red-eyed
females (X X) and only white-eyed males (X Y). Half of the F females would be red-eyed (X X) and half would be whi teeyed (X X). Similarly, half of the F males would be red-eye d (X Y) and half would be white-eyed (X Y).W w
W w
W W W w w w
1 2
0 0
1 1W w
W0
0W w W
W W W w W w
W w w
2W w
w w
2W w

14.8.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43734Practice Question
Figure 5. Punnett square analysis is used to determine the ratio of offspring from a cross between a red-eyed ma le fruit fly and a
white-eyed female fruit fly.
What ratio of offspring would result from a cross between a whi te-eyed male and a female that is heterozygous for red ey e color?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”722618″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”722618″]Half of the female offsprin g would be heterozygous (X X) with red eyes, and half wou ld be
homozygous recessive (X X) with white eyes. Half of the m ale offspring would be hemizygous dominant (X Y) with re d yes,
and half would be hemizygous recessive (X Y) with white eyes.[/hidden-answer]
Discoveries in fruit fly genetics can be applied to human genetics. When a female parent is homozygous for a recessive X-linked
trait, she will pass the trait on to 100 percent of he r offspring. Her male offspring are, therefore, destine d to express the trait, as they
will inherit their father’s Y chromosome. In humans, th e alleles for certain conditions (some forms of color blindness, hemophilia,
and muscular dystrophy) are X-linked. Females who are heterozygous for these diseases are said to be carrie rs and may not exhibit
any phenotypic effects. These females will pass the di sease to half of their sons and will pass carrier statu s to half of their
daughters; therefore, recessive X-linked traits appear mor e frequently in males than females.
In some groups of organisms with sex chromosomes, the g ender with the non-homologous sex chromosomes is the f emale rather
than the male. This is the case for all birds. In this case, sex-linked traits will be more likely to appear in the female, in which they
are hemizygous.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Modification and original content. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License:
CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previouslyW w
w w W
w

14.8.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43734Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Co-dominance Rhododendron. Authored by: darwin cruz. Located at: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Codominance_Rhododendron.jpg. License: CC BY: Attribution
Red roan Quarter Horse. Authored by: Betty Wills. Provided by: Wikimedia Commons. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Red_roan_Quarter_Ho rse.jpg. License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
14.8: Non-Mendelian Inheritance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373514.9: Non-Mendelian Punnett Squares
This practice activity will help you remember the dif ference between types of non-Mendelian inheritance an d remember just how
they work.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Click here for a text-only version of the activity.
Video Review
Watch this video for a summary of the three “special” cas es of non-Mendelian inheritance you just practiced.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Non-Mendelian Punnett Squares. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License:
CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Non-Mendelian Trait Inheritance. Provided by: Lumen Learning. Located at: www.oppia.org/explore/huVa7Jm_04aL.
License: CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
All rights reserved content
Incomplete Dominance, Codominance, and Sex-Linked. Authored by: MissKmetBioClass. Located at:
https://youtu.be/fQvER3MyI2c. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
14.9: Non-Mendelian Punnett Squares is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371414.10: Multiple Alleles
Mendel implied that only two alleles, one dominant and one recessive, could exist for a given gene. We now k now that this is an
oversimplification. Although individual humans (and a ll diploid organisms) can only have two alleles for a given gene, multiple
alleles may exist at the population level such that many comb inations of two alleles are observed. Note that when many alleles exist
for the same gene, the convention is to denote the m ost common phenotype or genotype among wild animals as the wild type
(often abbreviated “+”); this is considered the stan dard or norm. All other phenotypes or genotypes are co nsidered variants of this
standard, meaning that they deviate from the wild type. Th e variant may be recessive or dominant to the wild-typ e allele.
An example of multiple alleles is coat color in rabbi ts (Figure 1). Here, four alleles exist for the c gene. The wild-type version,
C C, is expressed as brown fur. The chinchilla phenotype, c c, is expressed as black-tipped white fur. The Himalaya n
phenotype, c c, has black fur on the extremities and white fur elsewh ere. Finally, the albino, or “colorless” phenotype, cc, is
expressed as white fur. In cases of multiple alleles, d ominance hierarchies can exist. In this case, the wil d-type allele is dominant
over all the others, chinchilla is incompletely domi nant over Himalayan and albino, and Himalayan is domi nant over albino. This
hierarchy, or allelic series, was revealed by observing th e phenotypes of each possible heterozygote offspring.
Figure 1. Four different alleles exist for the rabbit c oat color (C) gene.
Figure 2. As seen in comparing the wild-type Drosophila (left) and the Antennapedia mutant (right), the Antennapedia mutant has
legs on its head in place of antennae.
The complete dominance of a wild-type phenotype over all other mutants often occurs as an effect of “dosag e” of a specific gene
product, such that the wild-type allele supplies the correct amount of gene product whereas the mutant alle les cannot. For the allelic+ + ch ch
h h

14.10.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43714series in rabbits, the wild-type allele may supply a giv en dosage of fur pigment, whereas the mutants supply a lesser dosage or none
at all. Interestingly, the Himalayan phenotype is the result of an allele that produces a temperature-sens itive gene product that only
produces pigment in the cooler extremities of the rabbit’ s body.
Alternatively, one mutant allele can be dominant over all other phenotypes, including the wild type. This may occur when the
mutant allele somehow interferes with the genetic mess age so that even a heterozygote with one wild-type all ele copy expresses the
mutant phenotype. One way in which the mutant allele c an interfere is by enhancing the function of the wild -type gene product or
changing its distribution in the body.
One example of this is the Antennapedia mutation in Drosophila (Figure 2). In this case, the mutant allele expands the distribution
of the gene product, and as a result, the Antennapedia heterozygote develops legs on its head where its antenna e should be.
Multiple Alleles Confer Drug Resistance in the Malaria Parasite
Malaria is a parasitic disease in humans that is transm itted by infected female mosquitoes, including Anopheles gambiae (Figure
3a), and is characterized by cyclic high fevers, chi lls, flu-like symptoms, and severe anemia. Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax
are the most common causative agents of malaria, and P. falciparum is the most deadly (Figure 3b). When promptly and correctly
treated, P. falciparum malaria has a mortality rate of 0.1 percent. However, i n some parts of the world, the parasite has evolved
resistance to commonly used malaria treatments, so the mo st effective malarial treatments can vary by geographic r egion.
Figure 3. The (a) Anopheles gambiae, or African malar ia mosquito, acts as a vector in the transmission to huma ns of the malariacausing parasite (b) Plasmodium falciparum, here visual ized using false-color transmission electron microscopy. (credit a: James D.
Gathany; credit b: Ute Frevert; false color by Marga ret Shear; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
In Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America, P. falciparum has developed resistance to the anti-malarial drug s chloroquine,
mefloquine, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. P. falciparum, which is haploid during the life stage in which it is infectious to
humans, has evolved multiple drug-resistant mutant al leles of the dhps gene. Varying degrees of sulfadoxine resistance are
associated with each of these alleles. Being haploid, P. falciparum needs only one drug-resistant allele to express this t rait.
In Southeast Asia, different sulfadoxine-resistant allele s of the dhps gene are localized to different geographic regions. This is a
common evolutionary phenomenon that occurs because d rug-resistant mutants arise in a population and int erbreed with other P.
falciparum isolates in close proximity. Sulfadoxine-resistant p arasites cause considerable human hardship in regions where this
drug is widely used as an over-the-counter malaria r emedy. As is common with pathogens that multiply to lar ge numbers within an
infection cycle, P. falciparum evolves relatively rapidly (over a decade or so) i n response to the selective pressure of commonly
used anti-malarial drugs. For this reason, scientists mu st constantly work to develop new drugs or drug combina tions to combat the
worldwide malaria burden.[1]

14.10.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43714Multiple Alleles (ABO Blood Types) and Punnett Squares
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=494
1. Sumiti Vinayak, et al., "Origin and Evolution of Sulfadox ine Resistant Plasmodium falciparum," Public Library of Science
Pathogens 6, no. 3 (2010): e1000830, doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.100 0830. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Multiple Alleles (ABO Blood Types) and Punnett Squares. Authored by: Amoeba Sisters. Located at:
https://youtu.be/9O5JQqlngFY. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
14.10: Multiple Alleles is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371614.11: Introduction to Heredity and Disease
Explain the conventions of a family pedigree and predict whether a disease will be passed through a
family in one of three modes
Over the years, we’ve seen that some diseases are here ditary. In this outcome, we’ll learn just how some disea ses can be passed
through a family line.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Understand why geneticists use pedigrees to track human d iseases
Understand how a pedigree analysis is used to identify the inheritance pattern of a genetic disorder
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Pedigrees and Disease
Pedigree Flowchart
Genetic Disorder and Pedigrees
Self Check: Heredity and Disease
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
14.11: Introduction to Heredity and Disease is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371514.12: Penetrance and Expressivity
Penetrance refers to the probability of a gene or trait be ing expressed. In some cases, despite the presence of a dominan t allele, a phenotype may not be present. One example of t his is polydactyly in
humans (extra fingers and/or toes). A dominant allele produce s polydactyly in humans but not all humans with the allele display the extra digits. “Complete” penetrance means the gene or genes for
a trait are expressed in all the population who have the g enes. “Incomplete” or ‘reduced’ penetrance means the genet ic trait is expressed in only part of the population. The pene trance of expression
may also change in different age groups of a population. Re duced penetrance probably results from a combination of gen etic, environmental, and lifestyle factors, many of which are unknown. This
phenomenon can make it challenging for genetics professionals to i nterpret a person’s family medical history and predict the risk o f passing a genetic condition to future generations.
Illustration modeled after similar image by Steven M. Carr, Penetrance versus expressivity.
Expressivity on the other hand refers to variation in phenotypi c expression when an allele is penetrant. Back to the polyda ctyly example, an extra digit may occur on one or more app endages. The
digit can be full size or just a stub. Hence, this allele has reduced penetrance as well as variable expressivity. Variable expressivity refers to the range of signs and symptoms that ca n occur in
different people with the same genetic condition. As with reduc ed penetrance, variable expressivity is probably caused by a comb ination of genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors, most of
which have not been identified. If a genetic condition has highly va riable signs and symptoms, it may be challenging to diagnose.
Illustration modeled after similar image by Steven M. Carr, Penetrance versus expressivity.
For more information about reduced penetrance and variable ex pressivity take a look at the interactive tutorial on penetrance the PHG Foundation offers. The tutorial explains the differences
between reduced penetrance and variable expressivity.
Variable Expressivity and Incomplete Penetrance
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the bottom of thi s page.
You can view the transcript for “Variable Expressivity and Incomplete Penet rance” here (link opens in new window).
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
Variable Expressivity and Incomplete Penetrance. Authored by: Learning Simply. Located at: https://youtu.be/1XW-j3VQGRY. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard
YouTube License
Public domain content
What are reduced penetrance and variable expressivity?. Provided by: National Institutes of Health. Located at: http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/handbook/inheritance/penetranceexpr essivity. Project:
Genetics Home Reference. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
14.12: Penetrance and Expressivity is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Lib reTexts.

14.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371714.13: Pedigrees and Disease
Health care professionals have known for a long time t hat common diseases—like heart disease, cancer, and di abetes—and even
rare diseases—like hemophilia, cystic fibrosis, and sickle cell anemia—can run in families. If one gener ation of a family has high
blood pressure, it is not unusual for the next genera tion to have similarly high blood pressure. Therefore, family history can be a
powerful screening tool and has often been referred to as the best “genetic test.”
Both common diseases and rare diseases can run in fam ilies. Therefore, family history can be a powerful sc reening tool. Family
history should be updated on each visit and patients shou ld be made aware of its significance to their health.
Importance of Family History
Family history holds important information about an individual’s past and future life. Family history can be used as a diagnostic
tool and help guide decisions about genetic testing for the patient and at-risk family members. If a fam ily is affected by a disease,
an accurate family history will be important to esta blish a pattern of transmission. In addition, a family history can even help to
exclude genetic diseases, particularly for common disea ses in which lifestyle and environment play strong r oles. Lastly, a family
history can identify potential health problems that an individual may be at increased risk for in the future. Early identification of
increased risk can allow the individual and health pr ofessional to take steps to reduce risk by implementin g lifestyle changes and
increasing disease surveillance.
While many of the well-known genetic disorders are of childhood onset, many complex, adult-onset conditi ons can also run in
families. For example, about 5 to 10 percent of all b reast cancers are hereditary. These cancers may be cau sed by mutations in
particular genes, such as BRCA1 or BRCA2. An individual m ay be at high risk of hereditary breast cancer and g enetic testing
should be considered if her family history includes more than one first-degree (mother, sister, or daught er) or second-degree
relative (aunt, grandmother, or niece) with breast or ovarian cancer, particularly if the diagnosis of br east or ovarian cancer in those
relatives was at a young age (50 or younger).
Another example of an adult-onset disease that can be inherited is Alzheimer’s disease. Although most of Alzh eimer’s disease cases
are sporadic, a small number are hereditary. Heredita ry Alzheimer’s disease is an extremely aggressive form of the disease and
typically manifests before the age of 65. Three genes that cause early-onset Alzheimer’s disease have been identif ied.
Notwithstanding the importance of family history to h elp define occurrence of a genetic disorder within a family, it should be noted
that some genetic diseases are caused by spontaneous m utations, such as for single gene disorders like Duche nne muscular
dystrophy and hemophilia A, as well as for most cases of Down syndrome, chromosomal deletion syndromes, and ot her
chromosomal disorders. Therefore, a genetic disorder ca nnot be ruled out in the absence of a family history.
How to Take a Family Medical History
A basic family history should include three generat ions. To begin taking a family history, start by aski ng the patient about his/her
health history and then ask about siblings and parents. Que stions should include:
1. General information such as names and birthdates
2. Family’s origin or racial/ethnic background
3. Health status
4. Age at death and cause of death of each family member
5. Pregnancy outcomes of the patient and genetically-relat ed relatives It may be easier to list all the members of t he nuclear family
first and then go back and ask about the health status of each one. After you have taken the family history of the patient’s closest
relatives, go back one generation at a time and ask about aunts, uncles, grandparents, and first cousins.
Pedigrees
One way to record a family history is by drawing a fami ly tree called a “pedigree.” A pedigree represents fa mily members and
relationships using standardized symbols (see below). As p atients relate information to you about their family history, a pedigree
can be drawn much quicker than recording the informa tion in writing and allows patterns of disease to emerg e as the pedigree is
drawn. Since the family history is continually changing, the pedigree can be easily updated on future visit s. Patients should be
encouraged to record information and update their famil y history regularly.

14.13.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43717
The sample pedigree below contains information such as age or date of birth (and, for all deceased family members, age at death
and cause of death), major medical problems with age of onset, birth defects, learning problems and mental retardation, and vision
loss/hearing loss at a young age. For family members with known medical problems, ask whether they smoke, what their diet and
exercise habits are if known, and if they are overweight.
[reveal-answer q=”724528″]Show References[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”724528″]

14.13.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43717American Society for Human Genetics. (2004). Your Family History. www.ashg.org/genetics/ashg/educ/007.shtml.
Bennett RL. The Practical Guide to the Genetic Family History. New York: Wiley-Liss, Inc. 1999.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Office of Gen omics and Disease Prevention. Using Family History to Promote Health.
www.cdc.gov/genomics/public/famhistMain.htm.
Genetic Alliance. (2004). Taking a Family History. www.geneticalliance.org/ws_di...asp?filter=fhh.
March of Dimes–Genetics and Your Practice. http://www.marchofdimes.com/gyponline/index.bm2.
My Family Health Portrait. familyhistory.genome.gov.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2004) U.S. Surgeon General’ s Family History Initiative.
http://www.hhs.gov/familyhistory/.
[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Chapter 3: Pedigree and Family History Taking. Authored by: Genetic Alliance. Provided by: National Center for
Biotechnology Information. Located at: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK132175/. Project: Understanding Genetics: A New
England Guide for Patients and Health Professionals. License: CC BY: Attribution
14.13: Pedigrees and Disease is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371814.14: Pedigree Flowchart
Watch this video to understand the basics of conducti ng a pedigree analysis of a human genetic disorder. At the end, you should
feel comfortable with the basic steps used to conduct a p edigree investigation.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
Pedigree Flowchart. Authored by: Biologybyme's channel. Located at: https://youtu.be/z0cwhooDZ0M. License: All Rights
Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
14.14: Pedigree Flowchart is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4371914.15: Genetic Disorder and Pedigrees
The following video provides a summary of all you ha ve just learned about pedigrees, including differences in family inheritance
patterns based on autosomal dominant, autosomal recessiv e, or sex-linked inheritance of a particular characteristi c.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
Video Lecture: 9-3 Genetic Disorder and Pedigrees. Authored by: jlambbio. Located at: https://youtu.be/-Su7OAqU72U.
License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
14.15: Genetic Disorder and Pedigrees is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372014.16: Introduction to Genetics and the Environment
Discuss the role environment plays on phenotypes
In recent years, scientists have begun to research how o ur environment can impact our phenotypes. In this out come, we’ll learn
about a few different ways our environment can impact us.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Explain how epistasis impacts trait expression
Describe polygenic inheritance and how to recognize it
Describe continuous variation and how to recognize it
Identify gene-environment interaction and how this im pacts trait expression
Explain pleiotropy and its impact on traits in a population
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Epistasis
Polygenic Inheritance and Environmental Effects
Effect of the Environment
Pleiotropy and Human Disorders
Self Check: Genetics and the Environment
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
14.16: Introduction to Genetics and the Environment is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

14.17.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372114.17: Epistasis
Mendel’s studies in pea plants implied that the sum of an individual’s phenotype was controlled by genes (o r as he called them, unit
factors), such that every characteristic was distinc tly and completely controlled by a single gene. In f act, single observable
characteristics are almost always under the influence of multiple genes (each with two or more alleles) ac ting in unison. For
example, at least eight genes contribute to eye color in humans.
Eye color in humans is determined by multiple genes. Us e the Eye Color Calculator to predict the eye color of children from
parental eye color.
In some cases, several genes can contribute to aspec ts of a common phenotype without their gene products ever directly interacting.
In the case of organ development, for instance, genes may be expressed sequentially, with each gene adding to the complexity and
specificity of the organ. Genes may function in compl ementary or synergistic fashions, such that two or mo re genes need to be
expressed simultaneously to affect a phenotype. Genes may also oppose each other, with one gene modifying the expression of
another.
In epistasis, the interaction between genes is antagonis tic, such that one gene masks or interferes with the ex pression of another.
“Epistasis” is a word composed of Greek roots that mea n “standing upon.” The alleles that are being masked or silenced are said to
be hypostatic to the epistatic alleles that are doin g the masking. Often the biochemical basis of epistasis i s a gene pathway in which
the expression of one gene is dependent on the function of a gene that precedes or follows it in the pathway.
An example of epistasis is pigmentation in mice. The wi ld-type coat color, agouti (AA), is dominant to solid-colored fur (aa).
However, a separate gene (C) is necessary for pigment production. A mouse with a recessive c allele at this locus is unable to
produce pigment and is albino regardless of the alle le present at locus A (Figure 1). Therefore, the genotypes AAcc, Aacc, and aacc
all produce the same albino phenotype. A cross betwe en heterozygotes for both genes (AaCc x AaCc) would generate offspring
with a phenotypic ratio of 9 agouti:3 solid color:4 albin o (Figure 1). In this case, the C gene is epistatic to the A gene.

14.17.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43721
Figure 1. In mice, the mottled agouti coat color (A) is dominant to a solid coloration, such as black or g ray. A gene at a separate
locus (C) is responsible for pigment production. The recessive c allele does not produce pigment, and a mouse with th e
homozygous recessive cc enotype is albino regardless of the allele present at the A locus. Thus, the C gene is epistatic to the A
gene.
Epistasis can also occur when a dominant allele masks expression at a separate gene. Fruit color in summer s quash is expressed in
this way. Homozygous recessive expression of the W gene (ww) coupled with homozygous dominant or heterozygous ex pression of
the Y gene (YY or Yy) generates yellow fruit, and the wwyy genotype produces green fruit. However, if a dominan t copy of the W
gene is present in the homozygous or heterozygous fo rm, the summer squash will produce white fruit regard less of the Y alleles. A
cross between white heterozygotes for both genes (WwYy × WwYy) would produce offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 12 white:3
yellow:1 green.
Finally, epistasis can be reciprocal such that either g ene, when present in the dominant (or recessive) form, expresses the same
phenotype. In the shepherd’s purse plant (Capsella bursa-pastoris), the characteristic of seed shape is controlled by two genes in a
dominant epistatic relationship. When the genes A and B are both homozygous recessive (aabb), the seeds are ovoid. If the
dominant allele for either of these genes is present, the result is triangular seeds. That is, every possi ble genotype other than aabb
results in triangular seeds, and a cross between hetero zygotes for both genes (AaBb x AaBb) would yield offspring with a
phenotypic ratio of 15 triangular:1 ovoid.
As you work through genetics problems, keep in mind that any single characteristic that results in a phenotyp ic ratio that totals 16
is typical of a two-gene interaction. Recall the phe notypic inheritance pattern for Mendel’s dihybrid c ross, which considered two

14.17.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43721non-interacting genes—9:3:3:1. Similarly, we would expe ct interacting gene pairs to also exhibit ratios exp ressed as 16 parts. Note
that we are assuming the interacting genes are not lin ked; they are still assorting independently into gametes.
For an excellent review of Mendel’s experiments and to perfo rm your own crosses and identify patterns of inheritance, visi t the
Mendel’s Peas web lab.
Whether or not they are sorting independently, genes may interact at the level of gene products such th at the expression of an allele
for one gene masks or modifies the expression of an allel e for a different gene. This is called epistasis.
In Summary: Epistasis
Epistasis is a form on non-Mendelian inheritance in whi ch one gene is capable of interfering with expression of another. This is
often found associated with gene pathways where the exp ression of one gene is directly dependent on the pre sence or absence of
another gene product within the pathway.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Epistasis!. Authored by: Science Club!. Located at: https://youtu.be/ctjw-ZijciM. License: All Rights Reserved. License
Terms: Standard YouTube License
14.17: Epistasis is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.18.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372214.18: Polygenic Inheritance and Environmental Effects
How is Height Inherited?
Many heritable human characteristics don’t seem to fol low Mendelian rules in their inheritance patterns. For example, consider
human height. Unlike a simple Mendelian characteristic, h uman height displays:
Continuous variation. Unlike Mendel’s pea plants, humans don’t come in two clear -cut “tall” and “short” varieties. In fact,
they don’t even come in four heights, or eight, or sixte en. Instead, it’s possible to get humans of many different heights, and
height can vary in increments of inches or fractions of in ches. As an example, consider the bell curve-shaped graph i n Figure 1,
which shows the heights of a group of male high school senior s.
A complex inheritance pattern. If you’ve paid attention to the heights of your friends and family, you may have noticed that
many different patterns of inheritance are possible. T all parents can have a short child, short parents can have a tall child, and
two parents of different heights may or may not have a c hild of intermediate height. In addition, siblings with the same two
parents may have a range of heights, ones that don’t fa ll into clear, distinct categories. Simple models involvi ng one or two
genes can’t accurately predict all of these inheritance patterns.
Figure 1. Heights of male high school seniors. Image mod ified from “Continuous variation: Quantitative trait s,” by J. W. Kimball
(CC BY 3.0).
How, then, is height inherited? Height and other simila r features are controlled not just by one gene, but rather, by multiple (often
many) genes that each make a small contribution to t he overall outcome. This inheritance pattern is call ed polygenic inheritance
(poly– = many). For instance, a recent study found over 400 genes linked to variation in height. When there are large numbers of
genes involved, it becomes hard to distinguish the ef fect of each individual gene, and even harder to see that gene variants (alleles)
are inherited according to Mendelian rules. In a fur ther complication, height doesn’t just depend on gene tics: it also depends a lot
on environmental factors, such as a child’s overall h ealth and the type of nutrition he or she receives while gr owing up.
In this article, we’ll look in more detail at how com plex human traits such as height are inherited, as we ll as how factors like
genetic background and environment can influence th e phenotype (observable features) produced by a particular genotype (set of
gene variants, or alleles).
Polygenic Inheritance
Some human characteristics, such as height, eye color, and hair color, don’t come in just a few distinct for ms. Instead, they vary in
small gradations, forming a spectrum or continuum o f possible phenotypes. Features like these are called q uantitative characters,
and they’re typically controlled by multiple genes (often, many genes), each of which contributes to the over all phenotype. For
example, although there are two major eye color gene s, there are at least 14 additional genes that play roles in determining a
person’s exact eye color.
Looking at a real example of a human polygenic trai t would get complicated, largely because we’d have to keep track of tens, or
even hundreds, of different allele pairs. However, we ca n use an example involving the color of wheat kernels to see how
Mendelian inheritance of multiple genes (plus a litt le incomplete dominance of alleles) can produce a b road spectrum of
phenotypes. In this example, there are three genes t hat make reddish pigment in wheat kernels, which we’ll call A, B, and C.
Each comes in two alleles, one of which makes a unit o f pigment (the capital-letter allele) and one of whi ch does not make any
pigment (the lowercase allele). Thus, the aa genotype would contribute zero units of pigment, the Aa genotype would contribute
one unit, and the AA genotype would contribute two—basically, a form of incom plete dominance.[1]
[2]
[3]

14.18.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43722
Now, let’s imagine that two plants heterozygous for all three genes (AaBbCc) were crossed to one another (or, equivalently, allo wed
to self-fertilize). Each of the parent plants would h ave three units of pigment, or pinkish kernels. The ir offspring, however, could
display seven different categories of phenotypes, rang ing from zero units of pigment (aabbcc) and pure white kernels to six units of
pigment (AABBCC) and dark red kernels, with the intermediate phenotypes b eing most common.
This example illustrates how we can get a spectrum of sl ightly different phenotypes (something approaching continuous variation)
with just three genes whose alleles display incomplet e dominance. It’s not hard to imagine that, as we in creased the number of
genes involved, we’d be able to get even finer variati ons in color, or in another trait such as height. R eal polygenic traits aren’t
usually quite this clean and simple. (For instance, genes may make unequal contributions to the phenotyp e, alleles may or may not
display incomplete dominance, and there may be non- additive interactions between genes.) However, the basic idea—that multiple
genes obeying Mendelian rules can produce a spectrum o f finely differing phenotypes—holds true for human traits such as skin
and eye color.
We’ve learned about polygenic inheritance and conti nuous variation. Just what is the difference between the se two types of
inheritance?
[practice-area rows=”4″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”646463″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]PRactice Questions

14.18.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43722[hidden-answer a=”646463″] Polygenic traits are traits that rely on multiple genes. Continuous variation describes traits whose
phenotypes occur on a continuum, rather than having a limited number of possible phenotypes. Traits with continuous variation
are often also polygenic traits, but not always, and not all polygenic traits have continuous variation.[/hidde n-answer]
1. Wood, A. R., Esko, T., Yang, J., Vedantam, S., Pers, T. H., Gusta fsson, S.,... Frayling, T. M. (2014). Defining the role of
common variation in the genomic and biological architectur e of adult human height. Nature Genetics, 46, 1173–1186.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ng.3097. ↵
2. White, D. and Rabago-Smith, M. (2011). Genotype-phenotype a ssociations and human eye color. Journal of Human Genetics,
56, 5–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2010.126. ↵
3. Kimball, J. W. (2011, March 8). Continuous variation: Quan titative traits. Retrieved from
users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/BiologyPages/Q/QTL.htm l. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Polygenic inheritance and environmental effects. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at:
https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/classical-gen etics/variations-on-mendelian-genetics/a/polygenic-i nheritanceand-environmental-effects. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
14.18: Polygenic Inheritance and Environmental Effe cts is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

14.19.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372314.19: Effect of the Environment
Characteristics that are influenced by environmenta l as well as genetic factors are called multifactorial. The idea of “nature versus
nurture” — in other words, the relative influence of g enetics versus environmental factors — has been and still is debated. Just
looking at the genes of a given organism will not de termine how that organism will develop and act. Even identical twins will show
different characteristics, depending on the environme nt in which they live. Everyone is a product of their environment as well as
their genetics.
Figure 1. Taking a newborn blood sample for PKU testin g. By Staff Sgt Eric T. Sheler, U.S. Air Force (Phenyl ketonuria testing)
Public Domain
Even when influenced by the environment, phenotypes h ave a normal range of expression. For instance, human height varies based
on nutrition and genetics, but not many people are shorter than 4½ feet or taller than 7 feet. The ran ge of phenotypic possibilities is
called the norm of reaction. Hydrangeas, for example, may be blue, pink, or purple, but they are never naturally orange.
Hydrangeas are blue in acidic soil with available alumi num, and they are pink in alkaline soil without available aluminum.
Some human characteristics have a narrow norm of react ion, such as blood type. Others have a wide norm of r eaction, such as the
number of blood cells in humans, which varies depend ing on factors that include physical fitness, presenc e or history of infections,
and even the altitude at which a person lives.
The environment also affects human genes. Serotonin, a neurotransmitter that acts inside brain cells, lowers a nxiety and depression
during traumatic times. Mutations in the serotonin t ransporter gene may cause a reduced ability to cope with stress. That does not
mean that the person is always depressed, but if the e nvironment produces stress, the person may become depres sed more easily
than a person with unmutated serotonin transporter genes.
You already learned about PKU, a pleiotropic disorder caused by defects in a single gene coding for an en zyme that converts the
amino acid phenylalanine to tyrosine. Newborns are tes ted for this defect very early in life (Figure 1), so that if the results are
positive, they can be given a diet limiting phenylal anine ingestion. That way, the toxic buildup is preve nted and the children can
develop normally. PKU is an example in which environmental fa ctors can modify gene expression.
Practice Question
Two identical twins (female) live in different parts o f the country. One is very committed to a healthy li festyle: not smoking,
exercising regularly, eating a diet rich in fresh pro duce, and avoiding red meats and processed foods. The other is not as careful: she
smokes, is overweight, and often eats fast and process ed foods. They are aware that several women in their fam ily have had breast
cancer, and decide to consult a doctor about their o dds of developing the disease. Which of the following statements by the doctor
sounds most correct?
1. As identical twins, you are genetically the same, so your ch ances of developing breast cancer are identical.
2. The twin with the healthy lifestyle should not be terri bly concerned, while the one with the unhealthy lifesty le is at a higher
risk.
3. Breast cancer has a genetic component, and the twins have identical genes, so they have the same genetic risk. However,
environmental factors such as smoking, obesity, and con sumption of red meat have been shown to increase the risk of cancer.
While both twins should monitor themselves closely, the t win who smokes and is overweight may want to consider a he althier
lifestyle to decrease her risk of breast cancer.
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”41921″]Show Answer[/reveal-answer]

14.19.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43723[hidden-answer a=”41921″]Option one is wrong; while it has been shown that certain genes may predispose peop le to cancer, there
are many associations between environmental effects a nd cancer. Option two is also wrong; familial cancers ha ve a genetic
component which may or may not be balanced by a heal thy lifestyle. Option three is the most correct answer; lifestyle choices are
important, but genetic influences are to be taken se riously, especially if there is a family pattern ass ociated with them.[/hiddenanswer]
In Summary: Effect of the Environment
While genes and genetic causes play a large role in health and phenotypes, the environment also plays a n important role.
Understanding this can enable the treatment of some disorders, such as the case with PKU in which limiting the intake of
phenylalanine can prevent toxic build up of this am ino acid. Often the norm of reaction is set by genetic factors but ultimately
determined by environmental exposures.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Application Spotlight: Effect of the Environment. Provided by: Open Learning Initiative. Located at:
https://oli.cmu.edu/jcourse/workbook/activity/page?cont ext=434a5f4180020ca600915a031e68a874. Project: Introduction to
Biology (Open + Free). License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
14.19: Effect of the Environment is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.20.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372514.20: Pleiotropy and Human Disorders
Based on Mendel’s experiments, you might imagine tha t all genes control a single characteristic, are pre sent in two copies, and
affect some harmless aspect of an organism’s appearanc e (such as color, height, or shape). Although those p redictions are accurate
in many cases, there are also some important exceptions. For instance, how can we explain observations like the fol lowing?
The genetic disorder Marfan syndrome is caused by a mut ation in one gene, yet it affects many aspects of growth and
development, including height, vision, and heart functio n.
To understand observations like these, we need to look more deeply at what genes are. Rather than abstract “ heritable factors,”
genes are stretches of DNA found on chromosomes, and most of them encode (specify the sequence of) proteins that do a certain
job in the cell or body. In this article, we’ll look in more det ail at genes affecting multiple characteristics (pleiot ropy).
Pleiotropy
When we discussed Mendel’s experiments with purple-flowered and white-flowered plants, we didn’t mention any othe r
phenotypes associated with the two flower colors. However, Mendel noticed that the flower colors were always correl ated with two
other features: the color of the seed coat (coverin g of the seed) and the color of the axils (junction s where the leaves met the main
stem). In plants with white flowers, the seed coats and axils were colorless, while in plants with purple flowers, the seed coats
were brown-gray and the axils were reddish. Thus, rath er than affecting just one characteristic, the flower c olor gene actually
affected three.
Based on similar diagram by Ingrid Lobo
Genes like this, which affect multiple, seemingly unre lated aspects of an organism’s phenotype, are said to be pleiotropic (pleio – =
many, – tropic = effects). We now know that Mendel’s flower color gene encodes a regulator protein that activates pigment
biosynthesis, and that it works in several different pa rts of the pea plant (flowers, seed coat, and leaf axil s). Thus, the seemingly
unrelated phenotypes can all be traced back to a defec t in a single gene with several jobs.
Alleles of pleiotropic genes are transmitted in the s ame way as alleles of genes that affect single traits. I n these cases, the difference
is that the phenotype contains multiple elements. T hese elements are specified as a package, and there would be both a dominant
and recessive version of this package of traits.
Pleiotropy in Human Genetic Disorders
Genes affected in human genetic disorders are often pleiotropic. For example, people with the hereditary di sorder Marfan
syndrome may have a constellation of seemingly unrelate d symptoms:
Unusually tall height
Thin fingers and toes
Dislocation of the lens of the eye
Heart problems (in which the aorta, the large blood ves sel carrying blood away from the heart, bulges or ruptu res).
These symptoms don’t appear directly related to one a nother, but as it turns out, they can all be traced b ack to the mutation of a
single gene. This gene encodes a protein that assembl es into chains, making elastic fibrils that give stre ngth and flexibility to the
body’s connective tissues. Disease-causing mutations in the Marfan syndrome reduce the amount of functio nal protein produced,[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

14.20.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43725resulting in fewer fibrils. The eye and the aorta no rmally contain many fibrils that help maintain struc ture, explaining why these
two organs are strongly affected in Marfan syndrome. I n addition, the fibrils serve as “storage shelves” for growth factors. When
there are fewer of them in Marfan syndrome, the growth factors cannot be shelved and thus cause excess gro wth (leading to the
characteristic tall, thin Marfan build).
1. Lobo, I. (2008). Pleiotropy: One gene can affect multip le traits. Nature Education, 1(1), 10. Retrieved from
http://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/pleiotropy-on e-gene-can-affect-multiple-traits-569. ↵
2. Ibid. ↵
3. Marfan syndrome. (2012). In Genetics home reference. Retrieved from http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/marfan-syndrome. ↵
4. FBN1. (2015). In Genetics home reference. Retrieved from http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/FBN1. ↵
5. Marfan syndrome. (2015, November 3). Retrieved November 21, 2 015 from Wikipedia:
https://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Marfan_syndrome. ↵
6. FBN1. (2015). In Genetics home reference. Retrieved from http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/FBN1. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Pleiotropy, lethal alleles, and sex linkage. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at:
https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/classical-gen etics/variations-on-mendelian-genetics/a/pleiotropy- lethal-allelesand-sex-linkage. License: CC BY-NC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
14.20: Pleiotropy and Human Disorders is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.[5]
[6]

14.21.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372614.21: Putting It Together- Trait Inheritance
Now that you understand more about genetic inheritance, you can appreciate better the complications associa ted with predicting
traits in children. Unfortunately, these complication s apply to inherited disease just as much as they app ly to predicting a child’s
height or eye color.
There are over 6,000 monogenetic disorders and thou sands more polygenetic disorders. All of this is in ad dition to the
complications brought about by environmental influen ces and random genetic mutations or damage. Despite t his complexity, we
continually learn new things about the genetic root of human diseases. This knowledge can be used not onl y to predict occurrence,
as a genetic counselor does, but also to develop treatmen ts, cures, or preventatives as clinicians and researchers d o.
One organization that puts this modern understanding o f genetics to use is the Dor Yeshorim, an organizatio n that offers genetic
screening to members of the Jewish community worldwide. Its objective is to minimize, and eventually elimin ate, the incidence of
genetic disorders common to Jewish people, such as Tay–Sac hs disease.
Figure 1. Tay-Sachs is an autosomal recessive disease. This m eans that children can only inherit the Tay-Sachs if b oth of their
parents are carriers for the disease.
In both the Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jewish communities, t here is an increased rate of a number of genetic dis orders such as Tay–
Sachs disease, an autosomal recessive disorder that go es unnoticed in carriers, but is fatal within the first few years of life in almost
all homozygotes.
Dor Yeshorim screens only for recessive traits that g ive rise to lethal or severely debilitating disorders, providing preventative,
rather than diagnostic services. They do not screen fo r disorders arising from dominant gene mutations, a s these cannot be
prevented by informed mate selection. Orthodox Judaism generally opposes selective abortion, and although prei mplantation
genetic diagnosis (PGD) is often approved by Halakha, it i s a difficult and costly process. By avoiding marri ages between carriers
of the diseases, the incidence of the disorders decrease s without having to resort to these methods.
Dor Yeshorim advocates anonymous testing. Individuals a re tested during large sessions in Jewish schools and pr ocessed
anonymously with only a PIN linking the sample with the candidate. When two members of the system contemplate marriage, they
contact the organization and enter both their PINs. Whe n both carry a gene for the same disorder, the risk of affected offspring is 25
percent, and it is considered advisable to discontinu e the plans. In the context of shidduchim (a system of matchmaking in Jewish
communities), the “carriership check” is often run with in the first three dates, to avoid disappointments and hea rtbreak.
According to the Dor Yeshorim website, they are “credite d with singlehandedly eradicating Tay Sachs from the Je wish community
and effectively closing the Tay Sachs ward at Kingsbrook Medical center forever.”
1. "Our History", Dor Yeshorim, https://doryeshorim.org/history-achievements/. ↵[1]

14.21.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43726Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Putting It Together: Trait Inheritance. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Modification of Dor Yeshorim. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: https://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Dor_Yeshorim. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
Public domain content
Autorecessive. Provided by: National Institutes of Health. Located at:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Autorecessive.jpg. License: Public Domain: No Known Copyright
14.21: Putting It Together- Trait Inheritance is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.22.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4372714.22: Assignment- Dragon Genetics
Begin this assessment by downloading the Modern Genetics simulator (links to an external site) from Concord.org.
Run the simulation and complete the exercises in it. While doing so, gather answers to these questions. Take screenshots as
directed; save each screenshot as its own document. You wi ll then complete the quiz entitled “C10: Dragon Genet ics” to submit
your answers and upload your documents. (Download the quiz file here.)
Please note the following:
The questions in the document are broken down by parts in the simulator; this is to help you as you move through the exercise.
They are not separated this way in the quiz but they will follow the same order.
When performing your pedigree crosses, if you obtain of fspring of a single sex, simply repeat the exact same pare ntal cross to
get more offspring. Do this until you have at least one of each sex in that generation.
Here is a worked example showing a screenshot and requir ed text explanation.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Performance Assessment: Dragon Genetics. Authored by: Shelli Carter. Provided by: Columbia Basin College. Located at:
https://www.columbiabasin.edu/. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Modern Genetics simulator. Provided by: Concord Consortium. Located at: http://concord.org/stem-resources/moderngenetics. License: Other. License Terms: GNU LGPL
14.22: Assignment- Dragon Genetics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
15: Module 13- Theory of Evolution
15.1: Why It Matters- Theory of Evolution
15.2: Introduction to Charles Darwin
15.3: Darwin and Descent with Modification
15.4: Darwin and the Theory of Evolution
15.5: Natural Selection
15.6: Introduction to Evidence for Evolution
15.7: Physical Evidence
15.8: Biological Evidence
15.9: Misconceptions of Evolution
15.10: Introduction to Mutations and Evolution
15.11: Population Genetics
15.12: Selective and Environmental Pressures
15.13: Introduction to Phylogenetic Trees
15.14: Scientific Classification
15.15: Structure of Phylogenetic Trees
15.16: Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees
15.17: The Taxonomic Classification System
15.18: Putting It Together- Theory of Evolution
15: Module 13- Theory of Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374615.1: Why It Matters- Theory of Evolution
Why explain the theory of evolution, which documents the change in the genetic makeup of a
biological population over time?
Have you ever wondered why doctors say you should get a new flu shot every year? It’s just the same old flu v irus right? How
much could it change from year to year?
Unfortunately, it’s not just the same old flu virus—and it often changes a lot from year to year. When the flu vaccine does its work,
killing the current iteration of the flu, it typica lly does a good job and saves its host from illness. However, as it wipes out the
majority of flu viruses, the only ones that are left ar e those that are resistant to the current virus, whic h means the overall make up
of the population of flu viruses has changed: the po pulation has evolved to become resistant to one ant i-viral treatment, so another
must be found.
Of course, while the theory of evolution can be applie d to viruses, it is more often discussed in the context of living things:
bacteria, plants, animals, and even humans. The theory of evolution began as a revolutionary idea, but it remains central to the
study of biology. Evolution is the unifying concept in biology. This theory documents the change in the genetic makeup of a
biological population over time. Evolution helps us understand the development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria and other
parasitic organisms. The following are just a few of the antibiotic resistant “bugs” plaguing humans.
Antibiotic-Resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB)
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci (VRE)
Multidrug-Resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Gonorrhea)
You can also check out the NIH’s website about antimicrobial resistance for more information.
While evolution is easiest to see in bacteria due to their short life cycles, every living population ex periences evolution of one kind
or another. Let’s see just how the world we live in has guided the evolutionary process.
Learning Outcomes
Describe the work of Charles Darwin in the Galapagos Islands, especially his discovery of natural selection in finch po pulations
Describe how the theory of evolution by natural selection i s supported by evidence
Recognize that mutations are the basis of microevolution; and that adaptations enhance the survival and reprod uction of
individuals in a population
Read and analyze a phylogenetic tree that documents e volutionary relationships
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
15.1: Why It Matters- Theory of Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Try It

15.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374715.2: Introduction to Charles Darwin
Describe the work of Charles Darwin in the Galapagos Islands, especially his discovery of natural
selection in finch populations
Charles Darwin is best known for his discovery of natur al selection. In this outcome we’ll learn more about his work and how it
helped develop the theory of evolution.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Outline the work of Charles Darwin as a naturalist aboard the HMS B eagle
Summarize the prior work and new evidence Darwin used to de velop the idea of “descent with modification”
Describe how Darwin’s work developed to the theory of evolution
Define the concept of natural selection
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Darwin and Descent with Modification
Darwin and the Theory of Evolution
Natural Selection
Self Check: Charles Darwin
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
15.2: Introduction to Charles Darwin is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374815.3: Darwin and Descent with Modification
Figure 1. Darwin observed that beak shape varies among finch species. He postulated that the beak of an ancest ral species had
adapted over time to equip the finches to acquire di fferent food sources.
In the mid-nineteenth century, the actual mechanism for evolution was independently conceived of and desc ribed by two
naturalists: Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace. Im portantly, each naturalist spent time exploring the natural world on
expeditions to the tropics. From 1831 to 1836, Darwin t raveled around the world on H.M.S. Beagle, including stops in South
America, Australia, and the southern tip of Africa. Wall ace traveled to Brazil to collect insects in the Amaz on rainforest from 1848
to 1852 and to the Malay Archipelago from 1854 to 18 62. Darwin’s journey, like Wallace’s later journeys to t he Malay
Archipelago, included stops at several island chains, the last being the Galápagos Islands west of Ecuador. On t hese islands,
Darwin observed species of organisms on different isl ands that were clearly similar, yet had distinct diffe rences. For example, the
ground finches inhabiting the Galápagos Islands comprised several species with a unique beak shape (Figure 1).
The species on the islands had a graded series of bea k sizes and shapes with very small differences between t he most similar. He
observed that these finches closely resembled anothe r finch species on the mainland of South America. Darwin imagined that the
island species might be species modified from one of the original mainland species. Upon further study, he rea lized that the varied
beaks of each finch helped the birds acquire a specif ic type of food. For example, seed-eating finches ha d stronger, thicker beaks
for breaking seeds, and insect-eating finches had spear- like beaks for stabbing their prey.
Wallace and Darwin both observed similar patterns in o ther organisms and they independently developed the same explanation for
how and why such changes could take place. Darwin calle d this mechanism natural selection. Natural selection, also known as
“survival of the fittest,” is the more prolific repr oduction of individuals with favorable traits that surv ive environmental change
because of those traits; this leads to evolutionary change.
For example, a population of giant tortoises found i n the Galapagos Archipelago was observed by Darwin to hav e longer necks
than those that lived on other islands with dry lowland s. These tortoises were “selected” because they could reach more leaves and
access more food than those with short necks. In time s of drought when fewer leaves would be available, those that could reach
more leaves had a better chance to eat and survive t han those that couldn’t reach the food source. Conse quently, long-necked
tortoises would be more likely to be reproductively successful and pass the long-necked trait to their off spring. Over time, only
long-necked tortoises would be present in the population.
Natural selection, Darwin argued, was an inevitable outco me of three principles that operated in nature. First, most characteristics
of organisms are inherited, or passed from parent to o ffspring. Although no one, including Darwin and Wallace, knew how this
happened at the time, it was a common understanding. Sec ond, more offspring are produced than are able to sur vive, so resources
for survival and reproduction are limited. The capa city for reproduction in all organisms outstrips the availability of resources to
support their numbers. Thus, there is competition for those resources in each generation. Both Darwin and W allace’s understanding
of this principle came from reading an essay by the e conomist Thomas Malthus who discussed this principle i n relation to human
populations. Third, offspring vary among each other i n regard to their characteristics and those variatio ns are inherited. Darwin and
Wallace reasoned that offspring with inherited charact eristics which allow them to best compete for limited r esources will survive
and have more offspring than those individuals with v ariations that are less able to compete. Because cha racteristics are inherited,

15.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43748these traits will be better represented in the next ge neration. This will lead to change in populations over generations in a process
that Darwin called descent with modification. Ultimately, natural selection leads to greater adaptation of th e population to its local
environment; it is the only mechanism known for adaptive e volution.
Papers by Darwin and Wallace (Figure 2) presenting the i dea of natural selection were read together in 1858 b efore the Linnean
Society in London. The following year Darwin’s book, On the Origin of Species, was published. His book outlined in considerable
detail his arguments for gradual changes and adaptive sur vival by natural selection.
Figure 2. Both (a) Charles Darwin and (b) Alfred Wall ace wrote scientific papers on natural selection that were presented together
before the Linnean Society in 1858.
Demonstrations of evolution by natural selection are time consuming and difficult to obtain. One of the best examples has been
demonstrated in the very birds that helped to inspir e Darwin’s theory: the Galápagos finches. Peter and Rosem ary Grant and their
colleagues have studied Galápagos finch populations every year since 1976 and have provided important d emonstrations of natural
selection. The Grants found changes from one generat ion to the next in the distribution of beak shapes with the medium ground
finch on the Galápagos island of Daphne Major. The birds have inherited variation in the bill shape with som e birds having wide
deep bills and others having thinner bills. During a pe riod in which rainfall was higher than normal because of an El Niño, the large
hard seeds that large-billed birds ate were reduced in number; however, there was an abundance of the small so ft seeds which the
small-billed birds ate. Therefore, survival and repr oduction were much better in the following years for th e small-billed birds. In
the years following this El Niño, the Grants measured be ak sizes in the population and found that the averag e bill size was smaller.
Since bill size is an inherited trait, parents with sm aller bills had more offspring and the size of bills had evolved to be smaller. As
conditions improved in 1987 and larger seeds became mor e available, the trend toward smaller average bill size cea sed.
In Summary: Darwin and Descent with Modification
While Charles Darwin is generally called “the father o f evolution,” the basic idea for this concept was act ually developed by both
Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace. Both scientists based t heir hypotheses on observations of diversity among nat ural populations.
Darwin’s work in particular focused on animals of the Gal apagos islands, especially finches. Over time, the ide a that species
changed from natural selection pressures through “de scent with modification” gave rise to the idea of ev olution. Data accumulated
over time, for example the long study of the Galapag os finches by the Grant research team, has supported this idea and moved it
into the realm of a supported theory of biology.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously

15.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43748Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.3: Darwin and Descent with Modification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374915.4: Darwin and the Theory of Evolution
Natural selection can only take place if there is variation, or differences, among individuals in a population. I mportantly, these
differences must have some genetic basis; otherwise, the selection will not lead to change in the next gener ation. This is critical
because variation among individuals can be caused by non-genetic reasons such as an individual being talle r because of better
nutrition rather than different genes.
Genetic diversity in a population comes from two main mechanisms: mutation and sexual reproduction. Mutation, a change in
DNA, is the ultimate source of new alleles, or new genetic v ariation in any population. The genetic changes cau sed by mutation can
have one of three outcomes on the phenotype. A muta tion affects the phenotype of the organism in a way that gives it reduced
fitness—lower likelihood of survival or fewer offspring. A mutation may produce a phenotype with a benefici al effect on fitness.
And, many mutations will also have no effect on the fit ness of the phenotype; these are called neutral mut ations. Mutations may
also have a whole range of effect sizes on the fitnes s of the organism that expresses them in their phenoty pe, from a small effect to
a great effect. Sexual reproduction also leads to ge netic diversity: when two parents reproduce, unique com binations of alleles
assemble to produce the unique genotypes and thus pheno types in each of the offspring.
A heritable trait that helps the survival and reprod uction of an organism in its present environment is c alled an adaptation.
Scientists describe groups of organisms becoming ada pted to their environment when a change in the range of genetic variation
occurs over time that increases or maintains the “fit” of the population to its environment. The webbed fee t of platypuses are an
adaptation for swimming. The snow leopards’ thick fur is an adaptation for living in the cold. The cheetah s’ fast speed is an
adaptation for catching prey.
Whether or not a trait is favorable depends on the environmental conditions at the time. The same traits are not always selected
because environmental conditions can change. For exam ple, consider a species of plant that grew in a moist c limate and did not
need to conserve water. Large leaves were selected be cause they allowed the plant to obtain more energy f rom the sun. Large
leaves require more water to maintain than small lea ves, and the moist environment provided favorable co nditions to support large
leaves. After thousands of years, the climate changed, a nd the area no longer had excess water. The direction of natural selection
shifted so that plants with small leaves were selecte d because those populations were able to conserve wat er to survive the new
environmental conditions.
The evolution of species has resulted in enormous var iation in form and function. Sometimes, evolution give s rise to groups of
organisms that become tremendously different from each other. When two species evolve in diverse directions from a common
point, it is called divergent evolution. Such divergent evolution can be seen in the forms of the reproductive organs of flowering
plants which share the same basic anatomies; however, t hey can look very different as a result of selection in different physical
environments and adaptation to different kinds of polli nators (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Flowering plants evolved from a common ancest or. Notice that the (a) dense blazing star (Liatrus spicata) and the (b)
purple coneflower (Echinacea purpurea) vary in appearance, yet both share a similar basic m orphology. (credit a: modification of
work by Drew Avery; credit b: modification of work by Cory Zanker)

15.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43749In other cases, similar phenotypes evolve independently in distantly related species. For example, flight ha s evolved in both bats
and insects, and they both have structures we refer to as wings, which are adaptations to flight. However, the wi ngs of bats and
insects have evolved from very different original st ructures. This phenomenon is called convergent evolution, where similar traits
evolve independently in species that do not share a recent common ancestry. The two species came to the same function, flying, but
did so separately from each other.
These physical changes occur over enormous spans of ti me and help explain how evolution occurs. Natural sele ction acts on
individual organisms, which in turn can shape an ent ire species. Although natural selection may work in a single generation on an
individual, it can take thousands or even millions of years for the genotype of an entire species to evo lve. It is over these large time
spans that life on earth has changed and continues to chan ge.
In Summary: Darwin and the Theory of Evolution
Natural selection, the driving force behind evolutio n, can only work if variation exists among organisms. Va riation arises ultimately
from genetic mutations. Diversity is further encourage d through sexual reproduction. As environments change, se lective pressures
shift and favor different adaptations. In this way, given tho usands or millions of years, species evolve.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.4: Darwin and the Theory of Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375015.5: Natural Selection
This video reviews some what we’ve learned so far this outcome, as well as going into more depth about natur al selection and how
it works.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=530
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
Natural Selection - Crash Course Biology #14. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at: https://youtu.be/aTftyFboC_M.
License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
15.5: Natural Selection is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375115.6: Introduction to Evidence for Evolution
Describe how the theory of evolution by natural selection is supported by evidence
The evidence for evolution is compelling and extensiv e. Looking at every level of organization in living systems, biologists see the
signature of past and present evolution. Darwin dedicat ed a large portion of his book, On theOrigin of Species, to identifying
patterns in nature that were consistent with evolution, and since Darwin, our understanding has become clearer and b roader.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Outline physical evidence that supports the theory of ev olution
Outline biological evidence that supports the theory of evolution
Refute common misconceptions about evolution
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Physical Evidence
Biological Evidence
Misconceptions of Evolution
Self Check: Evidence for Evolution
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
15.6: Introduction to Evidence for Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375215.7: Physical Evidence
Fossils
Fossils provide solid evidence that organisms from the past are not the same as those found today, and fossil s show a progression of
evolution. Scientists determine the age of fossils and categorize them from all over the world to determin e when the organisms
lived relative to each other. The resulting fossil record tells the story of the past and shows the evol ution of form over millions of
years (Figure 1a). For example, scientists have recovere d highly detailed records showing the evolution of hu mans and horses
(Figure 1b).
Figure 1. In this (a) display, fossil hominids are arrang ed from oldest (bottom) to newest (top). As hominids ev olved, the shape of
the skull changed. An artist’s rendition of (b) extinc t species of the genus Equus reveals that these ancient sp ecies resembled the
modern horse (Equus ferus) but varied in size.
Anatomy and Embryology
Figure 2. The similar construction of these appendages i ndicates that these organisms share a common ancestor.
Another type of evidence for evolution is the presen ce of structures in organisms that share the same ba sic form. For example, the
bones in the appendages of a human, dog, bird, and wh ale all share the same overall construction (Figure 2) resulting from their
origin in the appendages of a common ancestor. Over ti me, evolution led to changes in the shapes and sizes o f these bones in
different species, but they have maintained the same over all layout. Scientists call these synonymous parts homolog ous structures.
Some structures exist in organisms that have no apparen t function at all, and appear to be residual parts from a past common
ancestor. These unused structures without function are called vestigial structures. Some examples of vestigial structures are wings
on flightless birds, leaves on some cacti, and hind leg bo nes in whales.
Visit this interactive site to guess which bones structure s are homologous and which are analogous, and see examples of
evolutionary adaptations to illustrate these concepts.

15.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43752Another evidence of evolution is the convergence of f orm in organisms that share similar environments. For example, species of
unrelated animals, such as the arctic fox and ptarmig an, living in the arctic region have been selected f or seasonal white phenotypes
during winter to blend with the snow and ice (Figure 3). These similarities occur not because of common ances try, but because of
similar selection pressures—the benefits of not being s een by predators.
Figure 3. The white winter coat of the (a) arctic fo x and the (b) ptarmigan’s plumage are adaptations to their environments. (credit
a: modification of work by Keith Morehouse)
Embryology, the study of the development of the anat omy of an organism to its adult form, also provides evidence of relatedness
between now widely divergent groups of organisms. Mutation al tweaking in the embryo can have such magnified con sequences in
the adult that embryo formation tends to be conserv ed. As a result, structures that are absent in some group s often appear in their
embryonic forms and disappear by the time the adult or juvenile form is reached. For example, all vertebra te embryos, including
humans, exhibit gill slits and tails at some point in t heir early development. These disappear in the adult s of terrestrial groups but
are maintained in adult forms of aquatic groups suc h as fish and some amphibians. Great ape embryos, incl uding humans, have a
tail structure during their development that is lost b y the time of birth.
Since Darwin developed his ideas on descent with modificat ion and the pressures of natural selection, a variet y of evidence has
been gathered supporting the theory of evolution. Fos sil evidence shows the changes in lineages over million s of years, such as
in hominids and horses. Studying anatomy allows scientis ts to identify homologous structures across diverse gro ups of related
organisms, such as leg bones. Vestigial structures also o ffer clues to common ancestors. Using embryology, scien tists can
identify common ancestors through structures present only d uring development and not in the adult form.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.7: Physical Evidence is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

15.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375315.8: Biological Evidence
Biogeography
The geographic distribution of organisms on the pla net follows patterns that are best explained by evoluti on in conjunction with the
movement of tectonic plates over geological time. Br oad groups that evolved before the breakup of the su percontinent Pangaea
(about 200 million years ago) are distributed worldwi de. Groups that evolved since the breakup appear uniqu ely in regions of the
planet, such as the unique flora and fauna of northe rn continents that formed from the supercontinent La urasia and of the southern
continents that formed from the supercontinent Gondwan a. The presence of members of the plant family Protea ceae in Australia,
southern Africa, and South America is best due to their app earance prior to the southern supercontinent Gondwana b reaking up.
The great diversification of marsupials in Australia and the absence of other mammals reflect Australia’s long isolation. Australia
has an abundance of endemic species—species found n owhere else—which is typical of islands whose isolation b y expanses of
water prevents species migration. Over time, these speci es diverge evolutionarily into new species that look ve ry different from
their ancestors that may exist on the mainland. The ma rsupials of Australia, the finches on the Galápagos, and many species on the
Hawaiian Islands are all unique to their one point of origi n, yet they display distant relationships to ancestral species on mainlands.
Molecular Biology
Like anatomical structures, the structures of the mo lecules of life reflect descent with modification. Evi dence of a common ancestor
for all of life is reflected in the universality of DNA as the genetic material and in the near universali ty of the genetic code and the
machinery of DNA replication and expression. Fundament al divisions in life between the three domains are ref lected in major
structural differences in otherwise conservative stru ctures such as the components of ribosomes and the st ructures of membranes.
In general, the relatedness of groups of organisms is reflected in the similarity of their DNA sequences—ex actly the pattern that
would be expected from descent and diversification from a c ommon ancestor.
DNA sequences have also shed light on some of the mecha nisms of evolution. For example, it is clear that the evolution of new
functions for proteins commonly occurs after gene d uplication events that allow the free modification of one copy by mutation,
selection, or drift (changes in a population’s gene pool resulting from chance), while the other copy c ontinues to produce a
functional protein.
Biogeography offers further clues about evolutionary relationships. The presence of related organisms ac ross continents
indicates when these organisms may have evolved. For exa mple, some flora and fauna of the northern continen ts are similar
across these landmasses but distinct from that of th e southern continents. Islands such as Australia and the Ga lapagos chain
often have unique species that evolved after these la ndmasses separated from the mainland. Finally, molec ular biology
provides data supporting the theory of evolution. In particular, the universality of DNA and near universali ty of the genetic
code for proteins shows that all life once shared a c ommon ancestor. DNA also provides clues into how evolut ion may have
happened. Gene duplications allow one copy to undergo m utational events without harming an organism, as one copy
continues to produce functional protein.
Evolution—It’s a Thing
This video defines evolution and discusses several var ieties of evidence that support the Theory of Evolution:
Learning Objectives

15.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43753
A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=536
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Evolution: It's a Thing - Crash Course Biology #20. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at: https://youtu.be/P3GagfbA2vo.
License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
15.8: Biological Evidence is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375415.9: Misconceptions of Evolution
Although the theory of evolution generated some cont roversy when it was first proposed, it was almost univ ersally accepted by
biologists, particularly younger biologists, within 20 years after publication of On theOrigin of Species. Nevertheless, the theory of
evolution is a difficult concept and misconceptions ab out how it works abound.
This site addresses some of the main misconceptions associat ed with the theory of evolution.
Evolution Is Just a Theory
Critics of the theory of evolution dismiss its import ance by purposefully confounding the everyday usage of the word “theory” with
the way scientists use the word. In science, a “theory” is understood to be a body of thoroughly tested an d verified explanations for
a set of observations of the natural world. Scientists h ave a theory of the atom, a theory of gravity, and t he theory of relativity, each
of which describes understood facts about the world. In the same way, the theory of evolution describes fact s about the living
world. As such, a theory in science has survived signifi cant efforts to discredit it by scientists. In contrast, a “theory” in common
vernacular is a word meaning a guess or suggested expl anation; this meaning is more akin to the scientific concept of “hypothesis.”
When critics of evolution say evolution is “just a the ory,” they are implying that there is little evidenc e supporting it and that it is
still in the process of being rigorously tested. This is a mischaracterization.
Individuals Evolve
Evolution is the change in genetic composition of a population over time, specifically over generations, resulting from differential
reproduction of individuals with certain alleles. Ind ividuals do change over their lifetime, obviously, b ut this is called development
and involves changes programmed by the set of genes t he individual acquired at birth in coordination with the individual’s
environment. When thinking about the evolution of a characteristic, it is probably best to think about the change of the average
value of the characteristic in the population over time. For example, when natural selection leads to bil l-size change in mediumground finches in the Galápagos, this does not mean t hat individual bills on the finches are changing. I f one measures the average
bill size among all individuals in the population a t one time and then measures the average bill size i n the population several years
later, this average value will be different as a resu lt of evolution. Although some individuals may survive from the first time to the
second, they will still have the same bill size; howev er, there will be many new individuals that contribut e to the shift in average
bill size.
Organisms Evolve on Purpose
Statements such as “organisms evolve in response to a change in an environment” are quite common, but su ch statements can lead
to two types of misunderstandings. First, the stateme nt must not be understood to mean that individual or ganisms evolve. The
statement is shorthand for “a population evolves in response to a changing environment.” However, a second m isunderstanding
may arise by interpreting the statement to mean that the evolution is somehow intentional. A changed envi ronment results in some
individuals in the population, those with particular phenotypes, benefiting and therefore producing propor tionately more offspring
than other phenotypes. This results in change in the po pulation if the characteristics are genetically determ ined.
It is also important to understand that the variation that natural selection works on is already in a pop ulation and does not arise in
response to an environmental change. For example, app lying antibiotics to a population of bacteria will, o ver time, select a
population of bacteria that are resistant to antibiot ics. The resistance, which is caused by a gene, did no t arise by mutation because
of the application of the antibiotic. The gene for re sistance was already present in the gene pool of the ba cteria, likely at a low
frequency. The antibiotic, which kills the bacterial ce lls without the resistance gene, strongly selects indivi duals that are resistant,
since these would be the only ones that survived and divided. Experiments have demonstrated that mutatio ns for antibiotic
resistance do not arise as a result of antibiotic.
In a larger sense, evolution is not goal directed. Spec ies do not become “better” over time; they simply tr ack their changing
environment with adaptations that maximize their rep roduction in a particular environment at a particul ar time. Evolution has no
goal of making faster, bigger, more complex, or even smarter species, despite the commonness of this kind o f language in popular
discourse. What characteristics evolve in a species ar e a function of the variation present and the enviro nment, both of which are

15.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43754constantly changing in a non-directional way. What t rait is fit in one environment at one time may well be fatal at some point in the
future. This holds equally well for a species of insect as i t does the human species.
Evolution Explains the Origin of Life
It is a common misunderstanding that evolution incl udes an explanation of life’s origins. Conversely, s ome of the theory’s critics
believe that it cannot explain the origin of life. T he theory does not try to explain the origin of lif e. The theory of evolution explains
how populations change over time and how life diversi fies the origin of species. It does not shed light o n the beginnings of life
including the origins of the first cells, which is ho w life is defined. The mechanisms of the origin of li fe on Earth are a particularly
difficult problem because it occurred a very long t ime ago, and presumably it just occurred once. Impo rtantly, biologists believe
that the presence of life on Earth precludes the pos sibility that the events that led to life on Earth c an be repeated because the
intermediate stages would immediately become food for exis ting living things.
However, once a mechanism of inheritance was in place i n the form of a molecule like DNA either within a cell or pre-cell, these
entities would be subject to the principle of natural selection. More effective reproducers would increase in frequency at the
expense of inefficient reproducers. So while evolution does not explain the origin of life, it may have som ething to say about some
of the processes operating once pre-living entities a cquired certain properties.
Many misconceptions exist about the theory of evolutio n—including some perpetuated by critics of the theo ry. First, evolution
as a scientific theory means that it has years of obs ervation and accumulated data supporting it. It is not “just a theory” as a
person may say in common vernacular.
Another misconception is that individuals evolve, tho ugh in fact it is populations that evolve over time. Individuals simply
carry mutations. Furthermore, these mutations neither arise on purpose nor do they arise in response to an environmental
pressure. Instead, mutations in DNA happen spontaneousl y and are already present in individuals of a popula tion when a
selective pressure occurs. Once the environment begin s to favor a particular trait, then those individuals already carrying that
mutation will have a selective advantage and are likely to survive better and outproduce others without the ada ptation.
Finally, the theory of evolution does not in fact add ress the origins of life on this planet. Scientists beli eve that we cannot, in
fact, repeat the circumstances that led to life on E arth because at this time life already exists. The pres ence of life has so
dramatically changed the environment that the origins cannot be totally produced for study.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.9: Misconceptions of Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

15.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373715.10: Introduction to Mutations and Evolution
Recognize that mutations are the basis of microevolution; and that adaptations enhance the survival
and reproduction of individuals in a population
We’ve already learned about DNA and mutations. In this o utcome, we’ll understand how these mutations impact ev olution and the
change of species.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Understand the connection between genetics and evolution
Understand how environmental changes and selective pres sures impact the spread of mutations, contributing to the p rocess of
evolution
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Population Genetics
Selective and Environmental Pressures
Self Check: Mutations and Evolution
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
15.10: Introduction to Mutations and Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373815.11: Population Genetics
Darwin Meets Mendel—Not Literally
When Darwin came up with his theories of evolution and natural selection, he knew that the processes he was des cribing depended
on heritable variation in populations. That is, they relied on differences in the features of the organi sms in a population and on the
ability of these different features to be passed on to o ffspring.
Darwin did not, however, know how traits were inherited. Li ke other scientists of his time, he thought that trai ts were passed on via
blending inheritance. In this model, parents’ traits are supposed to permanently blend in their offspri ng. The blending model was
disproven by Austrian monk Gregor Mendel, who found that tr aits are specified by non-blending heritable units calle d genes.
Although Mendel published his work on genetics just a f ew years after Darwin published his ideas on evolution, Darwin probably
never read Mendel’s work. Today, we can combine Darwin’s and Mendel’s ideas to arrive at a clearer understandi ng of what
evolution is and how it takes place.
Microevolution and Population Genetics
Microevolution, or evolution on a small scale, is defined as a chan ge in the frequency of gene variants, alleles, in a p opulation over
generations. The field of biology that studies allele frequencies in populations and how they change over time is called population
genetics.
Microevolution is sometimes contrasted with macroevolution, evolution that involves large changes, such as form ation of new
groups or species, and happens over long time perio ds. However, most biologists view microevolution and mac roevolution as the
same process happening on different timescales. Microevo lution adds up gradually, over long periods of time to produce
macroevolutionary changes.
Let’s look at three concepts that are core to the def inition of microevolution: populations, alleles, and al lele frequency.
Populations
A population is a group of organisms of the same species that ar e found in the same area and can interbreed. A popu lation is the
smallest unit that can evolve—in other words, an individual can’t evolve.
Alleles
An allele is a version of a gene, a heritable unit that controls a particular feature of an organism.
For instance, Mendel studied a gene that controls flowe r color in pea plants. This gene comes in a white all ele, w, and a purple
allele, W. Each pea plant has two gene copies, which may be th e same or different alleles. When the alleles are diffe rent, one—the
dominant allele, W—may hide the other—the recessive allele, w. A plant’s set of alleles, called its genotype, determines its
phenotype, or observable features, in this case flower color.
Allele Frequency
Allele frequency refers to how frequently a particular allele appear s in a population. For instance, if all the alleles i n a population
of pea plants were purple alleles, W, the allele frequency of W would be 100%, or 1.0. However, if half the alleles were W and half
were w, each allele would have an allele frequency of 50%, or 0.5.
In general, we can define allele frequency as

15.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43738
\text{Frequency of allele }A=\frac{\text{Number of copies of allele }A\text{ in population}}{\text{Tot al number of }A\text{/}a\text{ gene copies in popul ation}}
Sometimes there are more than two alleles in a populat ion (e.g., there might be A, a, and A alleles of a gene). In that case, you
would want to add up all of the different alleles to get your denominator.
It’s also possible to calculate genotype frequencies —the fraction of individuals with a given genotype—an d phenotype
frequencies —the fraction of individuals with a given phenotype. Keep in mind, though, that these are different conce pts from
allele frequency. We’ll see an example of this difference next.
This video talks about population genetics, which helps t o explain the evolution of populations over time.
A YouTube element has been excluded from this versi on of the text. You can view it online here: pb.libret exts.org/biom1/?
p=542
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Allele frequency and the gene pool. Provided by: Khan Academy. Located at:
https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/her/heredity -and-genetics/a/allele-frequency-the-gene-pool. License: CC BYNC-SA: Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
All rights reserved content
Population Genetics: When Darwin Met Mendel - Crash Course Bi ology #18. Authored by: CrashCourse. Located at:
https://youtu.be/WhFKPaRnTdQ. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
15.11: Population Genetics is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.i
Learning Objectives

15.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4373915.12: Selective and Environmental Pressures
Natural selection only acts on the population’s herit able traits: selecting for beneficial alleles and th us increasing their frequency in
the population, while selecting against deleterious a lleles and thereby decreasing their frequency—a pro cess known as adaptive
evolution. Natural selection does not act on individual alleles, however, but on entire organisms. An individual may carry a very
beneficial genotype with a resulting phenotype that, f or example, increases the ability to reproduce (fec undity), but if that same
individual also carries an allele that results in a fatal childhood disease, that fecundity phenotype wil l not be passed on to the next
generation because the individual will not live to r each reproductive age. Natural selection acts at the level of the individual; it
selects for individuals with greater contributions t o the gene pool of the next generation, known as an o rganism’s evolutionary
(Darwinian) fitness.
Fitness is often quantifiable and is measured by scienti sts in the field. However, it is not the absolute fitnes s of an individual that
counts, but rather how it compares to the other organisms in the population. This concept, called relative fitness, allows
researchers to determine which individuals are contri buting additional offspring to the next generation, and thus, how the
population might evolve.
There are several ways selection can affect population variation: stabilizing selection, directional selec tion, diversifying selection,
frequency-dependent selection, and sexual selection. As natural selection influences the allele frequencie s in a population,
individuals can either become more or less genetical ly similar and the phenotypes displayed can become more similar or more
disparate.
Stabilizing Selection
If natural selection favors an average phenotype, se lecting against extreme variation, the population wi ll undergo stabilizing
selection (Figure 1a). In a population of mice that live in the woods, for example, natural selection is likely to fav or individuals that
best blend in with the forest floor and are less lik ely to be spotted by predators. Assuming the ground is a fairly consistent shade of
brown, those mice whose fur is most closely matched to that color will be most likely to survive and reprod uce, passing on their
genes for their brown coat. Mice that carry alleles th at make them a bit lighter or a bit darker will stan d out against the ground and
be more likely to fall victim to predation. As a result of t his selection, the population’s genetic variance will d ecrease.
Directional Selection
When the environment changes, populations will often undergo directional selection (Figure 1b), which selects for phenotypes at
one end of the spectrum of existing variation. A clas sic example of this type of selection is the evolutio n of the peppered moth in
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century England. Prior to the Industrial Revolution, the moths were predominate ly light in color, which
allowed them to blend in with the light-colored trees and lichens in their environment. But as soot began spewing from factories,
the trees became darkened, and the light-colored moth s became easier for predatory birds to spot. Over time, the frequency of the
melanic form of the moth increased because they had a higher survival rate in habitats affected by air pollution because their darker
coloration blended with the sooty trees. Similarly, th e hypothetical mouse population may evolve to take on a different coloration if
something were to cause the forest floor where they liv e to change color. The result of this type of selection is a shift in the
population’s genetic variance toward the new, fit phenot ype.
In science, sometimes things are believed to be true, and t hen new information comes to light that changes our under standing. The
story of the peppered moth is an example: the facts beh ind the selection toward darker moths have recently been c alled into
question. Read this article to learn more.
Diversifying Selection
Sometimes two or more distinct phenotypes can each hav e their advantages and be selected for by natural se lection, while the
intermediate phenotypes are, on average, less fit. Kno wn as diversifying selection (Figure 1c), this is seen in many populations of
animals that have multiple male forms. Large, dominan t alpha males obtain mates by brute force, while small males can sneak in
for furtive copulations with the females in an alpha male’s territory. In this case, both the alpha male s and the “sneaking” males will
be selected for, but medium-sized males, which can’t overtake the alpha males and are too big to sneak co pulations, are selected
against. Diversifying selection can also occur when env ironmental changes favor individuals on either end o f the phenotypic
spectrum. Imagine a population of mice living at the beach where there is light-colored sand intersperse d with patches of tall grass.

15.12.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43739In this scenario, light-colored mice that blend in wi th the sand would be favored, as well as dark-colored m ice that can hide in the
grass. Medium-colored mice, on the other hand, would n ot blend in with either the grass or the sand, and wou ld thus be more likely
to be eaten by predators. The result of this type of sele ction is increased genetic variance as the population becomes more diverse.
Figure 1. Different types of natural selection can imp act the distribution of phenotypes within a populatio n. In (a) stabilizing
selection, an average phenotype is favored. In (b) di rectional selection, a change in the environment shif ts the spectrum of
phenotypes observed. In (c) diversifying selection, two or more extreme phenotypes are selected for, while t he average
phenotype is selected against.
In recent years, factories have become cleaner, and less soot is released into the environment. What impa ct do you think this has
had on the distribution of moth color in the populatio n?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”173318″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”173318″]Moths have shifted to a lighter color.[/hidden-answer]Practice Question

15.12.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43739Frequency-dependent Selection
Figure 2. A yellow-throated side-blotched lizard is sma ller than either the blue-throated or orange-throat ed males and appears a bit
like the females of the species, allowing it to sneak c opulations. (credit: “tinyfroglet”/Flickr)
Another type of selection, called frequency-dependent selection, favors phenotypes that are either common (positiv e frequencydependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dep endent selection). An interesting example of this typ e of selection is seen in a
unique group of lizards of the Pacific Northwest. Male c ommon side-blotched lizards come in three throat-col or patterns: orange,
blue, and yellow. Each of these forms has a differen t reproductive strategy: orange males are the stronge st and can fight other males
for access to their females; blue males are medium-s ized and form strong pair bonds with their mates; and yellow males (Figure 2)
are the smallest, and look a bit like females, which allows them to sneak copulations. Like a game of roc k-paper-scissors, orange
beats blue, blue beats yellow, and yellow beats orange in the com petition for females. That is, the big, strong orange males can fight
off the blue males to mate with the blue’s pair-bond ed females, the blue males are successful at guardin g their mates against yellow
sneaker males, and the yellow males can sneak copulatio ns from the potential mates of the large, polygynous or ange males.
In this scenario, orange males will be favored by nat ural selection when the population is dominated by b lue males, blue males will
thrive when the population is mostly yellow males, and yellow males will be selected for when orange males are the most
populous. As a result, populations of side-blotched liza rds cycle in the distribution of these phenotypes—in one generation, orange
might be predominant, and then yellow males will begin to rise in frequency. Once yellow males make up a maj ority of the
population, blue males will be selected for. Finally, when blue males become common, orange males will once again be f avored.
Negative frequency-dependent selection serves to incr ease the population’s genetic variance by selecting for rare phenotypes,
whereas positive frequency-dependent selection usually de creases genetic variance by selecting for common phenotyp es.
Sexual Selection
Males and females of certain species are often quite d ifferent from one another in ways beyond the reproduc tive organs. Males are
often larger, for example, and display many elaborate colors and adornments, like the peacock’s tail, while females tend to be
smaller and duller in decoration. Such differences a re known as sexual dimorphisms (Figure 3), which arise from the fact that in
many populations, particularly animal populations, there is more variance in the reproductive success o f the males than there is of
the females. That is, some males—often the bigger, s tronger, or more decorated males—get the vast majori ty of the total matings,
while others receive none. This can occur because the males are better at fighting off other males, or be cause females will choose to
mate with the bigger or more decorated males. In eithe r case, this variation in reproductive success generat es a strong selection
pressure among males to get those matings, resulting in the evolution of bigger body size and elaborate ornaments to get the
females’ attention. Females, on the other hand, tend to get a handful of selected matings; therefore, they a re more likely to select
more desirable males.
Sexual dimorphism varies widely among species, of cour se, and some species are even sex-role reversed. In su ch cases, females
tend to have a greater variance in their reproducti ve success than males and are correspondingly selected for the bigger body size
and elaborate traits usually characteristic of males.

15.12.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43739
Figure 3. Sexual dimorphism is observed in (a) peacocks a nd peahens, (b) Argiope appensa spiders (the female spid er is the large
one), and in (c) wood ducks. (credit “spiders”: modifi cation of work by “Sanba38″/Wikimedia Commons; credit “duck”:
modification of work by Kevin Cole)
The selection pressures on males and females to obtai n matings is known as sexual selection; it can result in the development of
secondary sexual characteristics that do not benefit the individual’s likelihood of survival but help to maximize its reproductive
success. Sexual selection can be so strong that it sele cts for traits that are actually detrimental to the individual’s survival. Think,
once again, about the peacock’s tail. While it is be autiful and the male with the largest, most colorful tail is more likely to win the
female, it is not the most practical appendage. In ad dition to being more visible to predators, it makes t he males slower in their
attempted escapes. There is some evidence that this risk, in fact, is why females like the big tails in the first place. The speculation
is that large tails carry risk, and only the best mal es survive that risk: the bigger the tail, the more fit the male. This idea is known as
the handicap principle.
The good genes hypothesis states that males develop these impressive ornaments t o show off their efficient metabolism or their
ability to fight disease. Females then choose males with the most impressive traits because it signals their gen etic superiority, which
they will then pass on to their offspring. Though it might be argued that females should not be picky b ecause it will likely reduce
their number of offspring, if better males father mo re fit offspring, it may be beneficial. Fewer, healthie r offspring may increase the
chances of survival more than many, weaker offspring.
In both the handicap principle and the good genes h ypothesis, the trait is said to be an honest signal of the males’ quality, thus
giving females a way to find the fittest mates— males tha t will pass the best genes to their offspring.
No Perfect Organism
Natural selection is a driving force in evolution and can generate populations that are better adapted t o survive and successfully
reproduce in their environments. But natural selectio n cannot produce the perfect organism. Natural selec tion can only select on
existing variation in the population; it does not cre ate anything from scratch. Thus, it is limited by a po pulation’s existing genetic
variance and whatever new alleles arise through mutation and gene flow.
Natural selection is also limited because it works at the level of individuals, not alleles, and some allele s are linked due to their
physical proximity in the genome, making them more l ikely to be passed on together (linkage disequilibr ium). Any given
individual may carry some beneficial alleles and so me unfavorable alleles. It is the net effect of the se alleles, or the organism’s
fitness, upon which natural selection can act. As a resu lt, good alleles can be lost if they are carried by individuals that also have
several overwhelmingly bad alleles; likewise, bad alle les can be kept if they are carried by individuals t hat have enough good
alleles to result in an overall fitness benefit.
Furthermore, natural selection can be constrained by t he relationships between different polymorphisms. One m orph may confer a
higher fitness than another, but may not increase i n frequency due to the fact that going from the less beneficial to the more
beneficial trait would require going through a less b eneficial phenotype. Think back to the mice that liv e at the beach. Some are
light-colored and blend in with the sand, while others are dark and blend in with the patches of grass. The dark-colored mice may
be, overall, more fit than the light-colored mice, and at first glance, one might expect the light-colored mice be selected for a darker
coloration. But remember that the intermediate phen otype, a medium-colored coat, is very bad for the mice —they cannot blend in
with either the sand or the grass and are more likely to be eaten by predators. As a result, the light-co lored mice would not be

15.12.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43739selected for a dark coloration because those individu als that began moving in that direction (began bein g selected for a darker coat)
would be less fit than those that stayed light.
Finally, it is important to understand that not all e volution is adaptive. While natural selection selects the fittest individuals and
often results in a more fit population overall, othe r forces of evolution, including genetic drift and ge ne flow, often do the opposite:
introducing deleterious alleles to the population’s gene pool. Evolution has no purpose—it is not chang ing a population into a
preconceived ideal. It is simply the sum of the vari ous forces described in this chapter and how they inf luence the genetic and
phenotypic variance of a population.
Because natural selection acts to increase the freq uency of beneficial alleles and traits while decreasi ng the frequency of
deleterious qualities, it is adaptive evolution. Natura l selection acts at the level of the individual, sel ecting for those that have a
higher overall fitness compared to the rest of the population. If the fit phenotypes are those that are similar, natural selection
will result in stabilizing selection, and an overall d ecrease in the population’s variation. Directional se lection works to shift a
population’s variance toward a new, fit phenotype, as environmental conditions change. In contrast, diversif ying selection
results in increased genetic variance by selecting for two or more distinct phenotypes.
Other types of selection include frequency-dependent selection, in which individuals with either common (positive frequencydependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dep endent selection) phenotypes are selected for. Finally, sexual selection
results from the fact that one sex has more variance in the reproductive success than the other. As a resul t, males and females
experience different selective pressures, which can o ften lead to the evolution of phenotypic difference s, or sexual
dimorphisms, between the two.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.12: Selective and Environmental Pressures is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

15.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374015.13: Introduction to Phylogenetic Trees
Read and analyze a phylogenetic tree that documents evolutionary relationships
In scientific terms, the evolutionary history and r elationship of an organism or group of organisms is cal led phylogeny. Phylogeny
describes the relationships of an organism, such as fr om which organisms it is thought to have evolved, to which species it is most
closely related, and so forth. Phylogenetic relationsh ips provide information on shared ancestry but not n ecessarily on how
organisms are similar or different.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Identify how and why scientists classify the organisms on earth
Differentiate between types of phylogenetic trees and what the ir structure tells us
Identify some limitations of phylogenetic trees
Relate the taxonomic classification system and binomial n omenclature
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Scientific Classification
Structure of a Phylogenetic Tree
Limitation of Phylogenetic Trees
The Taxonomic Classification System
Self Check: Phylogenetic Trees
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.13: Introduction to Phylogenetic Trees is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374115.14: Scientific Classification
Figure 1. Only a few of the more than one million kn own species of insects are represented in this beetle col lection. Beetles are a
major subgroup of insects. They make up about 40 perce nt of all insect species and about 25 percent of all k nown species of
organisms.
Why do biologists classify organisms? The major reason is to make sense of the incredible diversity of life on Earth. Scientists
have identified millions of different species of org anisms. Among animals, the most diverse group of organi sms is the insects. More
than one million different species of insects have already been described. An estimated nine million in sect species have yet to be
identified. A tiny fraction of insect species is shown i n the beetle collection in Figure 1.
As diverse as insects are, there may be even more specie s of bacteria, another major group of organisms. Clear ly, there is a need to
organize the tremendous diversity of life. Classifi cation allows scientists to organize and better under stand the basic similarities and
differences among organisms. This knowledge is necessa ry to understand the present diversity and the past evolutionary history of
life on Earth.
Phylogenetic Trees
Scientists use a tool called a phylogenetic tree to show the evolutionary pathways and connections among o rganisms. A
phylogenetic tree is a diagram used to reflect evolutionary relation ships among organisms or groups of organisms. Scientist s
consider phylogenetic trees to be a hypothesis of the evolutionary past since one cannot go back to confir m the proposed
relationships. In other words, a “tree of life” can be co nstructed to illustrate when different organisms evol ved and to show the
relationships among different organisms (Figure 1).
Each group of organisms went through its own evolutiona ry journey, called its phylogeny. Each organism shar es relatedness with
others, and based on morphologic and genetic evidence, scientists attempt to map the evolutionary pathways of all life on Earth.
Many scientists build phylogenetic trees to illustrate e volutionary relationships.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
14.1: Form and Function. Provided by: CK-12. Located at: www.ck12.org/book/CK-12-Biology-I-Honors-CADTI3/section/14.1/. License: CC BY-NC: Attribution-NonCommercial
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.14: Scientific Classification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374215.15: Structure of Phylogenetic Trees
A phylogenetic tree can be read like a map of evolu tionary history. Many phylogenetic trees have a single lineage at the base
representing a common ancestor. Scientists call such tre es rooted, which means there is a single ancestral l ineage (typically drawn
from the bottom or left) to which all organisms represe nted in the diagram relate. Notice in the rooted phy logenetic tree that the
three domains—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya—diverge from a single point and branch off. The small branch t hat plants and
animals (including humans) occupy in this diagram sh ows how recent and miniscule these groups are compare d with other
organisms. Unrooted trees don’t show a common ancestor but do show relationships among species.
Figure 1. Both of these phylogenetic trees shows the rel ationship of the three domains of life—Bacteria, Arch aea, and Eukarya—
but the (a) rooted tree attempts to identify when va rious species diverged from a common ancestor while the (b) unrooted tree does
not. (credit a: modification of work by Eric Gaba)
In a rooted tree, the branching indicates evolutiona ry relationships (Figure 2). The point where a split occ urs, called a branch
point, represents where a single lineage evolved into a di stinct new one. A lineage that evolved early from the root and remains
unbranched is called basal taxon. When two lineages stem from the same branch point, th ey are called sister taxa. A branch with
more than two lineages is called a polytomy and serves to illustrate where scientists have not de finitively determined all of the
relationships. It is important to note that although si ster taxa and polytomy do share an ancestor, it doe s not mean that the groups of
organisms split or evolved from each other. Organisms in two taxa may have split apart at a specific branch point, but neither taxa
gave rise to the other.
Figure 2. The root of a phylogenetic tree indicates t hat an ancestral lineage gave rise to all organisms on the tree. A branch point
indicates where two lineages diverged. A lineage that evolved early and remains unbranched is a basal taxon. When two lineages
stem from the same branch point, they are sister taxa. A branch with more than two lineages is a polytomy.
The diagrams above can serve as a pathway to understa nding evolutionary history. The pathway can be traced from the origin of
life to any individual species by navigating through the evolutionary branches between the two points. Also, by starting with a
single species and tracing back towards the “trunk” of the tree, one can discover that species’ ancestors, as well as where lineages
share a common ancestry. In addition, the tree can be us ed to study entire groups of organisms.
Another point to mention on phylogenetic tree struct ure is that rotation at branch points does not change the information. For
example, if a branch point was rotated and the taxon order changed, this would not alter the information b ecause the evolution of
each taxon from the branch point was independent of the ot her.

15.15.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43742Many disciplines within the study of biology contribut e to understanding how past and present life evolved over time; these
disciplines together contribute to building, updatin g, and maintaining the “tree of life.” Information i s used to organize and classify
organisms based on evolutionary relationships in a scie ntific field called systematics. Data may be collect ed from fossils, from
studying the structure of body parts or molecules use d by an organism, and by DNA analysis. By combining da ta from many
sources, scientists can put together the phylogeny o f an organism; since phylogenetic trees are hypothe ses, they will continue to
change as new types of life are discovered and new informat ion is learned.
Video Review
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Phylogeny and Phylogentic Trees. Authored by: Complex Life. Located at: https://youtu.be/iyAOkzdO3vw. License: All
Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
15.15: Structure of Phylogenetic Trees is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374315.16: Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees
It may be easy to assume that more closely related or ganisms look more alike, and while this is often the c ase, it is not always true.
If two closely related lineages evolved under signific antly varied surroundings or after the evolution of a major new adaptation, it is
possible for the two groups to appear more different than other groups that are not as closely related. Fo r example, the phylogenetic
tree in Figure 1 shows that lizards and rabbits both have amniotic eggs, whereas frogs do not; yet lizard s and frogs appear more
similar than lizards and rabbits.
Figure 1. This ladder-like phylogenetic tree of verte brates is rooted by an organism that lacked a vertebra l column. At each branch
point, organisms with different characters are placed in different groups based on the characteristics they sh are.
Another aspect of phylogenetic trees is that, unless ot herwise indicated, the branches do not account for leng th of time, only the
evolutionary order. In other words, the length of a br anch does not typically mean more time passed, nor d oes a short branch mean
less time passed— unless specified on the diagram. For example, in Figure 1, the tree does not indicate how m uch time passed
between the evolution of amniotic eggs and hair. What the tree does show is the order in which things took place. Again using
Figure 1, the tree shows that the oldest trait is the vertebral column, followed by hinged jaws, and so forth. Remember that any
phylogenetic tree is a part of the greater whole, and like a real tree, it does not grow in only one dire ction after a new branch
develops.
So, for the organisms in Figure 1, just because a ver tebral column evolved does not mean that invertebrat e evolution ceased, it only
means that a new branch formed. Also, groups that are n ot closely related, but evolve under similar conditi ons, may appear more
phenotypically similar to each other than to a close rela tive.
Head to this website to see interactive exercises that allow you to explore the evolutionary relationships among species.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.16: Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.17.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374415.17: The Taxonomic Classification System
Taxonomy (which literally means “arrangement law”) is the sci ence of classifying organisms to construct internatio nally shared
classification systems with each organism placed into more and more inclusive groupings. Think about how a grocery store is
organized. One large space is divided into departments, s uch as produce, dairy, and meats. Then each department further divides
into aisles, then each aisle into categories and bra nds, and then finally a single product. This organiz ation from larger to smaller,
more specific categories is called a hierarchical sys tem.
The taxonomic classification system (also called the Linnaean system after its inventor, Carl Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist,
zoologist, and physician) uses a hierarchical model. Moving from the point of origin, the groups become mo re specific, until one
branch ends as a single species. For example, after the common beginning of all life, scientists divide o rganisms into three large
categories called a domain: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eu karya. Within each domain is a second category call ed a kingdom. After
kingdoms, the subsequent categories of increasing specific ity are: phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species (Figure 1).
Figure 1. The taxonomic classification system uses a hiera rchical model to organize living organisms into incre asingly specific
categories. The common dog, Canis lupus familiaris, is a subspecies of Canis lupus, which also includes the wolf and dingo. (credit
“dog”: modification of work by Janneke Vreugdenhil)

15.17.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43744The kingdom Animalia stems from the Eukarya domain. Fo r the common dog, the classification levels would be as shown in
Figure 1. Therefore, the full name of an organism tec hnically has eight terms. For the dog, it is: Eukarya, Animalia, Chordata,
Mammalia, Carnivora, Canidae, Canis, and lupus. Notice that each name is capitalized except for sp ecies, and the genus and
species names are italicized. Scientists generally ref er to an organism only by its genus and species, whi ch is its two-word scientific
name, in what is called binomial nomenclature. Therefore, the scientific name of the dog is Canis lupus. The name at each level is
also called a taxon. In other words, dogs are in order Carnivora. Carnivo ra is the name of the taxon at the order level; Can idae is
the taxon at the family level, and so forth. Organis ms also have a common name that people typically us e, in this case, dog. Note
that the dog is additionally a subspecies: the “ familiaris ” in Canis lupus familiaris. Subspecies are members of the same species
that are capable of mating and reproducing viable o ffspring, but they are considered separate subspecie s due to geographic or
behavioral isolation or other factors.
Figure 2 shows how the levels move toward specificity with other organisms. Notice how the dog shares a domain with the widest
diversity of organisms, including plants and butterfl ies. At each sublevel, the organisms become more simila r because they are
more closely related. Historically, scientists classifi ed organisms using characteristics, but as DNA technol ogy developed, more
precise phylogenies have been determined.

15.17.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43744Practice Question
Figure 2. At each sublevel in the taxonomic classificat ion system, organisms become more similar. Dogs and wolve s are the same
species because they can breed and produce viable offsp ring, but they are different enough to be classified as different subspecies.
(credit “plant”: modification of work by “berduchwa l”/Flickr; credit “insect”: modification of work by Jon Sullivan; credit “fish”:
modification of work by Christian Mehlführer; credit “rabbit”: modification of work by Aidan Wojtas; cre dit “cat”: modification of
work by Jonathan Lidbeck; credit “fox”: modification of work by Kevin Bacher, NPS; credit “jackal”: modi fication of work by
Thomas A. Hermann, NBII, USGS; credit “wolf”: modifi cation of work by Robert Dewar; credit “dog”: modif ication of work by
“digital_image_fan”/Flickr)
At what levels are cats and dogs considered to be part of th e same group?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”854290″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”854290″]Cats and dogs are part of the same group at five levels: both are in the domai n Eukarya, the kingdom
Animalia, the phylum Chordata, the class Mammalia, and th e order Carnivora.[/hidden-answer]
Visit this website to classify three organisms —bear, orchid, and sea cucumber—from kingdom to species. T o launch the game,
under Classifying Life, click the picture of the bear or the Launch Interactive button.

15.17.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43744Recent genetic analysis and other advancements have found that some earlier phylogenetic classification s do not align with the
evolutionary past; therefore, changes and updates mu st be made as new discoveries occur. Recall that phylogen etic trees are
hypotheses and are modified as data becomes available. In addition, classification historically has focused on grouping organisms
mainly by shared characteristics and does not necessar ily illustrate how the various groups relate to each o ther from an
evolutionary perspective. For example, despite the fac t that a hippopotamus resembles a pig more than a whal e, the hippopotamus
may be the closest living relative of the whale.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
15.17: The Taxonomic Classification System is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.18.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4374515.18: Putting It Together- Theory of Evolution
Let’s return to our discussion of evolving bacteria from the beginning of the module. The World Health Org anization (WHO)
suggests that based on current evidence, gonorrhea ma y soon be untreatable; there are no new treatments o r vaccinations in
development for this bacteria. Within the United State s this remain the second most common sexually transmi tted disease. Almost a
third of the US cases are drug resistant. MRSA remains a g rowing problem in our healthcare system. Staph bacter ia are the most
common source of health-care related infections in the Un ited States. Of MRSA infections, nearly 14% result in death.
Think about It
Based on this lesson you now understand that evoluti on is an inevitable process. Is there any hope of sto pping antibiotic resistance
from developing?
[practice-area rows=”4″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”880848″]See Our Thoughts[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”880848″]Yes and no. The average per son can take a number of steps to minimize selective pressures on
parasites. Without these pressures, mutations are less likel y to spread in the population.
[/hidden-answer]
Is there anything you can do?
[practice-area rows=”4″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”558353″]See Our Thoughts[/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”558353″]
Take the full course of prescribed antibiotics
Don’t save or share leftover antibiotics
Don’t ask for antibiotics if your doctor does not recomm end them
Practice good hygiene and get recommended vaccination s
Minimize your use of antibacterial products
[/hidden-answer]
To learn more about the topic, you can visit the following we bsites:
WHO—Antimicrobial Resistance
CDC—Antibiotic Resistance Threats
CDC—Mission Critical: Preventing Antibiotic Resistance
FDA—Antibacterial Soap
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
15.18: Putting It Together- Theory of Evolution is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
16: Module 14- Modern Biology
16.1: Why It Matters- Modern Biology
16.2: Introduction to Key Technologies
16.3: Manipulating Genetic Material
16.4: DNA Sequencing
16.5: Cloning
16.6: Genetic Engineering
16.7: Introduction to Biotechnology Applications
16.8: Medicinal Biotechnology
16.9: Agricultural Biotechnology
16.10: Biotechnology at the Cutting Edge
16.11: Introduction to Risks and Benefits of Genomic Sci ence
16.12: Genetic Information Used for Identification
16.13: Medical Uses of Genetic Information
16.14: Genomics in Agriculture
16.15: Putting It Together- Modern Biology
16.16: Assignment- When Jabberjays Attack!
16: Module 14- Modern Biology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376316.1: Why It Matters- Modern Biology
Why describe and discuss techniques used in modern biology?
Biology has impacted nearly every facet of human li fe. The entire field of medicine is based on biologi cal discovery and
exploration; without knowledge of how the human body f unctions, we would have no idea how to fix our bodies whe n something
goes wrong.
Over the decades, new techniques have been developed to study biology. Scientists recently mapped the com plete human genome.
New technologies were developed to help speed this proc ess up. Forensic science has also been vastly influen ced by biological
discovery. New techniques enable law enforcement to ga ther DNA evidence at crime scenes, which helps ensure th ey identify the
right suspect. DNA based information can be applied to many such situations. Consider the following scenario.
On Memorial Day 1984, the remains of a soldier killed du ring the Vietnam War were laid to rest in the Tomb of the Unknown at
Arlington National Cemetery. A decade later, however, q uestions began to arise about the identity of this u nknown soldier. In
particular, people began to wonder if, due to scientific i mprovement and developments, the soldier could be ident ified.
Learning Outcomes
List key technologies enabling modern uses of biology
Identify societal uses of biotechnology
Discuss the risks and benefits involved in applications of genetic and genomic science
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Why It Matters: Modern Biology. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License:
CC BY: Attribution
16.1: Why It Matters- Modern Biology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376416.2: Introduction to Key Technologies
List key technologies enabling modern uses of biology
Biotechnology is the use of biological agents for t echnological advancement. Biotechnology was used for b reeding livestock and
crops long before the scientific basis of these tec hniques was understood. Since the discovery of the struct ure of DNA in 1953, the
field of biotechnology has grown rapidly through bot h academic research and private companies. The primar y applications of this
technology are in medicine (production of vaccines and antibiotics) and agriculture (genetic modificat ion of crops, such as to
increase nutrient content). Biotechnology also has m any industrial applications, such as fermentation, the treatment of oil spills,
and the production of biofuels (Figure 1).
Figure 1. Antibiotics are chemicals produced by fungi, bacteria, and other organisms that have antimicrobia l properties. The first
antibiotic discovered was penicillin. Antibiotics are now commercially produced and tested for their poten tial to inhibit bacterial
growth. (credit “advertisement”: modification of wor k by NIH; credit “test plate”: modification of work by Don Stalons/CDC;
scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
In this outcome, we will learn about some modern techno logies used in biology today.
What You’ll Learn to Do
List basic techniques to manipulation genetic informa tion (DNA and RNA)
Recognize technologies used for molecular, cellular, and reproductive cloning
Understand the basics of genetic engineering
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Manipulating Genetic Material
Cloning
Genetic Engineering
Self Check: Key Technologies
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8

16.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376416.2: Introduction to Key Technologies is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376516.3: Manipulating Genetic Material
To understand the basic techniques used to work with nuc leic acids, remember that nucleic acids are macromol ecules made of
nucleotides (a sugar, a phosphate, and a nitrogenous base) linked by phosphodiester bonds. The phosphate groups on these
molecules each have a net negative charge. An entire set of DNA molecules in the nucleus is called the geno me. DNA has two
complementary strands linked by hydrogen bonds betwee n the paired bases. The two strands can be separated by exposure to high
temperatures (DNA denaturation) and can be reannealed by cooling. The DNA can be replicated by the DNA polym erase enzyme.
Unlike DNA, which is located in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, RNA molecules leave the nucleus. The most common type of
RNA that is analyzed is the messenger RNA (mRNA) because it represents the protein-coding genes that are acti vely expressed.
However, RNA molecules present some other challenges to analy sis, as they are often less stable than DNA.
DNA and RNA Extraction
To study or manipulate nucleic acids, the DNA or RNA m ust first be isolated or extracted from the cells. V arious techniques are
used to extract different types of DNA (Figure 1). Most nucleic acid extraction techniques involve steps to break open the cell and
use enzymatic reactions to destroy all macromolecule s that are not desired (such as degradation of unwant ed molecules and
separation from the DNA sample). Cells are broken usin g a lysis buffer (a solution which is mostly a detergent); lysis means “to
split.” These enzymes break apart lipid molecules in the cell membranes and nuclear membranes. Macromole cules are inactivated
using enzymes such as proteases that break down proteins, and ribonucleases (RNAses) that break down RNA. The DNA is then
precipitated using alcohol. Human genomic DNA is usual ly visible as a gelatinous, white mass. The DNA samples can be stored
frozen at –80°C for several years.
Figure 1. This diagram shows the basic method used for ex traction of DNA.
RNA analysis is performed to study gene expression patte rns in cells. RNA is naturally very unstable because RNAses are
commonly present in nature and very difficult to ina ctivate. Similar to DNA, RNA extraction involves the use o f various buffers
and enzymes to inactivate macromolecules and preserve th e RNA.

16.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43765
Figure 2. Shown are DNA fragments from seven samples run on a gel, stained with a fluorescent dye, and viewed under UV light.
(credit: James Jacob, Tompkins Cortland Community Colle ge)
Gel Electrophoresis
Because nucleic acids are negatively charged ions at neutral or basic pH in an aqueous environment, they can be mobilized by an
electric field. Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate molecules on the ba sis of size, using this charge. The nucleic
acids can be separated as whole chromosomes or fragme nts. The nucleic acids are loaded into a slot near the negative electrode of a
semisolid, porous gel matrix and pushed toward the posi tive electrode at the opposite end of the gel. Smalle r molecules move
through the pores in the gel faster than larger molec ules; this difference in the rate of migration separa tes the fragments on the basis
of size. There are molecular weight standard samples t hat can be run alongside the molecules to provide a size comparison. Nucleic
acids in a gel matrix can be observed using various fluorescent or colored dyes. Distinct nucleic acid fra gments appear as bands at
specific distances from the top of the gel (the neg ative electrode end) on the basis of their size (Fig ure 2). A mixture of genomic
DNA fragments of varying sizes appear as a long smear, whereas uncut genomic DNA is usually too large to run t hrough the gel
and forms a single large band at the top of the gel.
Amplification of Nucleic Acid Fragments by Polymerase Chain Reaction
Although genomic DNA is visible to the naked eye when it is extracted in bulk, DNA analysis often requires fo cusing on one or
more specific regions of the genome. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique used to amplify specific regions of DNA
for further analysis (Figure 3). PCR is used for many purposes in laboratories, such as the cloning of gen e fragments to analyze
genetic diseases, identification of contaminant fore ign DNA in a sample, and the amplification of DNA for seq uencing. More
practical applications include the determination of pat ernity and detection of genetic diseases.

16.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43765
Figure 3. Polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, is used to amplify a specific sequence of DNA. Primers—short pieces of DNA
complementary to each end of the target sequence—are combined with genomic DNA, Taq polymerase, and deox ynucleotides. Taq
polymerase is a DNA polymerase isolated from the thermo stable bacterium Thermus aquaticus that is able to withstand the high
temperatures used in PCR. Thermus aquaticus grows naturally in the Lower Geyser Basin of Yellowsto ne National Park. Reverse
transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) is similar to PCR, but cDNA is made from an RNA template before PCR begins.
DNA fragments can also be amplified from an RNA templa te in a process called reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR). The first
step is to recreate the original DNA template strand (called cDNA) by applying DNA nucleotides to the mRNA. This process is
called reverse transcription. This requires the pres ence of an enzyme called reverse transcriptase. After the cDNA is made, regular
PCR can be used to amplify it.
Deepen your understanding of the polymerase chain react ion by clicking through this interactive exercise.
Hybridization, Southern Blotting, and Northern Blotting
Nucleic acid samples, such as fragmented genomic DNA and RNA extracts, can be probed for the presence of cert ain sequences.
Short DNA fragments called probes are designed and labeled with radioactive or fluore scent dyes to aid detection. Gel
electrophoresis separates the nucleic acid fragments according to their size. The fragments in the gel a re then transferred onto a
nylon membrane in a procedure called blotting (Figure 4). The nucleic acid fragments that are bound to the surface of the
membrane can then be probed with specific radioactiv ely or fluorescently labeled probe sequences. When DNA is transferred to a

16.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43765nylon membrane, the technique is called Southern blotting, and when RNA is transferred to a nylon membrane, it is called
northern blotting. Southern blots are used to detect the presence of c ertain DNA sequences in a given genome, and northern bl ots
are used to detect gene expression. Note that “Southern ” blotting is capitalized but no other type of blott ing; Southern blotting is
named after the scientist who pioneered this techniqu e, Edwin Southern. The other types of blotting were nam ed in reference to the
original Southern blot.
Figure 4. Southern blotting is used to find a particul ar sequence in a sample of DNA. DNA fragments are separ ated on a gel,
transferred to a nylon membrane, and incubated with a DNA probe complementary to the sequence of interest. Northern blotting is
similar to Southern blotting, but RNA is run on the ge l instead of DNA. In western blotting, proteins are ru n on a gel and detected
using antibodies.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
16.3: Manipulating Genetic Material is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376616.4: DNA Sequencing
Until the 1990s, the sequencing of DNA (reading the seque nce of DNA) was a relatively expensive and long process. Using
radiolabeled nucleotides also compounded the proble m through safety concerns. With currently available technology and
automated machines, the process is cheap, safer, an d can be completed in a matter of hours. Fred Sanger d eveloped the sequencing
method used for the human genome sequencing project, which i s widely used today (Figure 1).
Figure 1. In Frederick Sanger’s dideoxy chain terminat ion method, dye-labeled dideoxynucleotides are used t o generate DNA
fragments that terminate at different points. The DNA is separated by capillary electrophoresis on the basis o f size, and from the
order of fragments formed, the DNA sequence can be re ad. The DNA sequence readout is shown on an electrophe rogram that is
generated by a laser scanner.
Visit this site to watch a video explaining the DNA sequence re ading technique that resulted from Sanger’s work.
The method is known as the dideoxy chain termination method. The sequencing method is based on the use of chain terminators,
the dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The dideoxynucleotides, or ddNTPSs, differ from the deoxynucleotides by the lack of a free 3′
OH group on the five-carbon sugar. If a ddNTP is added to a growing a DNA strand, the chain is not extended any further because
the free 3′ OH group needed to add another nucleotide is not available. By using a predetermined ratio of d eoxyribonucleotides to
dideoxynucleotides, it is possible to generate DNA fragmen ts of different sizes.
Figure 2. DNA can be separated on the basis of size using gel electrophoresis. (credit: James Jacob, Tompkins Cort land Community
College)
The DNA sample to be sequenced is denatured or separate d into two strands by heating it to high temperatures. The DNA is
divided into four tubes in which a primer, DNA polymera se, and all four nucleotides (A, T, G, and C) are added. In addition to each
of the four tubes, limited quantities of one of the four dideoxynucleotides are added to each tube respe ctively. The tubes are labeled
as A, T, G, and C according to the ddNTP added. For detect ion purposes, each of the four dideoxynucleotides c arries a different
fluorescent label. Chain elongation continues until a fluorescent dideoxy nucleotide is incorporated, af ter which no further

16.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43766elongation takes place. After the reaction is over, el ectrophoresis is performed. Even a difference in length of a single base can be
detected. The sequence is read from a laser scanner. For his work on DNA sequencing, Sanger received a Nobel Pri ze in chemistry
in 1980.
As already mentioned, gel electrophoresis (Figure 2) is a technique used to separate DNA fragme nts of different sizes. Usually the
gel is made of a chemical called agarose. Agarose powde r is added to a buffer and heated. After cooling, th e gel solution is poured
into a casting tray. Once the gel has solidified, the DNA is loaded on the gel and electric current is appli ed. The DNA has a net
negative charge and moves from the negative electro de toward the positive electrode. The electric curren t is applied for sufficient
time to let the DNA separate according to size; the sm allest fragments will be farthest from the well (where the DNA was loaded),
and the heavier molecular weight fragments will be clo sest to the well. Once the DNA is separated, the gel is stained with a DNAspecific dye for viewing it.
Sanger’s genome sequencing has led to a race to sequenc e human genomes at a rapid speed and low cost, often referr ed to as the
$1000 in one day sequence. Learn more by watching the Sequencing at Speed animation her e.
Neanderthal Genome: How Are We Related?
The first draft sequence of the Neanderthal genome was published by Richard E. Green et al. in 2010. Neandert hals are the
closest ancestors of present-day humans. They were known t o have lived in Europe and Western Asia before they disappeared from
fossil records approximately 30,000 years ago. Green’s team studied almost 40,000-year-old fossil remains t hat were selected from
sites across the world. Extremely sophisticated means of sample preparation and DNA sequencing were employed because of the
fragile nature of the bones and heavy microbial cont amination. In their study, the scientists were able to sequence some four billion
base pairs. The Neanderthal sequence was compared with th at of present-day humans from across the world. After c omparing the
sequences, the researchers found that the Neandertha l genome had 2 to 3 percent greater similarity to p eople living outside Africa
than to people in Africa. While current theories have suggested that all present-day humans can be traced to a small ancestral
population in Africa, the data from the Neanderthal ge nome may contradict this view. Green and his colleague s also discovered
DNA segments among people in Europe and Asia that are more similar to Neanderthal sequences than to other co ntemporary
human sequences. Another interesting observation was t hat Neanderthals are as closely related to people fr om Papua New Guinea
as to those from China or France. This is surprising because Neanderthal fossil remains have been located only in Europe and West
Asia. Most likely, genetic exchange took place between Neanderthals and modern humans as modern humans emerg ed out of
Africa, before the divergence of Europeans, East Asians, a nd Papua New Guineans.
Several genes seem to have undergone changes from Neand erthals during the evolution of present-day humans. These genes are
involved in cranial structure, metabolism, skin morph ology, and cognitive development. One of the genes t hat is of particular
interest is RUNX2, which is different in modern day humans and Neandert hals. This gene is responsible for the prominent front al
bone, bell-shaped rib cage, and dental differences se en in Neanderthals. It is speculated that an evolutiona ry change in RUNX2 was
important in the origin of modern-day humans, and this a ffected the cranium and the upper body.
Watch Svante Pääbo’s talk explaining the Neanderthal ge nome research at the 2011 annual TED (Technology, Ent ertainment,
Design) conference.
[1]

16.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43766A YouTube element has been excluded from this version o f the text. You can view it online here: pb.libretexts.org /biom1/?p=566
1. Richard E. Green et al., “A Draft Sequence of the Neandertal Ge nome,” Science 328 (2010): 710–22. ↵
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
Svante Paabo: DNA clues to our inner neanderthal. Authored by: TED. Located at: https://youtu.be/kU0ei9ApmsY. License:
All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
16.4: DNA Sequencing is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376716.5: Cloning
Molecular Cloning
In general, the word “cloning” means the creation of a perfect replica; however, in biology, the re-creatio n of a whole organism is
referred to as “reproductive cloning.” Long before a ttempts were made to clone an entire organism, researc hers learned how to
reproduce desired regions or fragments of the genome, a p rocess that is referred to as molecular cloning.
Cloning small fragments of the genome allows for the m anipulation and study of specific genes (and their pro tein products), or
noncoding regions in isolation. A plasmid (also called a vector) is a small circular DNA molecule that repl icates independently of
the chromosomal DNA of microorganisms such as E. coli. In cloning, the plasmid molecules can be used to pro vide a “folder” in
which to insert a desired DNA fragment. Plasmids are usua lly introduced into a bacterial host for proliferat ion. In the bacterial
context, the fragment of DNA from the human genome (or the genome of another organism that is being studied) is referred to as
foreign DNA, or a transgene, to differentiate it from the DNA of the ba cterium, which is called the host DNA.
Plasmids occur naturally in bacterial populations (suc h as Escherichia coli) and have genes that can contribute favorable trai ts to
the organism, such as antibiotic resistance (the ability to be unaffected by antibiotics). Plas mids have been repurposed and
engineered as vectors for molecular cloning and the large-scale production of important reagents, such as insulin and human
growth hormone. An important feature of plasmid vecto rs is the ease with which a foreign DNA fragment can be in troduced via the
multiple cloning site (MCS). The MCS is a short DNA sequence containing multiple s ites that can be cut with different commonly
available restriction endonucleases. Restriction endonucleases recognize specific DNA sequences and cut them in a pre dictable
manner; they are naturally produced by bacteria as a defense mechanism against foreign DNA. Many restriction endonucleases
make staggered cuts in the two strands of DNA, such that the cut ends have a 2- or 4-base single-stranded ov erhang. Because these
overhangs are capable of annealing with complementary overhangs, these are called “sticky ends.” Addition o f an enzyme called
DNA ligase permanently joins the DNA fragments via phosph odiester bonds. In this way, any DNA fragment generated by
restriction endonuclease cleavage can be spliced be tween the two ends of a plasmid DNA that has been cut wit h the same
restriction endonuclease (Figure 1).
Recombinant DNA Molecules
Plasmids with foreign DNA inserted into them are called recombinant DNA molecules because they are created artificially and do
not occur in nature. They are also called chimeric mo lecules because the origin of different parts of the m olecules can be traced
back to different species of biological organisms o r even to chemical synthesis. Proteins that are expresse d from recombinant DNA
molecules are called recombinant proteins. Not all recombinant plasmids are capable of express ing genes. The recombinant DNA
may need to be moved into a different vector (or ho st) that is better designed for gene expression. Plasm ids may also be engineered
to express proteins only when stimulated by certain en vironmental factors, so that scientists can control the expression of the
recombinant proteins.
View an animation of recombination in cloning from the DNA Learning Center.
Cellular Cloning
Unicellular organisms, such as bacteria and yeast, nat urally produce clones of themselves when they replicat e asexually by binary
fission; this is known as cellular cloning. The nuclear DNA duplicates by the process of mitosi s, which creates an exact replica of
the genetic material.
Practice Question

16.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43767
Figure 1. This diagram shows the steps involved in molecu lar cloning.
You are working in a molecular biology lab and, unbek nownst to you, your lab partner left the foreign geno mic DNA that you are
planning to clone on the lab bench overnight instea d of storing it in the freezer. As a result, it was de graded by nucleases, but still
used in the experiment. The plasmid, on the other han d, is fine. What results would you expect from your mo lecular cloning
experiment?
a. There will be no colonies on the bacterial plate.
b. There will be blue colonies only.
c. There will be blue and white colonies.
d. The will be white colonies only.
[reveal-answer q=”511969″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]
[hidden-answer a=”511969″]Answer b. The experiment would r esult in blue colonies only.[/hidden-answer]
Reproductive Cloning
Reproductive cloning is a method used to make a clone or an identical c opy of an entire multicellular organism. Most
multicellular organisms undergo reproduction by sexua l means, which involves genetic hybridization of two i ndividuals (parents),
making it impossible for generation of an identical copy or a clone of either parent. Recent advances in biotechnology have made it
possible to artificially induce asexual reproduction of m ammals in the laboratory.

16.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43767Parthenogenesis, or “virgin birth,” occurs when an embr yo grows and develops without the fertilization of the egg occurring; this is
a form of asexual reproduction. An example of parthen ogenesis occurs in species in which the female lays an egg and if the egg is
fertilized, it is a diploid egg and the individual d evelops into a female; if the egg is not fertilized, it remains a haploid egg and
develops into a male. The unfertilized egg is called a parthenogenic, or virgin, egg. Some insects and repti les lay parthenogenic
eggs that can develop into adults.
Sexual reproduction requires two cells; when the haplo id egg and sperm cells fuse, a diploid zygote results. The zygote nucleus
contains the genetic information to produce a new in dividual. However, early embryonic development require s the cytoplasmic
material contained in the egg cell. This idea forms the basis for reproductive cloning. Therefore, if th e haploid nucleus of an egg
cell is replaced with a diploid nucleus from the cel l of any individual of the same species (called a donor), it will become a zygote
that is genetically identical to the donor. Somatic c ell nuclear transfer is the technique of transferrin g a diploid nucleus into an
enucleated egg. It can be used for either therapeutic cloning or reproductive cloning.
The first cloned animal was Dolly, a sheep who was born in 1996. The success rate of reproductive cloning at the time was very
low. Dolly lived for seven years and died of respirat ory complications (Figure 2). There is speculation th at because the cell DNA
belongs to an older individual, the age of the DNA may affect the life expectancy of a cloned individual. Since Dolly, several
animals such as horses, bulls, and goats have been succ essfully cloned, although these individuals often exh ibit facial, limb, and
cardiac abnormalities. There have been attempts at producing cloned human embryos as sources of embryon ic stem cells,
sometimes referred to as cloning for therapeutic pur poses. Therapeutic cloning produces stem cells to atte mpt to remedy
detrimental diseases or defects (unlike reproductive cloning, which aims to reproduce an organism). Still, t herapeutic cloning
efforts have met with resistance because of bioethical cons iderations.
Figure 2. Dolly the sheep was the first mammal to be cl oned. To create Dolly, the nucleus was removed from a donor egg cell.
The nucleus from a second sheep was then introduced int o the cell, which was allowed to divide to the blasto cyst stage before
being implanted in a surrogate mother. (credit: modi fication of work by “Squidonius”/Wikimedia Commons)
Do you think Dolly was a Finn-Dorset or a Scottish Blackface sheep?
[practice-area rows=”2″][/practice-area]
[reveal-answer q=”985505″] Show Answer [/reveal-answer]Practice Question

16.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43767[hidden-answer a=”985505″]Dolly was a Finn-Dorset sheep be cause even though the original cell came from a Scott ish blackface
sheep and the surrogate mother was a Scottish blackface, the DNA came from a Finn-Dorset.[/hidden-answer]
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
16.5: Cloning is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376816.6: Genetic Engineering
Genetic engineering is the alteration of an organism’s genotype using r ecombinant DNA technology to modify an organism’s
DNA to achieve desirable traits. The addition of foreign DNA in the form of recombinant DNA vectors generated b y molecular
cloning is the most common method of genetic engineer ing. The organism that receives the recombinant DNA is called a
genetically modified organism (GMO). If the foreign DNA that is introduced comes from a d ifferent species, the host organism is
called transgenic. Bacteria, plants, and animals have been geneticall y modified since the early 1970s for academic, medical,
agricultural, and industrial purposes. In the US, GMOs su ch as Roundup-ready soybeans and borer-resistant corn are part of many
common processed foods.
Gene Targeting
Although classical methods of studying the function of genes began with a given phenotype and determined the genetic basis of
that phenotype, modern techniques allow researchers to start at the DNA sequence level and ask: “What does t his gene or DNA
element do?” This technique, called reverse genetic s, has resulted in reversing the classic genetic meth odology. This method would
be similar to damaging a body part to determine its function. An insect that loses a wing cannot fly, which me ans that the function
of the wing is flight. The classical genetic method would compare insects that cannot fly with insects that can fly, and observe that
the non-flying insects have lost wings. Similarly, muta ting or deleting genes provides researchers with clue s about gene function.
The methods used to disable gene function are collec tively called gene targeting. Gene targeting is the use of recombinant DNA
vectors to alter the expression of a particular gen e, either by introducing mutations in a gene, or by eliminating the expression of a
certain gene by deleting a part or all of the gene sequ ence from the genome of an organism.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
16.6: Genetic Engineering is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376916.7: Introduction to Biotechnology Applications
Identify societal uses of biotechnology
In this outcome we will discuss the ways biotechnology is used in our society.
What You’ll Learn to Do
List at least 3 medicinal uses of biotechnology advanc es
List at least 3 agricultural uses of biotechnology adv ances
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Medicinal Biotechnology
Agricultural Biotechnology
Biotechnology at the Cutting Edge
Self Check: Biotechnology Applications
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
16.7: Introduction to Biotechnology Applications is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4377016.8: Medicinal Biotechnology
It is easy to see how biotechnology can be used for me dicinal purposes. Knowledge of the genetic makeup of o ur species, the
genetic basis of heritable diseases, and the inventio n of technology to manipulate and fix mutant genes provides methods to treat
the disease.
Genetic Diagnosis and Gene Therapy
Figure 1. Gene therapy using an adenovirus vector can be used to cure certain genetic diseases in which a per son has a defective
gene. (credit: NIH)
The process of testing for suspected genetic defects before administering treatment is called genetic diagnosis by genetic testing.
Depending on the inheritance patterns of a disease-ca using gene, family members are advised to undergo ge netic testing. For
example, women diagnosed with breast cancer are usual ly advised to have a biopsy so that the medical team can determine the
genetic basis of cancer development. Treatment plans are based on the findings of genetic tests that det ermine the type of cancer. If
the cancer is caused by inherited gene mutations, o ther female relatives are also advised to undergo g enetic testing and periodic
screening for breast cancer. Genetic testing is also offered for fetuses (or embryos with in vitro fertilization) to determine the
presence or absence of disease-causing genes in families with specific debilitating diseases.
Gene therapy is a genetic engineering technique used to cure di sease. In its simplest form, it involves the introduc tion of a good
gene at a random location in the genome to aid the cure of a disease that is caused by a mutated gene. Th e good gene is usually
introduced into diseased cells as part of a vector t ransmitted by a virus that can infect the host cell and deliver the foreign DNA
(Figure 1). More advanced forms of gene therapy try to c orrect the mutation at the original site in the gen ome, such as is the case
with treatment of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).
Here’s a website to help you learn more information on SCID and its gene therapy trials.
Production of Vaccines, Antibiotics, and Hormones
Traditional vaccination strategies use weakened or in active forms of microorganisms to mount the initial immune response.
Modern techniques use the genes of microorganisms clo ned into vectors to mass produce the desired antigen. The antigen is then
introduced into the body to stimulate the primary im mune response and trigger immune memory. Genes clone d from the influenza
virus have been used to combat the constantly changing s trains of this virus.
Antibiotics are a biotechnological product. They are n aturally produced by microorganisms, such as fungi, to attain an advantage
over bacterial populations. Antibiotics are produced on a large scale by cultivating and manipulating fungal cel ls.
Recombinant DNA technology was used to produce large-sc ale quantities of human insulin in E. coli as early as 1978. Previously,
it was only possible to treat diabetes with pig insulin, which caused allergic reactions in humans because o f differences in the gene
product. In addition, human growth hormone (HGH) is used to treat growth disorders in children. The HGH gene was c loned from
a cDNA library and inserted into E. coli cells by cloning it into a bacterial vector.

16.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43770Transgenic organisms possess DNA from a different species, u sually generated by molecular cloning techniques. V accines,
antibiotics, and hormones are examples of products obt ained by recombinant DNA technology. Transgenic plants are usually
created to improve characteristics of crop plants.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
16.8: Medicinal Biotechnology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

16.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4377116.9: Agricultural Biotechnology
Biotechnology in agriculture can enhance resistance to disease, pest, and environmental stress, and impr ove both crop yield and
quality.
Transgenic Animals
Although several recombinant proteins used in medicin e are successfully produced in bacteria, some proteins require a eukaryotic
animal host for proper processing. For this reason, the desired genes are cloned and expressed in animals, suc h as sheep, goats,
chickens, and mice. Animals that have been modified to express recombinant DNA are called transgenic animals. Several human
proteins are expressed in the milk of transgenic shee p and goats, and some are expressed in the eggs of ch ickens. Mice have been
used extensively for expressing and studying the effects o f recombinant genes and mutations.
Transgenic Plants
Figure 1. Corn, a major agricultural crop used to cre ate products for a variety of industries, is often modi fied through plant
biotechnology. (credit: Keith Weller, USDA)
Manipulating the DNA of plants (i.e., creating GMOs) has help ed to create desirable traits, such as disease resista nce, herbicide and
pesticide resistance, better nutritional value, and better shelf-life (Figure 1). Plants are the most impo rtant source of food for the
human population. Farmers developed ways to select fo r plant varieties with desirable traits long before m odern-day biotechnology
practices were established.
Plants that have received recombinant DNA from other spe cies are called transgenic plants. Because they are not natural, transgenic
plants and other GMOs are closely monitored by governmen t agencies to ensure that they are fit for human co nsumption and do not
endanger other plant and animal life. Because foreig n genes can spread to other species in the environment, extensive testing is
required to ensure ecological stability. Staples like corn, potatoes, and tomatoes were the first crop plants to be genetically
engineered.
Transformation of Plants Using Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Gene transfer occurs naturally between species in mic robial populations. Many viruses that cause human dise ases, such as cancer,
act by incorporating their DNA into the human genome. In plants, tumors caused by the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens
occur by transfer of DNA from the bacterium to the pl ant. Although the tumors do not kill the plants, they make the plants stunted
and more susceptible to harsh environmental conditio ns. Many plants, such as walnuts, grapes, nut trees, and b eets, are affected by
A. tumefaciens. The artificial introduction of DNA into plant cells is more challenging than in animal cells because of the thick
plant cell wall.
Researchers used the natural transfer of DNA from Agrobacterium to a plant host to introduce DNA fragments of their c hoice into
plant hosts. In nature, the disease-causing A. tumefaciens have a set of plasmids, called the Ti plasmids (tum or-inducing plasmids),
that contain genes for the production of tumors in p lants. DNA from the Ti plasmid integrates into the inf ected plant cell’s genome.
Researchers manipulate the Ti plasmids to remove th e tumor-causing genes and insert the desired DNA fragmen t for transfer into
the plant genome. The Ti plasmids carry antibiotic res istance genes to aid selection and can be propagated in E. coli cells as well.

16.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43771Organic Insecticide Bacillus thuringiensis
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a bacterium that produces protein crystals during sporulation that are toxic to many insect sp ecies that
affect plants. Bt toxin has to be ingested by insect s for the toxin to be activated. Insects that have e aten Bt toxin stop feeding on the
plants within a few hours. After the toxin is activated in the intestines of the insects, death occurs within a couple of days. Modern
biotechnology has allowed plants to encode their own crystal Bt toxin that acts against insects. The crysta l toxin genes have been
cloned from Bt and introduced into plants. Bt toxin h as been found to be safe for the environment, non-to xic to humans and other
mammals, and is approved for use by organic farmers as a natural insecticide.
Flavr Savr Tomato
The first GM crop to be introduced into the market was the Flavr Savr Tomato produced in 1994. Antisense RNA t echnology was
used to slow down the process of softening and rotting caused by fungal infections, which led to increased sh elf life of the GM
tomatoes. Additional genetic modification improved the flavor of this tomato. The Flavr Savr tomato did not successfully stay in
the market because of problems maintaining and shippi ng the crop. However, since that time numerous crop pl ants have been
developed and approved for sale and consumption. Co rn, soybeans, and cotton in particular have been wide ly adopted by U.S.
farmers.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
16.9: Agricultural Biotechnology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375616.10: Biotechnology at the Cutting Edge
This video provides an introduction to some of the newest b reakthroughs in biotechnology: biofuel, health, and agr iculture.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Contributors and Attributions
All rights reserved content
Biotechnology at the Cutting Edge. Authored by: National Museum of American History. Located at:
https://youtu.be/ebSWG1QmxnY. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
16.10: Biotechnology at the Cutting Edge is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375716.11: Introduction to Risks and Benefits of Genomic Science
Discuss the risks and benefits involved in applications of genetic and genomic science
Scientific developments can be used in a lot of diffe rent ways that impact our lives. In this outcome, we’ll learn about the risks and
benefits of genomic science.
What You’ll Learn to Do
Outline how genetic information is used in personal identif ication
Discuss medical uses of genetic information and the potential benefits and risks of this
Outline the potential benefits and risks associated with agr icultural uses of biotechnology
Learning Activities
The learning activities for this section include the following:
Genetic Information Used for Identification
Medical Uses of Genetic Information
Genomics in Agriculture
Self Check: Risks and Benefits of Genomic Science
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning. License: CC BY: Attribution
16.11: Introduction to Risks and Benefits of Genomic Sc ience is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

16.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375816.12: Genetic Information Used for Identification
DNA as a Forensic Tool
Information and clues obtained from DNA samples found at crime scenes have been used as evidence in court cases, and genetic
markers have been used in forensic analysis. Genomic an alysis has also become useful in this field. In 2001, the first use of
genomics in forensics was published. It was a collabor ative attempt between academic research institutions a nd the FBI to solve the
mysterious cases of anthrax communicated via the US Po stal Service. Using microbial genomics, researchers det ermined that a
specific strain of anthrax was used in all the mailings.
Mitochondrial Genomics
Mitochondria are intracellular organelles that conta in their own DNA. Mitochondrial DNA mutates at a rapid rate and is often used
to study evolutionary relationships. Another feature that makes studying the mitochondrial genome interest ing is that the
mitochondrial DNA in most multicellular organisms is p assed on only from the mother during the process of fertilization. For this
reason, mitochondrial genomics is often used to trace gene alogy.
DNA Fingerprinting
DNA fingerprinting (also called DNA profiling, DNA testing, or DNA typing) i s a forensic technique used to identify individuals
by characteristics of their DNA. A DNA profile is a small set of DNA variations that is very likely to be diff erent in all unrelated
individuals, thereby being as unique to individuals as are fingerprints (hence the name for the technique).
Although 99.9% of human DNA sequences are the same in e very person, enough of the DNA is different that it is possible to
distinguish one individual from another, unless the y are monozygotic (“identical”) twins. DNA fingerprint ing uses repetitive
sequences that are highly variable, called variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs). Modern law enforcement i n particular uses
short tandem repeats (STRs). STR loci are very simila r between closely related individuals, but are so var iable that unrelated
individuals are extremely unlikely to have the same STRs. The combination of STRs used by law enforcement ena ble identification
though because even closely related individuals will no t share all the same STR loci.
The modern process of DNA fingerprinting was developed in 1984 by Sir Alec Jeffreys, while he was working in th e Department
of Genetics at the University of Leicester. DNA fingerpr inting can be used to identify a person or to place a person at a crime scene
and to help clarify paternity. DNA fingerprinting has also been widely used in the study of animal and flor al populations and has
revolutionized the fields of zoology, botany, and agric ulture.
Watch this video on the process of DNA fingerprinting and DNA p rofiling
A YouTube element has been excluded from this versi on of the text. You can view it online here: pb.libret exts.org/biom1/?
p=582Learning Objectives

16.12.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43758Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
Modification of DNA profiling. Provided by: Wikipedia. Located at: https://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/DNA_profiling. License:
CC BY-SA: Attribution-ShareAlike
All rights reserved content
DNA Fingerprinting. Authored by: Bozeman Science. Located at: https://youtu.be/DbR9xMXuK7c. License: All Rights
Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
16.12: Genetic Information Used for Identification is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

16.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4375916.13: Medical Uses of Genetic Information
Watch this video and consider whether you would be in terested in knowing details about your own personal di sease risk or
susceptibility.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
Predicting Disease Risk at the Individual Level
Predicting the risk of disease involves screening cur rently healthy individuals by genome analysis at th e individual level.
Intervention with lifestyle changes and drugs can be recommended before disease onset. However, this approac h is most applicable
when the problem resides within a single gene defect. Su ch defects only account for approximately 5 percent of diseases in
developed countries. Most of the common diseases, suc h as heart disease, are multi-factored or polygenic, which is a phenotypic
characteristic that involves two or more genes, and also involve environmental factors such as diet. In Ap ril 2010, scientists at
Stanford University published the genome analysis of a healthy individual (Stephen Quake, a scientist at Sta nford University, who
had his genome sequenced); the analysis predicted h is propensity to acquire various diseases. A risk asses sment was performed to
analyze Quake’s percentage of risk for 55 different m edical conditions. A rare genetic mutation was found, which showed him to be
at risk for sudden heart attack. He was also predicted to have a 23 percent risk of developing prostate c ancer and a 1.4 percent risk
of developing Alzheimer’s. The scientists used databas es and several publications to analyze the genomic da ta. Even though
genomic sequencing is becoming more affordable and analytical tools are becoming more reliable, ethical issues surrounding
genomic analysis at a population level remain to be addr essed.
Debate remains over what to do with individual level d ata as well, such as the data from the genomic analy sis of Quake’s DNA. As
a result of the study it was recommended that Quake star t a regiment of preventative statins; the long-term e ffects of this study or
treatment remain unknown at this stage.
Figure 1. PCA3 is a gene that is expressed in prostate epithelial cell s and overexpressed in cancerous cells. A high concentra tion of
PCA3 in urine is indicative of prostate cancer. The PCA3 test is considered to be a better indicator of cancer than the more well
know PSA test, which measures the level of PSA (prostate- specific antigen) in the blood.
For example, in 2011, the United States Preventative Ser vices Task Force recommended against using the PSA test to screen
healthy men for prostate cancer. Their recommendati on is based on evidence that screening does not red uce the risk of death from
prostate cancer. Prostate cancer often develops very slowly and does not cause problems, while the cancer t reatment can have
severe side effects. The PCA3 (Figure 1) test is considered to be more accurate, bu t screening may still result in men who would
not have been harmed by the cancer itself suffering sid e effects from treatment.
What do you think? Should all healthy men be screene d for prostate cancer using the PCA3 or PSA test? Should people in general
be screened to find out if they have a genetic risk for cancer or other diseases?
There are no right or wrong answers to these questions. While it is true that prostate cancer treatment it self can be harmful, many
men would rather be aware that they have cancer so th ey can monitor the disease and begin treatment if it progresses. And while
genetic screening may be useful, it is expensive and m ay cause needless worry. People with certain risk facto rs may never develop
the disease, and preventative treatments may do more har m than good.

16.13.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43759Pharmacogenomics and Toxicogenomics
Pharmacogenomics, also called toxicogenomics, involves evaluating the effectiveness and safety of drugs on the basis of
information from an individual’s genomic sequence. Ge nomic responses to drugs can be studied using experimen tal animals (such
as laboratory rats or mice) or live cells in the la boratory before embarking on studies with humans. Studyi ng changes in gene
expression could provide information about the transc ription profile in the presence of the drug, which can be used as an early
indicator of the potential for toxic effects. For ex ample, genes involved in cellular growth and controll ed cell death, when
disturbed, could lead to the growth of cancerous cel ls. Genome-wide studies can also help to find new genes i nvolved in drug
toxicity. Personal genome sequence information can be used to prescribe medications that will be most effec tive and least toxic on
the basis of the individual patient’s genotype. The g ene signatures may not be completely accurate, but c an be tested further before
pathologic symptoms arise.
Microbial Genomics
Metagenomics
Figure 2. Metagenomics involves isolating DNA from mult iple species within an environmental niche.
Traditionally, microbiology has been taught with the view that microorganisms are best studied under pure culture conditions,
which involves isolating a single type of cell and c ulturing it in the laboratory. Because microorganism s can go through several
generations in a matter of hours, their gene express ion profiles adapt to the new laboratory environment very quickly. In addition,
the vast majority of bacterial species resist being c ultured in isolation. Most microorganisms do not live as isolated entities, but in
microbial communities known as biofilms. For all of t hese reasons, pure culture is not always the best way to study
microorganisms. Metagenomics is the study of the collect ive genomes of multiple species that grow and intera ct in an
environmental niche. Metagenomics can be used to iden tify new species more rapidly and to analyze the effec t of pollutants on the
environment (Figure 2).
Multitude of Benefits
Knowledge of the genomics of microorganisms is being use d to find better ways to harness biofuels from algae and cyanobacteria.
The primary sources of fuel today are coal, oil, wood, and other plant products, such as ethanol. Although pla nts are renewable
resources, there is still a need to find more alterna tive renewable sources of energy to meet our populati on’s energy demands. The
microbial world is one of the largest resources for genes that encode new enzymes and produce new organic compounds, and it
remains largely untapped. Microorganisms are used to create products, such as enzymes that are used in rese arch, antibiotics, and
other anti-microbial mechanisms. Microbial genomics is h elping to develop diagnostic tools, improved vaccin es, new disease
treatments, and advanced environmental cleanup technique s.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8

16.13.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43759All rights reserved content
Personalized Medicine: Do You Want to Know?. Authored by: World Science Festival. Located at:
https://youtu.be/OON70d8gTnc. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
16.13: Medical Uses of Genetic Information is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376016.14: Genomics in Agriculture
Genomics can reduce the trials and failures involved in scientific research to a certain extent, which coul d improve the quality and
quantity of crop yields in agriculture. Linking trai ts to genes or gene signatures helps to improve crop breeding to generate hybrids
with the most desirable qualities. Scientists use gen omic data to identify desirable traits, and then tr ansfer those traits to a different
organism. Scientists are discovering how genomics can improve the quality and quantity of agricultural pr oduction. For example,
scientists could use desirable traits to create a us eful product or enhance an existing product, such as making a drought-sensitive
crop more tolerant of the dry season.
GMO Controversies: Science versus Public Fear
Watch Borut Bohanec, the Chair of the Department of Agronomy at the University of Ljubljana (in Slovenia), as he discusses the
fears and potential benefits surrounding GMOs.
A link to an interactive elements can be found at the b ottom of this page.
You can view the transcript for “GMO Controversies – Science vs. Publi c Fear” here (opens in new window).
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
Biology. Provided by: OpenStax CNX. Located at: http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72e-48f5-b51e-f14f2 1b5eabd@10.8.
License: CC BY: Attribution. License Terms: Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/185cbf87-c72...f21b5eabd@10.8
All rights reserved content
GMO controversies - science vs. public fear: Borut Bohanec at TEDxLjubljana. Authored by: TEDx Talks. Located at:
https://youtu.be/mz4_TwdaYeI. License: All Rights Reserved. License Terms: Standard YouTube License
16.14: Genomics in Agriculture is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376116.15: Putting It Together- Modern Biology
Figure 1. A photo of Michael Blassie in his Air Force Ac ademy Cadet Uniform.
Let’s return to our discussion of the unknown solider we discussed at the beginning of the module. First Li eutenant Michael Joseph
Blassie, 24, was shot down over South Vietnam in 1972 and presu med dead.
In the early 1990s, Blassie’s family received word th at his remains might be buried in the Tomb of the Un known. They petitioned
the Department of Defense to open the site and conduct DNA testing, a technology that had been unavailable whe n the remains
were first brought to and buried in the Tomb of the Un known. In 1998, the Tomb of the Unknown was opened and t he remains of
the Vietnam Unknown—previously identified as X-26—were remo ved.
Forensic anthropologists took the aged and damaged samp les of bone for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) testing. Becaus e mtDNA is
passed along the maternal line, scientists compared the Unknown Soldier’s DNA against two samples submitted by First Lieutenant
Blassie’s mother and sister and found a match.
On July 11, 1998, 1st Lt. Michael Blassie was buried with fu ll military honors in Jefferson National Cemetery, Miss ouri, near his
hometown, in the same cemetery as his father.
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Original
Putting It Together: Modern Biology. Authored by: Shelli Carter and Lumen Learning. Provided by: Lumen Learning.
License: CC BY: Attribution
Public domain content
Michael Blassie. Provided by: US Airforce. Located at: https://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/File:MichaelBlassie.jpg. License:
Public Domain: No Known Copyright
Michael Blassie unknown no more. Provided by: National Institutes of Health. Located at:
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/visibleproofs/galleries/c ases/blassie.html. Project: Visible Proofs. License: Public
Domain: No Known Copyright
16.15: Putting It Together- Modern Biology is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/4376216.16: Assignment- When Jabberjays Attack!
Read this New York Times article by author James Gorman which will introduce you to th e idea of DIY biology. After reading it
proceed with the activities below.
Part 1: Using your understanding of DNA technology and evolution, su mmarize changes that would need to take place in order
to create organisms such as the Jabberjay and mockingjay.
Part 2: Conduct further research into the idea of DIY biology and genetic engineering. Briefly summarize your findings and
provide a specific bioengineering example. Cite referen ces using MLA format.
Part 3: State your opinion of the DIYbio movement and whether you be lieve government regulation or publishing restrictions
should be put into place. Why or why not? Provide specif ic evidence and a logical argument to support your op inion. Simply
stating you ‘feel’ or ‘believe’ something is insuffici ent justification.
Your essay should be prepared and cited using MLA format. Su bmit your final work as a single document.
Use this document to find some helpful hints for completing this assignment.
Basic Requirements (the assignment will not be accepted o r assessed unless the follow criteria have been met):
Assignment has been proofread and does not contain any majo r spelling or grammatical errors
Assignment includes appropriate references.
Assignment is formatted throughout using MLA style.
Rubric
When Jabberjays Attack!
Outcome: Explain the theory of evolution, which doc uments the change in the genetic makeup of a biologi cal population over time.
Describe and discuss techniques used in modern biology.

16.16.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/43762When Jabberjays Attack!
Criteria Ratings Pts
Jabberjay creation
discussed referencing
specific DNA
technologies possibly
used for their
engineering.DNA technologies
identified and discussed
in detail that could have
created jabberjays.
5.0 ptsDNA technologies
identified that could
have created jabberjays.
4.0 ptsIncorrect DNA
technologies discussed
or not sufficiently
justified in discussion.
0.0 pts5 pts
Jabberjay and
mockingjay evolutionary
relationships discussed
in order to highlight the
way that adaptations
enhance the survival and
reproduction of
individuals in a
population.Evolutionary
relationship of
jabberjays/mockingjays
discussed correctly and
in detail.
5.0 ptsEvolutionary
relationship of
jabberjays/mockingjays
discussed correctly.
4.0 ptsJabberjay/mockingjay
relationship not logical
or insufficiently
discussed.
0.0 pts5 pts
Discuss mockingjay
survival as an example
of natural selection.Natural selection
discussion accurate and
detailed.
5.0 ptsNatural selection
discussion accurate.
4.0 ptsNatural selection
discussion incorrect or
illogical.
0.0 pts5 pts
DIY biology and specific
bioengineering example
discussed in order to
highlight societal use of
biotechnologyDIY biology and specific
example used to
highlight societal uses of
biotechnology and
potential scenarios
provided illustrating
pluses/minuses
5.0 ptsDIY biology and specific
example used to
highlight societal uses of
biotechnology
4.0 ptsDIY biology and specific
example not used to
highlight societal uses of
biotechnology
0.0 pts5 pts
Paper includes personal
opinion on gene
engineering, supported
by evidence beyond
simple opinion, that
discusses possible risks
and benefits of the
application genomic and
genetic science.Personal opinion well
supported by evidence,
example, and/or
scenarios.
5.0 ptsPersonal opinion
supported by at least one
full scenario or example.
4.0 ptsPersonal opinion not
fully supported.
0.0 pts5 pts
Total points: 25
Contributors and Attributions
CC licensed content, Shared previously
'Hunger Games' Science: Investigating Genetically Engineer ed Organisms. Authored by: Jeff Gerlach. Located at:
https://www.oercommons.org/authoring/4514-hunger-games-sc ience-investigating-genetically-eng/view. License: CC BY:
Attribution
16.16: Assignment- When Jabberjays Attack! is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

Index

Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/101205Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: Biology for Majors I (Lumen)
Webpages: 296
All licenses found:
Undeclared: 100% (296 pages)
By Page
Biology for Majors I (Lumen) - Undeclared
Front Matter - Undeclared
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
1: Course Contents - Undeclared
1.1: About This Course - Undeclared
1.2: Course Contents at a Glance - Undeclared
1.3: Learning Outcomes - Undeclared
2: Faculty Resources - Undeclared
2.1: Faculty Resources Overview - Undeclared
2.2: Pacing - Undeclared
2.3: PDF - Undeclared
2.4: PowerPoints - Undeclared
2.5: Assignments - Undeclared
2.6: Assignments with Samples - Undeclared
2.7: Question Banks - Undeclared
2.8: I Need Help - Undeclared
3: Module 1- Introduction to Biology - Undeclared
3.1: Why It Matters- Introduction to Biology Undeclared
3.2: Introduction to Characteristics of Life Undeclared
3.3: Properties of Life - Undeclared
3.4: Introduction to Prokaryotes and Eukaryotes Undeclared
3.5: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells Undeclared
3.6: Levels of Organization of Living Things Undeclared
3.7: Introduction to Taxonomy - Undeclared
3.8: The Diversity of Life - Undeclared
3.9: Phylogenetic Trees - Undeclared
3.10: Taxonomy - Undeclared
3.11: Introduction to the Study of Biology Undeclared3.12: The Branches of Biology - Undeclared
3.13: Scientific Inquiry - Undeclared
3.14: Experiments and Hypotheses - Undeclared
3.15: Interpreting Results - Undeclared
3.16: Putting It Together- Introduction to Biology Undeclared
4: Module 2- Chemistry of Life - Undeclared
4.1: Why It Matters- The Chemistry of Life Undeclared
4.2: Introduction to Atoms and Elements Undeclared
4.3: Atoms - Undeclared
4.4: The Periodic Table of Elements - Undeclared
4.5: Electrons - Undeclared
4.6: Introduction to Atomic Bonds - Undeclared
4.7: Ionic Bonds - Undeclared
4.8: Covalent Bonds - Undeclared
4.9: Hydrogen Bonds - Undeclared
4.10: Introduction to Functional Groups - Undeclared
4.11: Functional Groups - Undeclared
4.12: Introduction to The pH Scale - Undeclared
4.13: Acids and Bases - Undeclared
4.14: Buffers - Undeclared
4.15: Introduction to Chemical Reactions Undeclared
4.16: Chemical Reactions and Molecules Undeclared
4.17: Anabolic and Catabolic Pathways - Undeclared
4.18: Enzymes - Undeclared
4.19: Introduction to Thermodynamics - Undeclared
4.20: Open and Closed Systems - Undeclared
4.21: The First Law of Thermodynamics Undeclared
4.22: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Undeclared
4.23: Putting It Together- Chemistry of Life Undeclared
4.24: Assignment- Biological Astronaut - Undeclared

2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/1012054.25: Assignment- Interacting with Attributes of
Molecules - Undeclared
5: Module 3- Important Biological Macromolecules Undeclared
5.1: Why It Matters- Important Biological
Macromolecules - Undeclared
5.2: Introduction to Proteins - Undeclared
5.3: Amino Acids - Undeclared
5.4: Protein Structure - Undeclared
5.5: Function of Proteins - Undeclared
5.6: Introduction to Lipids - Undeclared
5.7: Lipids - Undeclared
5.8: Introduction to Carbohydrates - Undeclared
5.9: Structure and Function of Carbohydrates Undeclared
5.10: Introduction to Nucleic Acids - Undeclared
5.11: Structure of Nucleic Acids - Undeclared
5.12: DNA and RNA - Undeclared
5.13: Introduction to Comparing Biological
Macromolecules - Undeclared
5.14: Different Types of Biological Macromolecules Undeclared
5.15: Putting It Together- Important Biological
Macromolecules - Undeclared
5.16: Assignment- Nutritionist for a Day Undeclared
6: Module 4- Cellular Structure - Undeclared
6.1: Why It Matters- Cellular Structure - Undeclared
6.2: Introduction to Microscopes - Undeclared
6.3: Microscopy - Undeclared
6.4: Introduction to Organelles - Undeclared
6.5: Cytoplasm - Undeclared
6.6: Nucleus - Undeclared
6.7: Ribosomes, Mitochondria, and Peroxisomes Undeclared
6.8: Endomembrane System - Undeclared
6.9: Vesicles - Undeclared
6.10: Unique Features of Animal and Plant Cells Undeclared
6.11: Introduction to Cytoskeleton - Undeclared
6.12: Microfilaments - Undeclared
6.13: Intermediate Filaments - Undeclared
6.14: Microtubules - Undeclared
6.15: Introduction to Cell Surface - Undeclared
6.16: Cell Membranes - Undeclared
6.17: Cell Junctions - Undeclared
6.18: The Cell Wall - Undeclared
6.19: Putting It Together- Cellular Structure Undeclared6.20: Assignment- Cell Builder - Undeclared
7: Module 5- Cell Membranes - Undeclared
7.1: Why It Matters- Cell Membranes - Undeclared
7.2: Introduction to Structure of the Membrane Undeclared
7.3: Structure of the Cell Membrane - Undeclared
7.4: Phospholipids - Undeclared
7.5: Introduction to Kinds of Transport - Undeclared
7.6: Passive Transport - Undeclared
7.7: Active Transport - Undeclared
7.8: Membranes and Transport - Undeclared
7.9: Introduction to Endocytosis and Exocytosis Undeclared
7.10: Endocytosis - Undeclared
7.11: Exocytosis - Undeclared
7.12: Putting It Together- Cell Membranes Undeclared
7.13: Assignment- Membranes Alive! - Undeclared
8: Module 6- Metabolic Pathways - Undeclared
8.1: Why It Matters- Metabolic Pathways Undeclared
8.2: Introduction to Redox Reactions - Undeclared
8.3: Electrons and Energy - Undeclared
8.4: ATP in Living Systems - Undeclared
8.5: Introduction to Photosynthesis - Undeclared
8.6: An Overview of Photosynthesis - Undeclared
8.7: Spectrums of Light - Undeclared
8.8: Light-Dependent Reactions - Undeclared
8.9: Light-Independent Reactions - Undeclared
8.10: Photosynthesis - Undeclared
8.11: Introduction to Cellular Respiration Undeclared
8.12: Glycolysis - Undeclared
8.13: Pyruvate Oxidation - Undeclared
8.14: Citric Acid Cycle - Undeclared
8.15: Electron Transport Chain - Undeclared
8.16: Cellular Respiration - Undeclared
8.17: Introduction to Fermentation - Undeclared
8.18: Metabolism without Oxygen - Undeclared
8.19: Types of Fermentation - Undeclared
8.20: Putting It Together- Metabolic Pathways Undeclared
8.21: Assignment- Observing Energy Transactions Undeclared
9: Module 7- Cell Communication - Undeclared
9.1: Why It Matters- Cell Communication Undeclared
9.2: Introduction to Signaling Molecules and Cellular
Receptors - Undeclared

3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/1012059.3: Types of Signals - Undeclared
9.4: Signaling Molecules - Undeclared
9.5: Signaling Receptors - Undeclared
9.6: Introduction to Propagation of the Signal Undeclared
9.7: Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway Undeclared
9.8: Methods of Intracellular Signaling - Undeclared
9.9: Introduction to Response to the Signal Undeclared
9.10: Expression and Growth - Undeclared
9.11: Cell Death - Undeclared
9.12: Introduction to Signaling in Single-Celled
Organisms - Undeclared
9.13: Signaling in Yeast - Undeclared
9.14: Signaling in Bacteria - Undeclared
9.15: Putting It Together- Cell Communication Undeclared
10: Module 8- Cell Division - Undeclared
10.1: Why It Matters- Cell Division - Undeclared
10.2: Introduction to Chromosomes and DNA
Packaging - Undeclared
10.3: DNA and Chromosomes - Undeclared
10.4: Chromosome Structure - Undeclared
10.5: Introduction to the Cell Cycle - Undeclared
10.6: Interphase - Undeclared
10.7: Mitosis - Undeclared
10.8: Cytokinesis - Undeclared
10.9: The Complete Cycle - Undeclared
10.10: Introduction to Cell Cycle Checkpoints Undeclared
10.11: Control of the Cell Cycle - Undeclared
10.12: Cancer and the Cell Cycle - Undeclared
10.13: Introduction to Meiosis - Undeclared
10.14: Stages of Meiosis - Undeclared
10.15: Meiosis I - Undeclared
10.16: Meiosis II - Undeclared
10.17: Meiosis - Undeclared
10.18: Introduction to Genetic Diversity - Undeclared
10.19: Sexual Reproduction - Undeclared
10.20: Genetic Variation in Meiosis - Undeclared
10.21: Chromosomal Structural Rearrangements Undeclared
10.22: Mitosis, Meiosis, and Sexual Reproduction Undeclared
10.23: Introduction to Errors in Chromosome
Number - Undeclared
10.24: Karyotypes - Undeclared
10.25: Common Disorders - Undeclared10.26: Putting It Together- Cell Division Undeclared
10.27: Assignment- Mitosis and Meiosis Worksheets Undeclared
11: Module 9- DNA Structure and Replication Undeclared
11.1: Why It Matters- DNA Structure and Replication
- Undeclared
11.2: Introduction to Storing Genetic Information Undeclared
11.3: Structure of DNA - Undeclared
11.4: Genetic Information - Undeclared
11.5: DNA Packaging in Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes
- Undeclared
11.6: Introduction to DNA Base Pairs and Replication
- Undeclared
11.7: The History of DNA - Undeclared
11.8: Basics of DNA Replication - Undeclared
11.9: Major Enzymes - Undeclared
11.10: “Proofreading” DNA - Undeclared
11.11: Telomeres - Undeclared
11.12: Introduction to DNA Mutations - Undeclared
11.13: What is a Mutation? - Undeclared
11.14: Mutations in Somatic Cells and in Gametes Undeclared
11.15: Major Types of Mutations - Undeclared
11.16: Putting It Together- DNA Structure and
Replication - Undeclared
11.17: Assignment- Which Has More DNA? Undeclared
12: Module 10- DNA Transcription and Translation Undeclared
12.1: Why It Matters- DNA Transcription and
Translation - Undeclared
12.2: Introduction to Transcription - Undeclared
12.3: Steps of Genetic Transcription - Undeclared
12.4: RNA Polymerase - Undeclared
12.5: pre-RNA and mRNA - Undeclared
12.6: RNA Post-Translational Modification Undeclared
12.7: Introduction to Translation - Undeclared
12.8: Steps of Translation - Undeclared
12.9: Ribosomes - Undeclared
12.10: tRNA - Undeclared
12.11: Codons - Undeclared
12.12: Protein Modifications - Undeclared
12.13: Introduction to Prokaryotic Transcription and
Translation - Undeclared
12.14: Prokaryotic Transcription - Undeclared

4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10120512.15: Prokaryotic Translation - Undeclared
12.16: Introduction to the Central Dogma Undeclared
12.17: The Central Dogma - Undeclared
12.18: Putting It Together- DNA Transcription and
Translation - Undeclared
13: Module 11- Gene Expression - Undeclared
13.1: Why It Matters- Gene Expression - Undeclared
13.2: Introduction to Regulation of Gene Expression Undeclared
13.3: Expression of Genes - Undeclared
13.4: Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene Regulation Undeclared
13.5: Introduction to Prokaryotic Gene Regulation Undeclared
13.6: Gene Regulation in Prokaryotes - Undeclared
13.7: Repressors - Undeclared
13.8: Activators and Inducers - Undeclared
13.9: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation at Work Undeclared
13.10: Introduction to Eukaryotic Gene Regulation Undeclared
13.11: Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation Undeclared
13.12: Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation Undeclared
13.13: Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene
Expression - Undeclared
13.14: Putting It Together- Gene Expression Undeclared
13.15: Assignment- How Mutations Work Undeclared
14: Module 12- Trait Inheritance - Undeclared
14.1: Why It Matters- Trait Inheritance - Undeclared
14.2: Introduction to the Father of Genetics Undeclared
14.3: Mendel’s Experiments and Heredity Undeclared
14.4: Characteristics and Traits - Undeclared
14.5: Laws of Inheritance - Undeclared
14.6: Heredity - Undeclared
14.7: Introduction to Beyond Dominance and
Recessiveness - Undeclared
14.8: Non-Mendelian Inheritance - Undeclared
14.9: Non-Mendelian Punnett Squares - Undeclared
14.10: Multiple Alleles - Undeclared
14.11: Introduction to Heredity and Disease Undeclared
14.12: Penetrance and Expressivity - Undeclared14.13: Pedigrees and Disease - Undeclared
14.14: Pedigree Flowchart - Undeclared
14.15: Genetic Disorder and Pedigrees - Undeclared
14.16: Introduction to Genetics and the Environment
- Undeclared
14.17: Epistasis - Undeclared
14.18: Polygenic Inheritance and Environmental
Effects - Undeclared
14.19: Effect of the Environment - Undeclared
14.20: Pleiotropy and Human Disorders - Undeclared
14.21: Putting It Together- Trait Inheritance Undeclared
14.22: Assignment- Dragon Genetics - Undeclared
15: Module 13- Theory of Evolution - Undeclared
15.1: Why It Matters- Theory of Evolution Undeclared
15.2: Introduction to Charles Darwin - Undeclared
15.3: Darwin and Descent with Modification Undeclared
15.4: Darwin and the Theory of Evolution Undeclared
15.5: Natural Selection - Undeclared
15.6: Introduction to Evidence for Evolution Undeclared
15.7: Physical Evidence - Undeclared
15.8: Biological Evidence - Undeclared
15.9: Misconceptions of Evolution - Undeclared
15.10: Introduction to Mutations and Evolution Undeclared
15.11: Population Genetics - Undeclared
15.12: Selective and Environmental Pressures Undeclared
15.13: Introduction to Phylogenetic Trees Undeclared
15.14: Scientific Classification - Undeclared
15.15: Structure of Phylogenetic Trees - Undeclared
15.16: Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees Undeclared
15.17: The Taxonomic Classification System Undeclared
15.18: Putting It Together- Theory of Evolution Undeclared
16: Module 14- Modern Biology - Undeclared
16.1: Why It Matters- Modern Biology - Undeclared
16.2: Introduction to Key Technologies - Undeclared
16.3: Manipulating Genetic Material - Undeclared
16.4: DNA Sequencing - Undeclared
16.5: Cloning - Undeclared
16.6: Genetic Engineering - Undeclared

5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/10120516.7: Introduction to Biotechnology Applications Undeclared
16.8: Medicinal Biotechnology - Undeclared
16.9: Agricultural Biotechnology - Undeclared
16.10: Biotechnology at the Cutting Edge Undeclared
16.11: Introduction to Risks and Benefits of Genomic
Science - Undeclared
16.12: Genetic Information Used for Identification Undeclared16.13: Medical Uses of Genetic Information Undeclared
16.14: Genomics in Agriculture - Undeclared
16.15: Putting It Together- Modern Biology Undeclared
16.16: Assignment- When Jabberjays Attack! Undeclared
Back Matter - Undeclared
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared