PRINCIPLES OF
BIOLOGY

Book: Principles of Biology

This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts’ web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.
LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.
This text was compiled on 03/01/2026

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64533TABLE OF CONTENTS
Class Descriptions
Licensing
BIOLOGY 211: Cell Biology
1: The Process of Science
1.1: The Nature of Science
1.2: The Scientific Process
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
1.4: Writing for Science
1.5: Using Credible Sources
2: Chemistry for Biology
2.1: Atoms
2.2: Chemical Bonds
2.3: Water
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
2.5: Absolutely Necessary Chemistry Summary
3: Biological Molecules
3.1: Carbohydrates
3.2: Lipids
3.3: Proteins
3.4: Nucleic Acids
3.5: Biological Macromolecule Practice Questions
4: What is Life?
4.1: What makes something living?
4.2: Levels of Organization
4.3: The Diversity of Life
5: Cell Structure and Function
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
5.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm
5.4: Ribosomes
5.5: The Cytoskeleton
5.6: Flagella and Cilia
5.7: The Endomembrane System
5.8: The Nucleus
5.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum
5.10: The Golgi Apparatus
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and Peroxisomes
5.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
5.13: The Cell Wall
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular junctions
5.15: The Production of a Protein
5.16: Summary Table of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells and Functions
6 Th C ll M b d T t

2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/645336: The Cell Membrane and Transport6.1: The Plasma Membrane
6.2: Transport Across Membranes
6.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion
6.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
6.6: Active Transport
7: Cell Communication
7.1: A Summary of Cell Communication
7.2: Types of Receptors
7.3: Types of signaling molecules
7.4: Propagation of the signal
7.5: Response to the signal
8: Enzyme-catalyzed reactions
8.1: Energy
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
8.3: Thermodynamics
8.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy
8.5: Free and Activation Energy
8.6: Enzymes
8.7: Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways
9: How cells obtain energy
9.1: Energy in Living Systems
9.2: From Mouth to Molecule - Digestion
9.3: Metabolism
9.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative Phosphorylation
9.8: Metabolism without Oxygen - Fermentation
9.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose
9.10: Anaerobic Cellular Respiration in Prokaryotes
10: Photosynthesis
10.1: Putting photosynthesis into context
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
10.3: Light and Pigments
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the Calvin Cycle)
10.6: Photosynthesis in Prokaryotes
11: Cell Division - Binary Fission and Mitosis
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
11.2: An Overview of DNA Replication
11.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
11.6: Cancer and the cell cycle

3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64533BIOLOGY 212: Genetics
12: DNA and Chromosome Structure
12.1: DNA Structure
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
12.3: Homologous Chromosomes and Sexual Reproduction
13: DNA Replication
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
13.3: DNA Repair
14: Mutations
14.1: How do genes direct the production of proteins?
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
14.3: Introduction to Genetic Disorders
14.4: Do all mutations affect health and development?
14.5: Types of Mutations
14.6: Multifactorial Disorders and Genetic Predispositions
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or Chromosomes
15: Protein Synthesis
15.1: The Genetic Code
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing
15.5: Translation
15.6: Optional Section - Micropigs
16: Gene Regulation
16.1: Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene Expression
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
16.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
16.5: Eukaryotic Translational and Post-Translational Regulation
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
17: Meiosis - Sexual Reproduction
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
17.2: Meiosis I
17.3: Meiosis II
17.4: Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
18: Patterns of Inheritance
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
18.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics of Heredity
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
18.4: Monohybrid Cross and the Punnett Square
18.5: Laws of Inheritance
18.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance
18.7: Multiple Alleles
18.8: Sex-Linked Traits
18.9: Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent Assortment

4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6453318.10: Epistasis
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares
19.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait
19.4: Yellow fur color - a recessive trait
19.5: Epistasis - the relationship between black, brown, and yellow fur
19.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and epistasis
19.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend
19.8: White spotting - when there's more than two alleles
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder
19.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together
19.11: KIT - embryonic lethality
19.12: It's not all in the genes - the effect of environment
19.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one trait
20: Biotechnology
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR
20.2: Cloning
20.3: Genetic Engineering
20.4: Mapping Genomes
20.5: Applying Genomics
20.6: Proteomics
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
BIOLOGY 213: Ecology and Evolution
21: Introduction to Evolution
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
21.2: Formation of New Species
21.3: Speciation
22: Evolution in Action
22.1: Population Evolution
22.2: Population Genetics
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
23: Evolutionary Relationships
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
24: Ecology and the Biosphere
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
24.2: Biogeography
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate Change
25: Population and Community Ecology
25.1: Population Demography
25.2: Population Dynamics and Regulation
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection

5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6453325.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
25.5: Human Population Growth
25.6: Community Ecology
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate Causes of Behavior
26: Ecosystems
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
27: Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
27.2: The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity
Index
Glossary
Detailed Licensing

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/73307Class Descriptions
Principles of Biology: The Principles of Biology sequence (BI 211, 212 and 21 3) introduces biology as a scientific discipline for
students planning to major in biology and other scie nce disciplines. Laboratories and classroom activiti es introduce techniques used
to study biological processes and provide opportunities for students to develop their ability to conduct research.
BI211 focuses on how structure defines function in organi sms and the pathways and transformation of energy in living sys tems.
BI212 uses genetics as a model system to understand inform ation flow in living organisms.
BI213 focuses on the interactions of living systems and t he ecology and evolution of biodiversity.

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/97931Licensing
A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be fo und in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1SECTION OVERVIEW
BIOLOGY 211: Cell Biology
1: The Process of Science
1.1: The Nature of Science
1.2: The Scientific Process
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
1.4: Writing for Science
1.5: Using Credible Sources
2: Chemistry for Biology
2.1: Atoms
2.2: Chemical Bonds
2.3: Water
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
2.5: Absolutely Necessary Chemistry Summary
3: Biological Molecules
3.1: Carbohydrates
3.2: Lipids
3.3: Proteins
3.4: Nucleic Acids
3.5: Biological Macromolecule Practice Questions
4: What is Life?
4.1: What makes something living?
4.2: Levels of Organization
4.3: The Diversity of Life
5: Cell Structure and Function
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
5.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm
5.4: Ribosomes
5.5: The Cytoskeleton
5.6: Flagella and Cilia
5.7: The Endomembrane System
5.8: The Nucleus
5.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum
5.10: The Golgi Apparatus
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and Peroxisomes
5.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
5.13: The Cell Wall

25.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular junctions
5.15: The Production of a Protein
5.16: Summary Table of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells an d Functions
6: The Cell Membrane and Transport
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
6.2: Transport Across Membranes
6.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion
6.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
6.6: Active Transport
7: Cell Communication
7.1: A Summary of Cell Communication
7.2: Types of Receptors
7.3: Types of signaling molecules
7.4: Propagation of the signal
7.5: Response to the signal
8: Enzyme-catalyzed reactions
8.1: Energy
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
8.3: Thermodynamics
8.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy
8.5: Free and Activation Energy
8.6: Enzymes
8.7: Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways
9: How cells obtain energy
9.1: Energy in Living Systems
9.2: From Mouth to Molecule - Digestion
9.3: Metabolism
9.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative Phosphorylation
9.8: Metabolism without Oxygen - Fermentation
9.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose
9.10: Anaerobic Cellular Respiration in Prokaryotes
10: Photosynthesis
10.1: Putting photosynthesis into context
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
10.3: Light and Pigments
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions

310.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the Calvin Cy cle)
10.6: Photosynthesis in Prokaryotes
11: Cell Division - Binary Fission and Mitosis
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
11.2: An Overview of DNA Replication
11.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
11.6: Cancer and the cell cycle
Thumbnail: A diagram of a typical prokaryotic cell. (Public Domain; LadyofHats).
BIOLOGY 211: Cell Biology is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1: The Process of Science
Course Outcomes for this section:
Apply the scientific method to biological questions by designing ex periments and using the resulting data to form a
conclusion.
1. Design a controlled experiment to answer a biological q uestion.
2. Predict the outcome of an experiment.
3. Collect, manipulate, and analyze quantitative and qu alitative data
4. Answer a biological question using data.
Select, evaluate, and utilize discipline-specific information and litera ture to research a biological topic.
1. Differentiate between questions that can and cannot be answered using science.
2. Identify appropriate credible sources of information to research a topic.
3. Evaluate sources of information for their strengths and we aknesses.
4. Differentiate between popular and scholarly sources.
Like geology, physics, and chemistry, biology is a science that gathers knowledge about the natural world. Specifically, biology is
the study of life. The discoveries of biology are ma de by a community of researchers who work individuall y and together using
agreed-on methods. In this sense, biology, like all s ciences is a social enterprise like politics or the arts. The methods of science
include careful observation, record keeping, logical and mathematical reasoning, experimentation, and sub mitting conclusions to
the scrutiny of others. Science also requires considera ble imagination and creativity; a well-designed exper iment is commonly
described as elegant, or beautiful. Like politics, sc ience has considerable practical implications and som e science is dedicated to
practical applications, such as the prevention of disea se (see Figure). Other science proceeds largely motiva ted by curiosity.
Whatever its goal, there is no doubt that science, includ ing biology, has transformed human existence and will c ontinue to do so.
Figure: Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacteria, seen in this scanning electron micrograph, are normal residents of our digestive
tracts that aid in the absorption of vitamin K and ot her nutrients. However, virulent strains are sometimes r esponsible for disease
outbreaks. (credit: Eric Erbe, digital colorization by Christopher Pooley, both of USDA, ARS, EMU)
1.1: The Nature of Science
1.2: The Scientific Process
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
1.4: Writing for Science
1.5: Using Credible Sources
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Proce ss-ofScience.Learning Objectives

21: The Process of Science is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/646951.1: The Nature of Science
Biology is a science, but what exactly is science? What does the study of biology share with other scientifi c
disciplines? Science (from the Latin scientia, meaning “knowledge”) can be defined as knowledge about the natural world. Scienc e
is a very specific way of learning, or knowing, about the world. The history of the past 500 years demonstrat es that science is a
very powerful way of knowing about the world; it is larg ely responsible for the technological revolutions th at have taken place
during this time. There are however, areas of knowledge and human experience that the methods of science can not be applied to.
These include such things as answering purely moral que stions, aesthetic questions, or what can be generally c ategorized as
spiritual questions. Science can not investigate thes e areas because they are outside the realm of materi al phenomena, the
phenomena of matter and energy, and can not be observed and measured.
The scientific method is a method of research with defined steps that incl ude experiments and careful observation. One of the mo st
important aspects of this method is the testing of hy potheses. A hypothesis is a suggested explanation for an event, which can be
tested. Hypotheses, or tentative explanations, are gene rally produced within the context of a scientific th eory. A scientific theory is
a generally accepted, thoroughly tested and confirme d explanation for a set of observations or phenomena. Scientific theory is the
foundation of scientific knowledge. In addition, in ma ny scientific disciplines (less so in biology) there are scientific laws, often
expressed in mathematical formulas, which describe how elements of nature will behave under certain specific conditions. There is
not an evolution of hypotheses through theories to laws as if they represented some increase in certainty a bout the world.
Hypotheses are the day-to-day material that scientist s work with and they are developed within the context o f theories. Laws are
concise descriptions of parts of the world that are amena ble to formulaic or mathematical description.
The scientific community has been debating for the last few decades about the value of different types of science. Is it valuable to
pursue science for the sake of simply gaining knowledg e, or does scientific knowledge only have worth if we c an apply it to
solving a specific problem or bettering our lives? T his question focuses on the differences between two ty pes of science: basic
science and applied science.
Basic science or “pure” science seeks to expand knowledge regardless of the short-term application of that knowle dge. It is not
focused on developing a product or a service of immediat e public or commercial value. The immediate goal of basic science is
knowledge for knowledge’s sake, though this does not mean tha t in the end it may not result in an application.
In contrast, applied science or “technology,” aims to use science to solve real-world problems, making it possi ble, for example,
to improve a crop yield, find a cure for a particular di sease, or save animals threatened by a natural disaster. In applied science,
the problem is usually defined for the researcher.
Some individuals may perceive applied science as “use ful” and basic science as “useless.” A question these people might pose to a
scientist advocating knowledge acquisition would be, “What for?” A careful look at the history of science, h owever, reveals that
basic knowledge has resulted in many remarkable appl ications of great value. Many scientists think that a basic understanding of
science is necessary before an application is develo ped; therefore, applied science relies on the results generated through basic
science. Other scientists think that it is time to mo ve on from basic science and instead to find solutio ns to actual problems. Both
approaches are valid. It is true that there are pro blems that demand immediate attention; however, few sol utions would be found
without the help of the knowledge generated through basic science.
One example of how basic and applied science can work t ogether to solve practical problems occurred after t he discovery of DNA
structure led to an understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing DNA replication. Strands of DNA, uni que in every
human, are found in our cells, where they provide the instructions necessary for life. During DNA replication, n ew copies of DNA
are made, shortly before a cell divides to form new c ells. Understanding the mechanisms of DNA replication enabled scientists to
develop laboratory techniques that are now used to id entify genetic diseases, pinpoint individuals who were at a crime scene, and
determine paternity. Without basic science, it is unlike ly that applied science would exist.
Another example of the link between basic and applied research is the Human Genome Project, a study in which e ach human
chromosome was analyzed and mapped to determine the pr ecise sequence of DNA subunits and the exact location of each gene.
(The gene is the basic unit of heredity; an individ ual’s complete collection of genes is his or her gen ome.) Other organisms have
also been studied as part of this project to gain a better understanding of human chromosomes. The Human Ge nome Project

1.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64695(Figure) relied on basic research carried out with non-human organisms and, later, with the human genome. An import ant end
goal eventually became using the data for applied resear ch seeking cures for genetically related diseases.
Figure: The Human Genome Project was a 13-year collaborative effort among researchers working in several different fields
of science. The project, which sequenced the entire h uman genome, was completed in 2003. (credit: the U.S. Department of Energy
Genome Programs (http://genomics.energy.gov))
While research efforts in both basic science and ap plied science are usually carefully planned, it is important to note that some
discoveries are made by serendipity, that is, by mea ns of a fortunate accident or a lucky surprise. Penic illin was discovered when
biologist Alexander Fleming accidentally left a petri dish of Staphylococcus bacteria open. An unwanted mol d grew, killing the
bacteria. The mold turned out to be Penicillium, and a new antibiotic was discovered. Even in the highly or ganized world of
science, luck—when combined with an observant, curious mind —can lead to unexpected breakthroughs.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Proce ss-ofScience.
1.1: The Nature of Science is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/646961.2: The Scientific Process
Biologists study the living world by posing questions a bout it and seeking science-based responses. This appr oach is common to
other sciences as well and is often referred to as th e scientific method. The scientific process was used even in ancient time s, but it
was first documented by England’s Sir Francis Bacon (1 561–1626) (Figure), who set up inductive methods for scientific
inquiry. The scientific method is not exclusively use d by biologists but can be applied to almost anythi ng as a logical problem
solving method.
Figure: Sir Francis Bacon (1561–1626) is credited with being the first to define the scientific method. (credit: P aul van
Somer)
Question
The scientific process typically starts with an observation (often a problem to be solved) that leads to a question. Remember that
science is very good at answering questions having to do with observations about the natural world, but is very bad at answering
questions having to do with morals, ethics, or personal opi nions.
Questions that can be answered using science Questions that cannot be answered usi ng science
• What is the optimum temperature for the growth of E. coli
bacteria?• How tall is Santa Claus?
• Do birds prefer bird feeders of a specific color? • Do an gels exist?
• What is the cause of this disease? • Which is better: classi cal music or rock and roll?
• How effective is this drug in treating this disease? • Wha t are the ethical implications of human cloning?
Let’s think about a simple problem that starts with a n observation and apply the scientific method to solv e the problem. Imagine
that one morning when you wake up and flip the switch to turn on your bedside lamp, the light won’t turn on. That is an
observation that also describes a problem: the ligh ts won’t turn on. Of course, you would next ask the qu estion: “Why won’t the
light turn on?”
Hypothesis
Recall that a hypothesis is a suggested explanation that can be tested. A hypothesis is NOT the question you are trying to a nswer –
it is what you think the answer to the question wil l be and why. To solve a problem, several hypotheses may be propo sed. For
example, one hypothesis might be, “The light won’t turn on because the bulb is burned out.” But there could be other answers to
the question, and therefore other hypotheses may be proposed. A second hypothesis might be, “The light won ’t turn on because the
lamp is unplugged” or “The light won’t turn on becau se the power is out.” A hypothesis should be based on credible background
information. A hypothesis is NOT just a guess (not eve n an educated one), although it can be based on your prior experience (such
as in the example where the light won’t turn on). In g eneral, hypotheses in biology should be based on a cre dible, referenced source
of information.

1.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64696A hypothesis must be testable to ensure that it is valid. For example, a hypothesis t hat depends on what a dog thinks is not testable,
because we can’t tell what a dog thinks. It should al so be falsifiable, meaning that it can be disproven by experimental re sults. An
example of an unfalsifiable hypothesis is “Red is a bet ter color than blue.” There is no experiment that m ight show this statement to
be false. To test a hypothesis, a researcher will con duct one or more experiments designed to eliminate on e or more of the
hypotheses. This is important: a hypothesis can be disproven, or eliminated, but it can never be proven. Science does not deal in
proofs like mathematics. If an experiment fails to disprove a hypothesis, then that explanation (the hy pothesis) is supported as the
answer to the question. However, that doesn’t mean tha t later on, we won’t find a better explanation or desig n a better experiment
that will be found to falsify the first hypothesis and lea d to a better one.
Variables
A variable is any part of the experiment that can va ry or change during the experiment. Typically, an exp eriment only tests one
variable and all the other conditions in the experiment are held constant.
The variable that is tested is known as the independent variable.
The dependent variable is the thing (or things) that you are measuring as the outcome of your experiment.
A constant is a condition that is the same between all of the tested groups.
A confounding variable is a condition that is not held constant that could affec t the experimental results.
A hypothesis often has the format “If [I change the independent variable in this way] then [I will obser ve that the dependent
variable does this] because [of some reason].” For ex ample, the first hypothesis might be, “If you change the light bulb, then the
light will turn on because the bulb is burned out.” In this experiment, the independent variable (the thing that yo u are testing) would
be changing the light bulb and the dependent variab le is whether or not the light turns on. It would be important to hold all the
other aspects of the environment constant, for exam ple not messing with the lamp cord or trying to turn the lamp on using a
different light switch. If the entire house had lost p ower during the experiment because a car hit the powe r pole, that would be a
confounding variable.
You may have learned that a hypothesis can be phrased as an “If..then…” statement. Simple hypotheses can be phrased that way
(but they must also include a “because”), but more com plicated hypotheses may require several sentences. I t is also very easy to get
confused by trying to put your hypothesis into this format. Hypotheses do not have to be phrased as “if..t hen..” statements, it is just
sometimes a useful format.
Results
The results of your experiment are the data that you collect a s the outcome. In the light experiment, your result s are either that the
light turns on or the light doesn’t turn on. Based on your results, you can make a conclusion. Your conclusion uses the results to
answer your original question.

1.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64696
Figure: The basic process of the scientific method. This is what science looks like in a simplified world.
We can put the experiment with the light that won’t go i n into the figure above:
1. Observation: the light won’t turn on.
2. Question: why won’t the light turn on?
3. Hypothesis: the lightbulb is burned out.
4. Prediction: if I change the lightbulb (independent v ariable), then the light will turn on (dependent variabl e).
5. Experiment: change the lightbulb while leaving all othe r variables the same.
6. Analyze the results: the light didn’t turn on.
7. Conclusion: The lightbulb isn’t burned out. The result s do not support the hypothesis, time to develop a new one!
8. Hypothesis 2: the lamp is unplugged.
9. Prediction 2: if I plug in the lamp, then the light will t urn on.
10. Experiment: plug in the lamp
11. Analyze the results: the light turned on!
12. Conclusion: The light wouldn’t turn on because the l amp was unplugged. The results support the hypothesis, it’s time to move
on to the next experiment!
In practice, the scientific method is not as rigid a nd structured as it might at first appear. Sometimes an experiment leads to
conclusions that favor a change in approach; often, an experiment brings entirely new scientific question s to the puzzle. Many
times, science does not operate in a linear fashion; instead, scientists continually draw inferences and ma ke generalizations, finding
patterns as their research proceeds. Scientific reasonin g is more complex than the scientific method alone suggests.

1.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64696
Figure: The actual process of using the scientific method. “Th e general process of scientific investigations” by Laura
Guerin, CK-12 Foundation is licensed under CC BY-NC 3. 0
Control Groups
Another important aspect of designing an experiment i s the presence of one or more control groups. A control group allows you to
make a comparison that is important for interpretin g your results. Control groups are samples that hel p you to determine that
differences between your experimental groups are due t o your treatment rather than a different variable – they eliminate alternate
explanations for your results (including experimenta l error and experimenter bias). They increase reliabi lity, often through the
comparison of control measurements and measurements o f the experimental groups. Often, the control group is a sample that is not
treated with the independent variable, but is otherwi se treated the same way as your experimental sample. T his type of control
group contains every feature of the experimental gr oup except it is not given the manipulation that is hypothesized about (it does
not get treated with the independent variable). There fore, if the results of the experimental group differ from the control group, the
difference must be due to the hypothesized manipulati on, rather than some outside factor. It is common in complex experiments
(such as those published in scientific journals) to have mo re control groups than experimental groups.
Question: Which fertilizer will produce the greatest number of to matoes when applied to the plants?
Prediction and Hypothesis: If I apply different brands of fertilizer to tomato plants, the most tomatoes will be produced from
plants watered with Brand A because Brand A advertises that it produces twice as many tomatoes as other leading brands.
Experiment: Purchase 10 tomato plants of the same type from the s ame nursery. Pick plants that are similar in size and age.
Divide the plants into two groups of 5. Apply Brand A t o the first group and Brand B to the second group a ccording to the
instructions on the packages. After 10 weeks, count the nu mber of tomatoes on each plant.
Independent Variable: Brand of fertilizer.
Dependent Variable: Number of tomatoes.
The number of tomatoes produced depends on the brand of fertil izer applied to the plants.
Constants: amount of water, type of soil, size of pot, amount of ligh t, type of tomato plant, length of time plants were grown.
Confounding variables: any of the above that are not held constant, plant h ealth, diseases present in the soil or plant before i t
was purchased.
Results: Tomatoes fertilized with Brand A produced an averag e of 20 tomatoes per plant, while tomatoes fertilize d with Brand
B produced an average of 10 tomatoes per plant.Example

1.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64696You’d want to use Brand A next time you grow tomatoes, right? But what if I told you that plants grown witho ut fertilizer
produced an average of 30 tomatoes per plant! Now what will you use on your tomatoes?
Results including control group: Tomatoes which received no fertilizer produced more tomatoes than either brand of
fertilizer.
Conclusion: Although Brand A fertilizer produced more tomatoes than Brand B, neither fertilizer should be used bec ause
plants grown without fertilizer produced the most tomatoes!
Positive control groups are often used to show that the experiment is valid and that everything has worked correctly. You can th ink
of a positive control group as being a group where yo u should be able to observe the thing that you are m easuring (“the thing”
should happen). The conditions in a positive contro l group should guarantee a positive result. If the p ositive control group doesn’t
work, there may be something wrong with the experimental procedure.
Negative control groups are used to show whether a treatment had any effect. I f your treated sample is the same as your negative
control group, your treatment had no effect. You can also think of a negative control group as being a group where you should NOT
be able to observe the thing that you are measuring (“the thing” shouldn’t happen), or where you should no t observe any change in
the thing that you are measuring (there is no diffe rence between the treated and control group). The co nditions in a negative control
group should guarantee a negative result. A placebo g roup is an example of a negative control group.
As a general rule, you need a positive control to validate a negative result, and a negative control to validate a pos itive result.
You read an article in the NY Times that says some spinach is contaminated wit h Salmonella. You want to test the spinach
you have at home in your fridge, so you wet a sterile swab and wip e it on the spinach, then wipe the swab on a nutrient plat e
(petri plate).
You observe growth. Does this mean that your spinach is really contaminated? Consider an alternate explanation for growth:
the swab, the water, or the plate is contaminated with bact eria. You could use a negative control to determine which
explanation is true. If a swab is wet and wiped on a nutrient p late, do bacteria grow?
You don’t observe growth. Does this mean that your spinach is really safe? Consider a n alternate explanation for no growth:
Salmonella isn’t able to grow on the type of nutrient you u sed in your plates. You could use a positive control to determine
which explanation is true. If you wipe a known sample of Salmone lla bacteria on the plate, do bacteria grow?
In a drug trial, one group of subjects are given a new drug, while a second group is given a placebo drug (a sugar pill;
something which appears like the drug, but doesn’t contain the active ingredient). Reduction in disease symptom s are measured.
The second group receiving the placebo is a negative co ntrol group. You might expect a reduction in disease sympt oms purely
because the person knows they are taking a drug so they sh ould be getting better. If the group treated with the real drug does not
show more a reduction in disease symptoms than the placebo g roup, the drug doesn’t really work. The placebo group set s a
baseline against which the experimental group (treated wit h the drug) can be compared. A positive control group i s not required
for this experiment.
In an experiment measuring the preference of birds for various types of food, a negative control group would be a “placebo
feeder”. This would be the same type of feeder, but with no f ood in it. Birds might visit a feeder just because they are interested
in it; an empty feeder would give a baseline level for bir d visits. A positive control group might be a food that squ irrels are
known to like. This would be useful because if no squirrel s visited any of the feeders, you couldn’t tell if this was because there
were no squirrels around or because they didn’t like any of your food offerings!
To test the effect of pH on the function of an enzyme, you would want a positive control group where you knew the enzyme
would function (pH not changed) and a negative control gr oup where you knew the enzyme would not function (no enzyme

1.2.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64696added). You need the positive control group so you know y our enzyme is working: if you didn’t see a reaction in a ny of the
tubes with the pH adjusted, you wouldn’t know if it was because the enzyme wasn’t working at all or because the enzyme just
didn’t work at any of your tested pH. You need the negat ive control group so you can ensure that there is no react ion taking
place in the absence of enzyme: if the reaction proceeds wi thout the enzyme, your results are meaningless.
References
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27,
2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Proce ss-of-Science.
1.2: The Scientific Process is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/646971.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
Types of Data
There are different types of data that can be colle cted in an experiment. Typically, we try to design expe riments that collect
objective, quantitative data.
Objective data is fact-based, measurable, and observable. This means that if two people made the same measurement wi th the
same tool, they would get the same answer. The measure ment is determined by the object that is being meas ured. The length of a
worm measured with a ruler is an objective measurement. The observation that a chemical reaction in a test tube changed color is
an objective measurement. Both of these are observable f acts.
Subjective data is based on opinions, points of view, or emotion al judgment. Subjective data might give two different answers
when collected by two different people. The measurement is determined by the subject who is doing the measur ing. Surveying
people about which of two chemicals smells worse is a su bjective measurement. Grading the quality of a presen tation is a
subjective measurement. Rating your relative happine ss on a scale of 1-5 is a subjective measurement. All of these depend on the
person who is making the observation – someone else might make these measurements differently.
Quantitative measurements gather numerical data. For example, mea suring a worm as being 5cm in length is a quantitativ e
measurement.
Qualitative measurements describe a quality, rather than a num erical value. Saying that one worm is longer than anot her worm is a
qualitative measurement.
Quantitative Qualitative
ObjectiveThe chemical reaction has produced 5cm of
bubbles.The chemical reaction has produced a lot of
bubbles.
SubjectiveI give the amount of bubbles a score of 7
on a scale of 1-10.I think the bubbles are pretty.
After you have collected data in an experiment, you need to figure out the best way to present that data in a meaningful way.
Depending on the type of data, and the story that you are try ing to tell using that data, you may present your data in different ways.
Data Tables
The easiest way to organize data is by putting it into a data table. In most data tables, the independent variable (the variable that
you are testing or changing on purpose) will be in th e column to the left and the dependent variable(s) wi ll be across the top of the
table.
Be sure to:
Label each row and column so that the table can be interpr eted
Include the units that are being used
Add a descriptive caption for the table
You are evaluating the effect of different types of fertilizers on plant growth. You plant 12 tomato pl ants and divide them into
three groups, where each group contains four plants. To the first group, you do not add fertilizer and the plants are watered with
plain water. The second and third groups are watered wi th two different brands of fertilizer. After three week s, you measure the
growth of each plant in centimeters and calculate the aver age growth for each type of fertilizer.Example

1.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64697The effect of different brands of fertilizer on toma to plant growth over three weeks
TreatmentPlant Number
1 2 3 4 Average
No treatment 10 12 8 9 9.75
Brand A 15 16 14 12 14.25
Brand B 22 25 21 27 23.75
Scientific Method Review: Can you identify the key parts of the scientific method f rom this experiment?
Independent variable – Type of treatment (brand of fer tilizer)
Dependent variable – plant growth in cm
Control group(s) – Plants treated with no fertilizer
Experimental group(s) – Plants treated with different bra nds of fertilizer
Graphing data
Graphs are used to display data because it is easier to see trends in the data when it is displayed visuall y compared to when it is
displayed numerically in a table. Complicated data c an often be displayed and interpreted more easily in a graph format than in a
data table.
In a graph, the X-axis runs horizontally (side to sid e) and the Y-axis runs vertically (up and down). Typic ally, the independent
variable will be shown on the X axis and the dependent variab le will be shown on the Y axis (just like you learned in mat h class!).
Line Graph
Line graphs are the best type of graph to use when yo u are displaying a change in something over a conti nuous range. For example,
you could use a line graph to display a change in t emperature over time. Time is a continuous variable because it can have any
value between two given measurements. It is measured along a continuum. Between 1 minute and 2 minutes are an infinite number
of values, such as 1.1 minute or 1.93456 minutes.
Changes in several different samples can be shown on the sam e graph by using lines that differ in color, symbol, etc.
Figure: Change in bubble height in centimeters over 120 seco nds for three samples containing different amounts of e nzyme.
Sample A contained no enzyme, sample B contained 1mL of enzyme, sample C contained 2 mL of enzyme.
Bar Graph
Bar graphs are used to compare measurements between di fferent groups. Bar graphs should be used when your dat a is not
continuous, but rather is divided into different ca tegories. If you counted the number of birds of dif ferent species, each species of
bird would be its own category. There is no value between “robin” and “eagle”, so this data is not continuous.

1.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64697
Figure: Final bubble height after 120 seconds for three sample s containing different combinations of ingredients. Sam ple A
contained enzyme but no substrate, sample B contained substrate but no enzyme, sample C contained substrate an d enzyme.
Scatter Plot
Scatter plots are used to evaluate the relationship b etween two different continuous variables. These grap hs compare changes in
two different variables at once. For example, you could look at the relationship between height and weight. B oth height and weight
are continuous variables. You could not use a scatter plot to look at the relationship between number of ch ildren in a family and
weight of each child because the number of children in a family is not a continuous variable: you can’t have 2.3 children in a
family.
Figure: The relationship between height (in meters) and weig ht (in kilograms) of members of the girls softball team. “OLS
example weight vs height scatterplot” by Stpasha is in the Public Domain
How to make a graph
1. Identify your independent and dependent variables.
2. Choose the correct type of graph by determining whether each variable is continuous or not.
3. Determine the values that are going to go on the X and Y axis. If the values are continuous, they need to be eve nly spaced based
on the value.
4. Label the X and Y axis, including units.
5. Graph your data.
6. Add a descriptive caption to your graph. Note that dat a tables are titled above the figure and graphs are capt ioned below the
figure.
Let’s go back to the data from our fertilizer exper iment and use it to make a graph. I’ve decided to gr aph only the average
growth for the four plants because that is the most important piece of data. Including every single data point would make the
graph very confusing.
1. The independent variable is type of treatment and the dependent variable is plant growth (in cm).
2. Type of treatment is not a continuous variable. Ther e is no midpoint value between fertilizer brands (Brand A 1/2 doesn’t
make sense). Plant growth is a continuous variable. It makes sense to sub-divide centimeters into smaller values. Since the
independent variable is categorical and the depende nt variable is continuous, this graph should be a bar gr aph.
3. Plant growth (the dependent variable) should go on the Y axis and type of treatment (the independent variable) shou ld go
on the X axis.
4. Notice that the values on the Y axis are continuous an d evenly spaced. Each line represents an increase of 5cm.
5. Notice that both the X and the Y axis have labels that i nclude units (when required).
6. Notice that the graph has a descriptive caption that all ows the figure to stand alone without additional informa tion given
from the procedure: you know that this graph shows the ave rage of the measurements taken from four tomato plants.Example

1.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64697
Figure: Average growth (in cm) of tomato plants when treate d with different brands of fertilizer. There were fo ur tomato
plants in each group (n = 4).
Descriptive captions
All figures that present data should stand alone – t his means that you should be able to interpret the in formation contained in the
figure without referring to anything else (such as th e methods section of the paper). This means that all figures should have
a descriptive caption that gives information about the independent and dependent variable. Another way to state this is that the
caption should describe what you are testing and what you are measuring. A good starting point to develop ing a caption is “the
effect of [the independent variable] on the [dependent va riable].”
Here are some examples of good caption for figures:
The effect of exercise on heart rate
Growth rates of E. coli at different temperatures
The relationship between heat shock time and transformat ion efficiency
Here are a few less effective captions:
Heart rate and exercise
Graph of E. coli temperature growth
Table for experiment 1
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/646981.4: Writing for Science
Whether scientific research is basic science or app lied science, scientists must share their findings fo r other researchers to expand
and build upon their discoveries. Communication and c ollaboration within and between sub disciplines of scie nce are key to the
advancement of knowledge in science. For this reason, an important aspect of a scientist’s work is disseminat ing results and
communicating with peers. Scientists can share results by presenting them at a scientific meeting or confer ence, but this approach
can reach only the limited few who are present. Instead, most scientists present their results in peer-reviewed articles that are
published in scientific journals. Peer-reviewed articles are scientific papers that are reviewed, usually an onymously by a scientist’s
colleagues, or peers. These colleagues are qualified individuals, often experts in the same research area, who judge whether or not
the scientist’s work is suitable for publication. The pr ocess of peer review helps to ensure that the research described in a scientific
paper or grant proposal is original, significant, logi cal, and thorough. Grant proposals, which are requests for research funding, are
also subject to peer review. Scientists publish their wo rk so other scientists can reproduce their experiments under similar or
different conditions to expand on the findings. The ex perimental results must be consistent with the findings of other scientists.
There are many journals and the popular press that d o not use a peer-review system. A large number of onli ne open-access journals,
journals with articles available without cost, are now a vailable many of which use rigorous peer-review syste ms, but some of which
do not. Results of any studies published in these for ums without peer review are not reliable and should not form the basis for other
scientific work. In one exception, journals may allo w a researcher to cite a personal communication from another researcher about
unpublished results with the cited author’s permission.
Scientific articles are not literary works. Instead, the y are meant to transmit information effectively and concisely. The need for
clarity and brevity is especially important for oth er forms of science communication such as posters wher e the audience must be
able to understand the significance of your research in just a few minutes, but the need is there for all f orms of scientific
communication.
There is an explicit format that scientific papers f ollow, with relatively small variations in style among journals. Papers are broken
down into the following sections: title, abstract, int roduction, methods, results, and discussion. Every sec tion, except the title,
should be labeled as such. Generally the section name is centered and underlined (or bold-faced) over the text. Although posters
follow the same format as a paper, each section is abbrevi ated (once again, clarity is critical).
Title
The title should give the reader a concise, informative description of the content and scope of the paper.
Abstract
The abstract is a concise summary of the major finding s of the study. It should be no longer than 9-10 sent ences. It should
summarize every subsequent section of the paper. It should state the purposes of the study, and then briefl y summarize the methods,
results, and conclusions of the study. The abstract sho uld be able to stand-alone. Do not refer to any figure s or tables, or cite any
references. Because the abstract is a distillation of t he paper, it is often written last. It is typically th e hardest part of the paper to
write.
Introduction
In many journals, the introduction is also unlabeled, and simply starts after the abstract.
The introduction gives the rationale for the researc h. It answers the question “Why should anyone be inter ested in this work?” It
usually includes background information, including t he work of others, and a description of your objective s. If you are studying a
particular species, give both the scientific (Latin) name and the common name the first time you mentio n your study animal. The
scientific name is always underlined or italicized, an d the genus name is capitalized while the species na me is not. Cite only
references pertinent to your study. Direct quotations a re rarely used in scientific writing; instead state th e findings of others in your
own words. Furthermore, footnotes are rarely used in a sc ientific paper. Instead cite the author by last nam e, and the year that the
source was published.
Smith (1987) found that male mice prefer the odor of non-pregnant female mice to that of pregnant femal e mice. Male mice prefer
the odor of non-pregnant female mice to that of pregnant female mice (Smith, 1987).

1.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64698When two people
co-author a paper, both are cited:
For instance:
When more than two people co-author a paper, cite on ly the first author, and refer to the other authors with the Latin phrase, “et
al.”, indicating “and others”:
Undergraduate students who came to lectures were more likely to receive a high grade on the exams (Thatcher, et al., 2000).
Harrett and Garrett (1999) found no differences betwee n male and female elephants in their response to the tape of a female
vocalization.
The full reference for each work must be given in th e literature cited section at the end of the paper. For references, select work
from the primary literature: that is, work that is publ ished by the same people who did it. In general, citing an encyclopedia or
textbook is not appropriate for a scientific paper.
When organizing your introduction, begin with a gener al description of the topic, and then become more s pecific. For example, in a
study of the olfaction in the reproductive behavior of mice, the skeleton of the introduction might be:
For reproduction to be successful, animals must be able to correctly asse ss the
reproductive condition of a potential partner. Many different signals have evolve d in
animals to facilitate such assessment.
Olfactory signals seem to be particularly important
in mammals.
Mice are particularly suited for studying the role of olfaction in reproduct ive behavior.
Odor cues are involved in several aspects of mouse reproductive behavior, including…
The aim of this study was…
Each of these sentences would be a good topic sentence of a different paragraph in the introduction. Refer ences should be cited
where appropriate.
In sum, an introduction should convey your overall purpo se in conducting the experiment as well as your specific o bjectives.
Methods
This section is also often called Materials and Methods.
This section is a very concise summary of the subjec ts, equipment, and
procedures used. This section should contain enough in formation so that someone else could replicate your work. It is NOT a list,
but a narrative description. Because it is a narrativ e, it should not include a list of your materials. Rat her, they should be described
in the narrative as required. For example, you could say: “We measured 5mL of enzyme solution into a test tu be and heated it on a
hot plate until it boiled.” From this, it is obvious th at you used some sort of tool to accurately measure 5 mL of solution, as well as a
test tube, and a hot plate.
Only include information that is relevant to your exp eriment: do not include information that any scient ist should know to do or
that won’t affect the results (label the tubes, clean up afterwards, make a graph). If you are following the methods of another paper
or a lab manual, simply cite the source. Then, you ca n concentrate on describing any changes that you mad e to that procedure. A
common mistake is to let results creep into this section.
Results
The results includes presentations of your data and the results of statistical analysis of your data. First, state the overall trend of the
data. Did the majority of the data statistically support or contradict the null hypothesis?
Address each statistical test separately, often in se parate paragraphs. For each type of data analyzed say whether your results are
statistically significant, and in parentheses give the statistical test used, the value of the test stat istic, and the probability level for
that computed value. For example, “Male mice visited non-pregnant females significantly more often than pregnant females (chi
square = 4.69; p < 0.05).”

1.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64698Do not present your raw data. Instead, present data in a n easy to read form. You will probably use a figure o r a table to present your
results. Refer to each table by a number (Table 1, Ta ble 2, etc.) It should have a concise heading at the top. Graphs and diagrams
are both called figures and are numbered consecutiv ely (Fig. 1, Fig. 2, etc.) They have headings at the bot tom. Axes on graphs
should be clearly labeled. See the section on Presenting Y our Data for more information.
You must refer to every table and figure at least o nce in the text. Often this can be done parentheticall y: “Male mice visited nonpregnant females significantly more often than pregnan t females (chi square = 4.69; p <0.05; Fig. 2).”
Do not use the word “significant” unless it can be suppo rted by statistical evidence.
A common mistake is to discuss the
implications of your findings. Save that for the discussion section.
Discussion
Here you are to give a reader the “take home” message of the study. Begin by briefly summarizing the majo r findings of your
study. Then discuss each finding one at a time (usuall y in separate paragraphs).
Interpret your results in light of the biology you are studying. Your discussion section should paralle l your introduction: if you
discussed the role of reproductive biology of the m ouse at the beginning of your study, come back to it again here. The paper
should come full circle.
Use references throughout your discussion to support you r points. Compare your findings with those of similar stu dies.
Do not make statements that cannot be supported by t he data, and be sure none of your conclusions are cont radicted by the
data. Discuss unexpected results or possible errors in the experiment, but don’t focus on “what didn’t work”. We all know
this was a classroom research project!
Literature cited
Each academic discipline uses a different format to cite the references they use. These differences can b e dramatic (English vs.
Science, for example) or small (Psychology vs. Biology), but they are based on what information is seen as imp ortant. In this
course, we follow the format of the most biology journ als by using CSE format. See the section on Citing You r Sources for more
specific information.
General hints
For stylistic hints, browse one of the many books in t he library on scientific writing. Remember, being a g ood writer in English
“121” doesn’t mean your skills will translate to scienc e writing without work (though you have a great start!).
Outline your paper. Use topic sentences for every paragraph. You should be able to go back a nd underline each topic sentence after
you are finished.
Keep your report as short as you can, consistent with clar ity and completeness. Do not “pad” with a lot of irrele vant information
just to show you know a lot.
A note on Plagiarism: Plagiarism is a serious academic offense. However, most in stances of plagiarism are the result of a lack of
care and effort, and not intentional misbehavior. Here is a general rule to follow: Don’t Cut and Paste! Accidental or not, any
occurrence of academic dishonesty will be treated seriousl y. Ignorance is no defense.
Be sure to proofread for typographical errors, poor gra mmar, or unclear sentence structure.
Try to start paragraphs with a topic sentence or a su mmary statement. Then follow it with supporting statemen ts. This technique
makes your writing clearer and easier to follow. Ideal ly, someone could read the first sentence of each par agraph and still
understand the gist of our paper.
PLEASE avoid dull scientific writing, particularly the u se of the passive voice. As much as possible, use an ac tive voice. Passive
writing takes up more space and is dull, dull, dull. L ook at the example here; see how this is more excitin g and can lead to an
interesting ecological observation about the importa nce of the predator – prey relationship involved?
BAD: Mussels are eaten by sea stars.
GOOD: Sea stars eat mussels.
BETTER STILL: Sea stars are voracious predators of mus sels.
Make sure the object to which words such as “this” or “it” refer is clear.

1.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64698Combine sentences with low information content into on e sentence. This will make your writing more streamlin ed and less
repetitive. But don’t write run-on sentences either!
Always refer to work people have done in the past in t he past tense. Refer to species attributes or other o ngoing, continuing states
in the present tense.
The word “data” is plural. Say either “these data are…” or “ this datum is…”
BAD: Wentworth (1985) studied vegetation in Arizona. He f ound that tree species distributions followed gradients.
GOOD: In the
Huachuca Mountains of Arizona, both elevation and the amo unt of light influenced tree species distributions (Wentwor th 1985).
Scientific names of animals and plants are underlined or italicized (as are most Latin words), such as Homo s apiens or Homo
sapiens (genera and all higher taxa are capitalized, species nam es are lowercase).
Do not anthropomorphize. A honeybee or a dandelion do es not have the same consciousness or emotional life as your roommate. In
extreme forms, this type of writing is appropriate for th e tabloids in supermarket checkout lines…
Try varying the length of your sentences, and keep i n mind that a sentence with 4 words is probably too sh ort, and one with 20 too
long.
BAD: Kudzu, an Asian super weed, intends to dominate and c onquer the entire southeastern United States.
GOOD: Kudzu is a
noxious weed introduced from Asia that has quickly spr ead from its point of introduction throughout the s outheastern United
States.
Avoid using too many clauses in one sentence. If you s ee that you
have a lot of commas, that is a clue that you’ve ov erdone the
number of clauses in the sentence.
Try reading your work out loud. Anything that is writte n poorly will be difficult to read. This technique wi ll alert you to problem
areas in your writing.
BE PREPARED TO WRITE SEVERAL DRAFTS! Good, hard editing will tur n you from a mediocre to a good writer. And with
good writing, you are able to show your GREAT thinking!
Sources:
These instructions are adapted by Walter Shriner. Orig inally from Jakob, E. 1995. Laboratory manual for animal behavior.
Bowling Green University and Muller, K. 1991. Ornithology laboratory. University of California, Dav is.
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:RD6ERYiU@5/The-Proce ss-ofScience.
1.4: Writing for Science is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/646991.5: Using Credible Sources
Course Objective for this section: Select, evaluate, and utilize discipline-specific inform ation and literature to explore topics.
Differentiate between questions that can and cannot be a nswered using science.
Identify appropriate credible sources of information t o research a topic.
Evaluate sources of information for their strengths and weak nesses.
Science is a very specific way of learning, or knowing, about the world. Humans have used the process of sci ence to learn a huge
amount about the way the natural world works. Science is r esponsible for amazing innovations in medicine, hygi ene, and
technology. There are however, areas of knowledge and human experience that the methods of science cannot be applied to. These
include such things as answering purely moral questi ons, aesthetic questions, or what can be generally categ orized as spiritual
questions. Science has cannot investigate these areas b ecause they are outside the realm of material pheno mena, the phenomena of
matter and energy, and cannot be observed and measured.
Questions that can be answered using science Questions that cannot be answered usi ng science
What is the optimum temperature for the growth of E. coli
bacteria?
Do birds prefer bird feeders of a specific color?
What is the cause of this disease?
How effective is this drug in treating this disease?How tall is Santa Claus?
Do angels exist?
Which is better: classical music or rock and roll?
What are the ethical implications of human cloning?
Since this is a biology class, we will be focusing on q uestions that can be answered scientifically. Remember that in the scientific
process, observations lead to questions. A scientific question is one that can be answered by using the pr ocess of science (testing
hypotheses, making observations about the natural world, de signing experiments).
Sometimes you will directly make observations yourself about the natural world that lead you to ask scient ific questions, other
times you might hear or read something that leads y ou to ask a question. Regardless of how you make your i nitial observation, you
will want to do research about your topic before you s tart setting up an experiment. When you’re learning about a topic, it’s
important to use credible sources of information.
Types of Sources
Whether conducting research in the social sciences, h umanities (especially history), arts, or natural scienc es, the ability to
distinguish between primary and secondary source material is essential. Basically, this distinction illustrates the degree to which
the author of a piece is removed from the actual eve nt being described. This means whether the author is reporting information first
hand (or is first to record these immediately following an event), or conveying the experiences and opinions of others—that
is, second hand. In biology, the distinction would be between the perso n (or people) who conducted the research and someone who
didn’t actually do the research, but is merely reporting on it.
Primary sources
These are contemporary accounts of an event, written b y someone who experienced or witnessed the event in que stion. In general,
these original documents (i.e., they are not about ano ther document or account) are often diaries, letters, memoirs, journals,
speeches, manuscripts, interviews, photographs, audio or v ideo recordings, or original literary or theatrical work s.
In science, a “primary source” or the “primary liter ature” refers to the original publication of a scien tist’s new data, results, and
conclusions. These articles are written for other exper ts in a specific scientific field.
You’ve probably done a writing assignment or other p roject during which you have participated in a peer review process. During
this process, your project was critiqued and evaluated by people of similar competence to yourself (your pe ers). This gave you
feedback on which to improve your work. Scientific art icles typically go through a peer review process befo re they are published in
an academic journal. In this case, the peers who are reviewing the article are other experts in the speci fic field about which theLearning Objectives

1.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64699paper is written. This allows other scientists to critiq ue experimental design, data, and conclusions before th at information is
published in an academic journal. Often, the scientists wh o did the experiment and who are trying to publish i t are required to do
additional work or edit their paper before it is pub lished. The goal of the scientific peer review proces s is to ensure that published
primary articles contain the best possible science.
Secondary sources
The function of a secondary source is to interpret t he primary source. A secondary source can be described as at least one step
removed from the event or phenomenon under review. Secondary source materials interpret, assign value to, conjecture upon, and
draw conclusions about the events reported in primar y sources. These are usually in the form of published works such as magazine
articles or books, but may include radio or television documentaries, or conference proceedings.
Popular vs. Scholarly Sources
POPULAR SCHOLARLY
Broad range of topics, presented in shorter articles Specific, narrowly focused topics in lengthy, in-depth articles
Articles offer overview of subject matter; interpretatio n,
rather than original research; sometimes contain feature
articles and reports on current social issues and public
opinionArticles often contain previously unpublished research and
detail new developments in field
Intended to attract a general readership without any
particular expertise or advanced educationIntended for specialist readership of researchers, acade mics,
students and professionals
Written by staff (not always attributed) or freelance writ ers
using general, popular languageWritten by identified specialists and researchers in subj ect area,
usually employing technical, subject-specific language a nd
jargon
Edited and approved for publication in-house (not peerreviewed)Critically evaluated by peers (fellow scholars) in field for
content, scholarly soundness, and academic value
Articles rarely contain references or footnotes and follow n o
specific formatWell-researched, documented articles nearly always foll ow
standard format:
abstract, introduction, literature review, methodology, results,
conclusion, bibliography/references
Designed to attract eye of potential newsstand customers:
usually filled with photographs or illustrations, printe d on
glossier paperSober design: mostly text with some tables or graphs
accompanying articles; usually little or no
photography; negligible, if any, advertising; rarely p rinted on
high-gloss paper
Each issue begins with page number ‘1’Page numbers of issues within a volume (year) are usually
consecutive (i.e., first page of succeeding issue is number
following last page number of previous issue)
Presented to entertain, promote point of view, and/or sel l
productsIntended to present researchers’ opinions and findings based on
original research
Examples: Newsweek, Rolling Stone, VogueExamples: Science, Nature, Journal of Microbial and
Biochemical Technology
In science, it is often extremely difficult to read a nd understand primary articles unless you are an ex pert in that specific scientific
field. Secondary sources are typically easier to read and can give you the important information from a p rimary source, but only if
the secondary source has interpreted the information correctly! It is always better to go to the primary source if possible because
otherwise you are relying on someone else’s interpreta tion of the information. However, it is always better to use a source that you

1.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64699can read and understand rather than a source that y ou can’t. For this reason, it is very important to b e able to identify credible
secondary sources.
Evaluating Credibility
When you write a scientific paper (or any paper, real ly), you want to back up your statements with credible sources. You will need
to identify credible sources to help you research sci entific topics to help you develop interesting scienti fic questions. You will also
need sources to help you form a well-educated hypoth esis that is not just based on your guess about what wi ll happen. A credible
source is one that is trustworthy from which the inform ation can be believed. Credible sources are written b y people who are
experts in the field (or at least are very knowledgeabl e) about the subject that they are commenting on.
We will be using a variation of the CRAAP test to help you determine whether or not sources that you find ar e credible or not. The
CRAAP Test was created by Sarah Blakeslee, of the University of California at Chico’s Meriam Library. It is adapte d below. When
evaluating the credibility of sources using this method, i f it’s CRAAP, it’s good!
You can use the table below to help you evaluate the cre dibility of your sources.
Credibility Table
Factors to
considerLeast reliable
(0 points)Possibly reliable
(1 point)Most reliable
(2 points)
CurrencyNo date of publication or
revision givenOutdated for this particular topic Recently published or revised
Reliable
sourceUnreliable website, no
additional info availablePossibly reliableOfficial government or
organization, institutional sites,
academic journals
AuthorNo author is given / the
author is not qualified to
write about this topicAuthor is educated on topic or is staff of an
organization assumed to be knowledgeable on
this specific topicSpecifically identified expert in
this field with degrees /
credentials in this subject
AccuracyNo review process and
information is not supported
by evidence from cited
sourcesThe information may have been reviewed or
edited by someone knowledgeable in the
field. It mentions but does not directly cite
other sourcesThe information has been peer
reviewed and is supported by
evidence from cited credible
sources
PurposeObviously biased or trying to
sell you somethingSponsored source; may present unbalanced
informationBalanced, neutral, presents all
sides of the issue fully
In general, do not use a source if it doesn’t pass t he CRAAP test! For our purposes, do not use any sources th at score less than 6
points using the credibility table.
Several examples are given below for sources that you might c ome across if you were researching the topic of vaccine safet y.
Example 1:
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). Aug 28, 2015. Vaccine Safety [Internet]. [cited May 12, 2016]. Available
from: http://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/index.html

1.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64699 Score Discussion – why did you give that score?
Currency 2 Aug 28 2015 is recent and shows that this informati on is updated frequently.
Reliable
source2I looked at the “about this organization” and learned that the CDC is a major government organization
that works to protect Americans from health, safety, and se curity threats. They are a division of the US
department of health and human services.
Author 1A specific author was not identified, but the page state s that the content is from the CDC, which
suggests that it was written by a knowledgeable staff mem ber.
Accuracy 1.5No information is given about the review process, but it was probably edited by staff at the CDC. There
is a list of citations and links to primary scientific a rticles supporting the information.
Purpose 2The point of view does not appear to be biased because it seems to be presenting factual information.
Admittedly, it only presents the pro-vaccine side of the arg ument. There are no ads on the page or other
information trying to change the reader’s viewpoint.
Credibility
Score8.5/10This seems like an excellent source to use for research. It’ s readable and I could look at the primary
articles if I wanted to check them out.
Example 2:
Stop Mandatory Vaccination. N.d.. The Dangers of Vaccines a nd Vaccinations [Internet]. [cited May 12, 2016]. Avai lable from:
http://www.stopmandatoryvaccination.com/vaccine-dangers /
Score Discussion – why did you give that score?
Currency 1The copyright is given as 2015, but there is no date for thi s specific article. It does reference something
that took place in 2015, so it is likely written after th at.
Reliable
source0 The “About” page states that the organization was started by Larry Cook using a GoFundMe platform
Author 0Larry Cook has been devoted to the natural lifestyle fo r 25 years, but doesn’t appear to have any degrees
or specific expertise on this topic. Other contributing au thors include Landee Martin, who has a
Bachelor’s of Science in Psychology (which isn’t related t o vaccine safety), and Brittney Kara, who is a
mother who has studied holistic living for the last 17 ye ars. None of the individuals specifically identified
on the website appear to be experts in the field.
Accuracy 0.5It seems unlikely that there is any review process. There ar e links to several sources, but none of them
appear to be primary scientific articles. Several are link s to interviews.
Purpose 0This source is extremely biased. Even the name of the websit e is biased. There is a link to donate to the
webpage. There are at least 10 ads for anti-vaccine book s and websites.
Credibility
Score1.5/10I would not want to use this source to research this topic. It ’s extremely biased and doesn’t seem to offer
much evidence for its assertions.
Citing Your Sources
One of the goals for any class is to help students be come better scholars. And, one of the important skills of scholarship is proper
citation of resources used. Citations demonstrate your “credentials” as a scholar, and provide a resource to your readers of good
reference material.
Why do you have to cite your sources?
No research paper is complete without a list of the so urces that you used in your writing. Scholars are very c areful to keep accurate
records of the resources they’ve used, and of the idea s and concepts they’ve quoted or used from others. T his record keeping is
generally presented in the form of citations.

1.5.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64699A citation is a description of a book, article, URL, et c. that provides enough information so that others c an locate the source you
used themselves. It allows you to credit the authors o f the sources you use and clarify which ideas belong t o you and which belong
to other sources. And providing a citation or referen ce will allow others to find and use these sources as we ll. Most research papers
have a list of citations or cited references and there are special formatting guidelines for different types o f research.
However, there are many “proper” formats because each d iscipline has its own rules. In general we ask only tha t you use one of the
“official” formats and that you use it consistently. To understand what we mean by “consistent”, compare t he citations in two
scientific journals. You will notice that each journa l has its own rules for whether an article title is in quotes, bold, underlined, etc.,
but within each journal the rule applies to all refe rence citations. Below is a condensed guide to the ge neral format used in science
(CSE). For more detailed information consult one of the on line citation guides and generators.
Plagiarism
Plagiarism is presenting the words or ideas of someone else as y our own without proper acknowledgment of the source. Wh en you
work on a research paper you will probably find suppor ting material for your paper from works by others. It ’s okay to quote people
and use their ideas, but you do need to correctly c redit them. Even when you summarize or paraphrase inf ormation found in books,
articles, or Web pages, you must acknowledge the origi nal author. To avoid plagiarism, include a reference to any material you use
that provides a fact not commonly known, or whenever yo u use information from another author. In short, if y ou didn’t collect the
data or reach the conclusion on your own, cite it!
These are all examples of plagiarism:
Buying or using a term paper written by someone else.
Cutting and pasting passages from the Web, a book, or an a rticle and inserting them into your paper without citing
them. Warning! It is now easy for your instructors to search and identi fy passages that you have copied from the Web.
Using the words or ideas of another person without citing the m.
Paraphrasing that person’s words without citing them.
Tips for Avoiding Plagiarism:
First, use your own ideas—it should be your paper and you r ideas should be the focus.
Use the ideas of others sparingly—only to support or rein force your own argument.
When taking notes, include complete citation informati on for each item you use.
Use quotation marks when directly stating another person’s wo rds. Quotes are not frequently used in scientific writing unless
you are directly quoting someone’s spoken words.
Citing Sources in CSE Format
The Council of Science Editors (CSE) citation format is commonly used in scientific writing. CSE format emp hasizes the
information that is important when writing scientific ally: who wrote the information and when they wrote it. In different fields,
there is an emphasis on different types of informat ion. In the humanities, MLA format is commonly used. Th is style emphasizes the
author’s name and the page number. This information allows a reader to track down the exact quotes that a re being discussed.
Another commonly used format, APA, emphasizes the author’s n ame and the year the information was published.
The standard format for citing a source in science writing is the Name-year format. In this format, the firs t author’s last name is
followed by the date. For example: Not all populations of alligators in the everglades are at risk from habitat loss (Nicholson,
2002).
If you are not familiar with the CSE citation style, y ou can get additional information and examples
at http://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/DocCSE_NameYear.html
Beware of computerized “citation creators.” While they can get you part way to a correct citat ion, they rarely are 100% correct.
For example, they often fail to put the last name first.

1.5.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64699Author’s last name first initial, next author’s last name first initial. Date published. Title of Article. J ournal Name. V olume
(issue): pages.
Please note that you need to cite the JOURNAL, not the DAT ABASE that you got it from. Citing the database in which you
found a scientific journal article is like citing Googl e for an internet resource that you are using.
Flores-Cruz Z, Allen C. 2011. Necessity of OxyR for the hy drogen peroxide stress response and full virulence in Ralstonia
solanacearum. Appl Environ Microbiol. 77(18):6426-6432.
Werling BP, Lowenstein DM, Straub CS, Gratton C. 2012. Multi- predator effects produced by functionally distinct species
vary with prey density. J Insect Sci; 12(30): 346-378.
Shriner, W.M. 1998. Yellow-bellied marmot and golden-ma ntled ground squirrel responses to heterospecific a larm calls.
Animal Behaviour 55:529-536.
Author’s last name, first initial. Date published. Titl e of Website [Internet]. Publisher information. [cited on date that you
accessed the information]. Available from: URL where you a ccessed the source.
Williamson RC. 2004. Deciduous tree galls [Internet]. Madison (WI): University of Wisconsin-Madison; [cite d 2013 Sep 12].
Available from: http://labs.russell.wisc.edu/pddc/files/Fact_Sheets/FC_PDF/Decidu ous_Tree_Galls.pdf
[BP] The Biology Project. 2003. The chemistry of amino acids [Internet]. University of Arizona; [cited 2004 Mar 17].
Available from: http://www.biology.arizona.edu/biochemistry/problem_se ts/aa/aa.html
Hilton-Taylor C, compiler. 2000. 2000 IUCN red list of th reatened species [Internet]. Gland (Switzerland) and Camb ridge
(UK): IUCN; [cited 2002 Feb 12]. Available from: http://www.redlist.org/.
Citing Sources Within Text
We will be using the CSE Name-year format for citation s. When you want to provide a citation reference for a statement that you
are making, you should end the sentence with (First au thor’s last name, year). If the article was written by an organization and not a
specific author, you can use the name of the organizati on (or an abbreviation for the name).
Example: Sickle cell anemia is caused by abnormally-shape d haemoglobin proteins (NIH, 2012).
In the References Cited section (a.k.a. Literature cit ed…) list all the sources you cited in your paper, b ut do not include any items
that you did not specifically cite within the body of your paper or project, even if you read them! Exce pt in rare instances, do not
cite a reference that you have not personally read.
You should then list all your references in the Literatu re Cited section alphabetically by author’s last name.
For more information and lots of examples of what to d o in specific instances, please
visit http://writing.wisc.edu/Handbook/DocCSE_NameYear.html
Sources:
“Cite Your Sources” by University of California, Santa Cruz, University Library is licensed under CC BY 3.0
“What is plagiarism?” by University of California, Santa Cruz, University Library is licensed under CC BY 3.0
“Distinguish Between Primary and Secondary Sources” by University of California, Santa Cruz, University Library is licensed
under CC BY 3.0
“Distinguish between Popular and Scholarly Journals” by University of California, Santa Cruz, University Library is licensed
under CC BY 3.0
1.5: Using Credible Sources is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Citing a scientific journal article
Citing an internet resource

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2: Chemistry for Biology
Course Outcomes for this section:
Describe the structure of biologically-important mole cules (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, nucleic acids, wate r) and how
their structure leads to their function.
Living things are highly organized and structured, f ollowing a hierarchy that can be examined on a scale from small to large. The
examination of the smallest parts involves a knowledg e of chemistry. We can put the levels of organization of living things in order
from smallest to largest.
The atom is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. I t consists of a nucleus surrounded by electrons.
Atoms form molecules. A molecule is a chemical structure consisting of at least t wo atoms held together by one or more
chemical bonds. Many molecules that are biologically i mportant are macromolecules, large molecules that are typically formed
by polymerization (a polymer is a large molecule that is ma de by combining smaller units called monomers, which are simp ler
than macromolecules).
These first 2 levels (or 3, depending on how you categ orize macromolecules) are typically studied in chemi stry or biochemistry
courses. However, a working knowledge of atoms and molecul es is required to understand how these small pieces wor k to make
larger, living organisms.
Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surrou nded by membranes; these are called organelles. Organelles are small
structures that exist within cells.
All living things are made of cells; the cell itself is the smallest fundamental unit of struc ture and function in living organisms.
In larger multicellular organisms, cells combine to make tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out similar or
related functions.
Organs are collections of tissues grouped together performin g a common function. An organ system is a higher level of
organization that consists of functionally related organ s.
Mammals have many organ systems. For instance, the circulatory system transports blood t hrough the body and to and from
the lungs; it includes organs such as the heart and bloo d vessels.
Organisms are individual living entities. For example, each tree in a forest is an organism. Single-celled prokaryotes and
single-celled eukaryotes are also considered organisms and are typically referred to as microorganisms.
Once we move beyond one single organism, we have reached the study of ecology. You’ll look at these topics in BI213.
All the individuals of a species living within a specific area are collectively called a population. For example, a forest may
include many pine trees. All of these pine trees represent the population of pine trees in this forest. Different pop ulations may
live in the same specific area. For example, the forest with the p ine trees includes populations of flowering plants and a lso
insects and microbial populations.
A community is the sum of populations inhabiting a particular area. For instance, all of the trees, flowers, insects, and other
populations in a forest form the forest’s community. The f orest itself is an ecosystem.
An ecosystem consists of all the living things in a particular area t ogether with the abiotic, non-living parts of that environ ment
such as nitrogen in the soil or rain water.
At the highest level of organization, the biosphere is the collection of all ecosystems, and it represents the zones of life on
earth. It includes land, water, and even the atmosphere to a certain extent.Learning Outcomes

Figure: The biological levels of organization of living thi ngs are shown. From a single organelle to the entire bi osphere, living
organisms are parts of a highly structured hierarchy. (credit “organelles”: modification of work by Umberto Salvagnin; credit
“cells”: modification of work by Bruce Wetzel, Harry Schaefer/ National Cancer Institute; credit “tissues”: modification of work by
Kilbad; Fama Clamosa; Mikael Häggström; credit “organ s”: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal; credit “organisms”:
modification of work by “Crystal”/Flickr; credit “eco systems”: modification of work by US Fish and Wildlife Ser vice
Headquarters; credit “biosphere”: modification of wor k by NASA)
2.1: Atoms
2.2: Chemical Bonds
2.3: Water
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
2.5: Absolutely Necessary Chemistry Summary
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 25, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...ptsof-Biology
Thumbnail: Hydrogen bonds between water molecules. (CC-BY 4. 0; OpenStax).
2: Chemistry for Biology is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/647002.1: Atoms
An atom is the smallest component of an element that retain s all of the chemical properties of that element. For example, one
hydrogen atom has all of the properties of the elem ent hydrogen, such as it exists as a gas at room temp erature, and it bonds with
oxygen to create a water molecule. Hydrogen atoms can not be broken down into anything smaller while still re taining the
properties of hydrogen. If a hydrogen atom were broke n down into subatomic particles, it would no longer ha ve the properties of
hydrogen.
All atoms contain protons, electrons, and neutrons (Figure). The only exception is hydrogen (H), which i s made of one
proton and one electron. A proton is a positively cha rged particle that resides in the nucleus (the core o f the atom) of an atom and
has a mass of 1 and a charge of +1. An electron is a n egatively charged particle that travels in the spac e around the nucleus. In other
words, it resides outside of the nucleus. It has a negligibl e mass and has a charge of –1.
Figure: Atoms are made up of protons and neutrons located wit hin the nucleus, and electrons surrounding the nucleus.
Neutrons, like protons, reside in the nucleus of an at om. They have a mass of 1 and no charge. The positive (protons) and negative
(electrons) charges balance each other in a neutral atom, which has a net zero charge.
Because protons and neutrons each have a mass of 1, t he mass of an atom is equal to the number of protons and neutrons of that
atom. The number of electrons does not factor into the o verall mass, because their mass is so small.
At the most basic level, all organisms are made of a combination of elements. An element is a substance whose atoms all have the
same number of protons. They contain atoms that com bine together to form molecules. In multicellular or ganisms, such as animals,
molecules can interact to form cells that combine to form tissues, which make up organs. These combinati ons continue until entire
multicellular organisms are formed.
Each element has its own unique properties. Each con tains a different number of protons and neutrons, givi ng it its own atomic
number and mass number. The atomic number of an elem ent is equal to the number of protons that element contains. The mass
number, or atomic mass, is the number of protons plus the numb er of neutrons of that element. Therefore, it is possible to d etermine
the number of neutrons by subtracting the atomic number from the mass number.
These numbers provide information about the elements a nd how they will react when combined. Different elements have different
melting and boiling points, and are in different sta tes (liquid, solid, or gas) at room temperature. They also combine in different
ways. Some form specific types of bonds, whereas others do not. How they combine is based on the number of elec trons present.
Because of these characteristics, the elements are arr anged into the periodic table of elements, a chart of the elements that includes
the atomic number and relative atomic mass of each e lement. The periodic table also provides key informa tion about the properties
of elements (Figure) —often indicated by color-codin g. The arrangement of the table also shows how the ele ctrons in each
element are organized and provides important details abou t how atoms will react with each other to form molecules.
Isotopes are different forms of the same element that have the same number of protons, but a different number of neutrons. Some
elements, such as carbon, potassium, and uranium, ha ve naturally occurring isotopes. Carbon-12, the most common isotope of
carbon, contains six protons and six neutrons. There fore, it has a mass number of 12 (six protons and six n eutrons) and an atomic
number of 6 (which makes it carbon). Carbon-14 conta ins six protons and eight neutrons. Therefore, it has a mass number of 14
(six protons and eight neutrons) and an atomic numb er of 6, meaning it is still the element carbon. Thes e two alternate forms of
carbon are isotopes. Some isotopes are unstable and wi ll lose protons, other subatomic particles, or energy t o form more stable
elements. These are called radioactive isotopes or ra dioisotopes.

2.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64700
Figure: Arranged in columns and rows based on the characterist ics of the elements, the periodic table provides key
information about the elements and how they might in teract with each other to form molecules. Most period ic tables provide a key
or legend to the information they contain.
Carbon-14 (C) is a naturally occurring radioisotope t hat is created in the atmosphere by cosmic rays. This is a continuous
process, so more C is always being created. As a living o rganism develops, the relative level of C in its body is equal to the
concentration of C in the atmosphere. When an organis m dies, it is no longer ingesting C, so the ratio will decline. C
decays to N by a process called beta decay; it gives off en ergy in this slow process.
After approximately 5,730 years, only one-half of th e starting concentration of C will have been convert ed to N. The time it
takes for half of the original concentration of an isotope to decay to its more stable form is called it s half-life. Because the halflife of C is long, it is used to age formerly living objects, such as fossils. Using the ratio of the C con centration found in an
object to the amount of C detected in the atmosphere, the amount of the isotope that has not yet decaye d can be determined.
Based on this amount, the age of the fossil can be c alculated to about 50,000 years (Figure). Isotopes with longer halflives, such as potassium-40, are used to calculate the ages of older fossils. Through the use of carbon dat ing, scientists can
reconstruct the ecology and biogeography of organisms li ving within the past 50,000 years.
Figure: The age of remains that contain carbon and are less t han about 50,000 years old, such as this pygmy mammoth,
can be determined using carbon dating. (credit: Bill Faulkner/NPS)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. March 22, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9....s-of-MoleculesEvolution in Action: Carbon Dating
14 14
14 14 14
14 14
14 14

2.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/647002.1: Atoms is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/647012.2: Chemical Bonds
How elements interact with one another depends on how th eir electrons are arranged and how many openings for e lectrons exist at
the outermost region where electrons are present in an atom. Electrons exist at energy levels that form she lls around the nucleus.
The closest shell can hold up to two electrons. The c losest shell to the nucleus is always filled first, b efore any other shell can be
filled. Hydrogen has one electron; therefore, it has on ly one spot occupied within the lowest shell. Helium has two electrons;
therefore, it can completely fill the lowest shell wit h its two electrons. If you look at the periodic tab le, you will see that hydrogen
and helium are the only two elements in the first row. This is because they only have electrons in their fir st shell. Hydrogen and
helium are the only two elements that have the lowest shell and no other shells.
The second and third energy levels can hold up to e ight electrons. The eight electrons are arranged in f our pairs and one position in
each pair is filled with an electron before any pairs ar e completed.
Looking at the periodic table again (Figure 2.1.2), you will notice that there are seven rows. These ro ws correspond to the number
of shells that the elements within that row have. The e lements within a particular row have increasing numbe rs of electrons as the
columns proceed from left to right. Although each el ement has the same number of shells, not all of the shells are completely filled
with electrons. If you look at the second row of the periodic table, you will find lithium (Li), beryllium (Be), boron (B), carbon (C),
nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), fluorine (F), and neon (Ne). The se all have electrons that occupy only the first and second shells. Lithium
has only one electron in its outermost shell, berylli um has two electrons, boron has three, and so on, until the entire shell is filled
with eight electrons, as is the case with neon.
Not all elements have enough electrons to fill their outermost shells, but an atom is at its most stable when a ll of the electron
positions in the outermost shell are filled. Because of these vacancies in the outermost shells, we see the fo rmation of chemical
bonds, or interactions between two or more of the sam e or different elements that result in the formation of molecules. To achieve
greater stability, atoms will tend to completely fil l their outer shells and will bond with other elements to accomplish this goal by
sharing electrons, accepting electrons from another a tom, or donating electrons to another atom. Because t he outermost shells of
the elements with low atomic numbers (up to calcium, with atomic number 20) can hold eight electrons, thi s is referred to as the
octet rule. An element can donate, accept, or share electro ns with other elements to fill its outer shell and satisfy the o ctet rule.
When an atom does not contain equal numbers of proto ns and electrons, it is called an ion. Because the number of electrons does
not equal the number of protons, each ion has a net c harge. Positive ions are formed by losing electrons an d are called cations.
Negative ions are formed by gaining electrons and are called anions.
For example, sodium only has one electron in its outerm ost shell. It takes less energy for sodium to donate that one electron than it
does to accept seven more electrons to fill the out er shell. If sodium loses an electron, it now has 11 prot ons and only 10 electrons,
leaving it with an overall charge of +1. It is now called a so dium ion.
The chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer sh ell. Again, it is more energy-efficient for chlorine to gain one electron than to
lose seven. Therefore, it tends to gain an electron to create an ion with 17 protons and 18 electrons, givi ng it a net negative (–1)
charge. It is now called a chloride ion. This movemen t of electrons from one element to another is referr ed to as electron transfer.
As Figure illustrates, a sodium atom (Na) only has one e lectron in its outermost shell, whereas a chlorine atom (Cl) has seven
electrons in its outermost shell. A sodium atom will don ate its one electron to empty its shell, and a chlorin e atom will accept that
electron to fill its shell, becoming chloride. Both i ons now satisfy the octet rule and have complete oute rmost shells. Because the
number of electrons is no longer equal to the number of protons, each is now an ion and has a +1 (sodium) or –1 (chl oride) charge.

2.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64701
Figure: Elements tend to fill their outermost shells with elec trons. To do this, they can either donate or accept e lectrons from
other elements.
Ionic Bonds
There are four types of bonds or interactions: ionic, covalent, hydrogen bonds, and van der Waals interac tions. Ionic and covalent
bonds are strong interactions that require a larger energy input to break apart. When an element donates an electron from its outer
shell, as in the sodium atom example above, a positi ve ion is formed (Figure). The element accepting th e electron is now
negatively charged. Because positive and negative ch arges attract, these ions stay together and form an ionic bond, or a bond
between ions. The elements bond together with the elect ron from one element staying predominantly with the other element. When
Na and Cl ions combine to produce NaCl, an electron fr om a sodium atom stays with the other seven from the chlorine atom, and
the sodium and chloride ions attract each other in a latt ice of ions with a net zero charge.
Figure: In the formation of an ionic compound, metals lose e lectrons and nonmetals gain electrons to achieve an oc tet.
Covalent Bonds
Another type of strong chemical bond between two or mo re atoms is a covalent bond. These bonds form when an electron is
shared between two elements and are the strongest and most common form of chemical bond in living organism s. Covalent bonds
form between the elements that make up the biologica l molecules in our cells. Unlike ionic bonds, covalent bonds do not dissociate
in water.
Interestingly, chemists and biologists measure bond s trength in different ways. Chemists measure the abso lute strength of a bond
(the theoretical strength) while biologists are more interested in how the bond behaves in a biological sys tem, which is usually
aqueous (water-based). In water, ionic bonds come apart much m ore readily than covalent bonds, so biologists would s ay that they
are weaker than covalent bonds. If you look in a chemi stry textbook, you’ll see something different. This is a great example of how
the same information can lead to different answers depe nding on the perspective that you’re viewing it from.
The hydrogen and oxygen atoms that combine to form water molecules are bound together by covalent bonds. The electron from
the hydrogen atom divides its time between the outer sh ell of the hydrogen atom and the incomplete outer s hell of the oxygen atom.
To completely fill the outer shell of an oxygen ato m, two electrons from two hydrogen atoms are needed, henc e the subscript “2” in
H O. The electrons are shared between the atoms, divid ing their time between them to “fill” the outer shell of each. This sharing is
a lower energy state for all of the atoms involved than i f they existed without their outer shells filled.+ –

2.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64701There are two types of covalent bonds: polar and nonpo lar. Nonpolar covalent bonds form between two atoms of the same
element or between different elements that share the electrons equally. For example, an oxygen atom can bon d with another oxygen
atom to fill their outer shells. This association is nonpolar because the electrons will be equally distributed bet ween each oxygen
atom. Two covalent bonds form between the two oxygen ato ms because oxygen requires two shared electrons to fil l its outermost
shell. Nitrogen atoms will form three covalent bonds (also called triple covalent) between two atoms of nit rogen because each
nitrogen atom needs three electrons to fill its oute rmost shell. Another example of a nonpolar covalent b ond is found in the methane
(CH) molecule. The carbon atom has four electrons in its outermost shell and needs four more to fill it. It gets these four from four
hydrogen atoms, each atom providing one. These element s all share the electrons equally, creating four no npolar covalent bonds
(Figure).
In a polar covalent bond, the electrons shared by the atoms spend more time closer to one nucleus than to the other nucleus.
Because of the unequal distribution of electrons be tween the different nuclei, a slightly positive (δ+) o r slightly negative (δ–)
charge develops. The covalent bonds between hydrogen and oxygen atoms in water are polar covalent bonds. The shared electrons
spend more time near the oxygen nucleus, giving it a small negative charge, than they spend near the h ydrogen nuclei, giving these
molecules a small positive charge.
Figure: The water molecule (left) depicts a polar bond with a slightly positive charge on the hydrogen atoms and a slightly
negative charge on the oxygen. Examples of nonpolar bonds include methane (middle) and oxygen (right).
Hydrogen Bonds
Ionic and covalent bonds are strong bonds that requi re considerable energy to break. However, not all bon ds between elements are
ionic or covalent bonds. Weaker bonds can also form. Th ese are attractions that occur between positive and ne gative charges that
do not require much energy to break. Two weak bonds t hat occur frequently are hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions.
These bonds give rise to the unique properties of water a nd the unique structures of DNA and proteins.
When polar covalent bonds containing a hydrogen ato m form, the hydrogen atom in that bond has a slightl y positive charge. This is
because the shared electron is pulled more strongly t oward the other element and away from the hydrogen nuc leus. Because the
hydrogen atom is slightly positive (δ+), it will be at tracted to neighboring negative partial charges (δ–). When this happens, a weak
interaction occurs between the δ+ charge of the hydro gen atom of one molecule and the δ– charge of the ot her molecule. This
interaction is called a hydrogen bond. This type of b ond is common; for example, the liquid nature of wat er is caused by the
hydrogen bonds between water molecules (Figure). Hydrog en bonds give water the unique properties that sustain life. If it
were not for hydrogen bonding, water would be a gas rather t han a liquid at room temperature.
Figure: Hydrogen bonds form between slightly positive (δ+) and slightly negative (δ–) charges of polar covalent mole cules,
such as water.
Hydrogen bonds can form between different molecules a nd they do not always have to include a water molecul e. Hydrogen atoms
in polar bonds within any molecule can form bonds with other adjacent molecules. For example, hydrogen bonds h old together two
long strands of DNA to give the DNA molecule its charact eristic double-stranded structure. Hydrogen bonds are a lso responsible
for some of the three-dimensional structure of proteins.4

2.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64701van der Waals Interactions
Like hydrogen bonds, van der Waals interactions are we ak attractions or interactions between molecules. They o ccur between
polar, covalently bound, atoms in different molecul es. Some of these weak attractions are caused by temp orary partial charges
formed when electrons move around a nucleus. These weak inter actions between molecules are important in biological s ystems.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. March 22, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9....cks-of-Molecul
2.2: Chemical Bonds is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/647022.3: Water
Figure: Water: without it, life wouldn’t exist. Photo credi t ronymichaud; CC0 license;
https://pixabay.com/en/users/ronymichaud-647623/
Do you ever wonder why scientists spend time looking for water on other planets? It is because water is essenti al to life; even
minute traces of it on another planet can indicate t hat life could or did exist on that planet. Water is one of the more abundant
molecules in living cells and the one most critical to life as we know it. Approximately 60–70 percent of y our body is made up of
water. Without it, life simply would not exist.
Water Is Polar
The hydrogen and oxygen atoms within water molecules f orm polar covalent bonds. The shared electrons spend more time
associated with the oxygen atom than they do with hyd rogen atoms. There is no overall charge to a water m olecule, but there is a
slight positive charge on each hydrogen atom and a s light negative charge on the oxygen atom. Because o f these charges, the
slightly positive hydrogen atoms repel each other an d form the unique shape. Each water molecule attracts o ther water molecules
because of the positive and negative charges in the dif ferent parts of the molecule.

2.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64702
Figure: The electrons in the covalent bond connecting the t wo hydrogens to the atom of oxygen in a water molecu le spend
more time on the oxygen atom. This gives the oxygen a tom a slightly negative charge (since electrons are ne gatively charged).
Credit Anatomy & Physiology, Connexions Web site. http://cnx.org/content/col11496/1.6/, Jun 19, 2013.
Water also attracts other polar molecules (such as sug ars), forming hydrogen bonds. When a substance readily forms hydrogen
bonds with water, it can dissolve in water and is referred to as hydrophilic (“water-loving”). Hydrogen bonds are not readily
formed with nonpolar substances like oils and fats (Figure). These nonpolar compounds are hydrophobic (“water-fearing”)
and will not dissolve in water.
Figure: As this macroscopic image of oil and water show, oil i s a nonpolar compound and, hence, will not dissolve in water.
Oil and water do not mix. (credit: Gautam Dogra)
Water Stabilizes Temperature
The hydrogen bonds in water allow it to absorb and re lease heat energy more slowly than many other substanc es. Temperature is a
measure of the motion (kinetic energy) of molecules. As the motion increases, energy is higher and thus tem perature is higher.
Water absorbs a great deal of energy before its temp erature rises. Increased energy disrupts the hydrogen bon ds between water
molecules. Because these bonds can be created and dis rupted rapidly, water absorbs an increase in energy a nd temperature changes
only minimally. This means that water moderates temp erature changes within organisms and in their environ ments. As energy input

2.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64702continues, the balance between hydrogen-bond formatio n and destruction swings toward the destruction side. Mor e bonds are
broken than are formed. This process results in the release of individual water molecules at the surface of the liquid (such as a body
of water, the leaves of a plant, or the skin of an o rganism) in a process called evaporation. Evaporation of sweat, which is 90
percent water, allows for cooling of an organism, beca use breaking hydrogen bonds requires an input of ener gy and takes heat away
from the body.
Conversely, as molecular motion decreases and tempera tures drop, less energy is present to break the hydrog en bonds between
water molecules. These bonds remain intact and begin to form a rigid, lattice-like structure (e.g., ice) (Figu re a). When frozen,
ice is less dense than liquid water (the molecules ar e farther apart). This means that ice floats on the surface of a body of water
(Figure b). In lakes, ponds, and oceans, ice will form on the su rface of the water, creating an insulating barrier to protect the
animal and plant life beneath from freezing in the water. If this did not happen, plants and animals livin g in water would freeze in a
block of ice and could not move freely, making life in cold temperatures difficult or impossible.
Figure: (a) The lattice structure of ice makes it less dense th an the freely flowing molecules of liquid water. Ice ’s lower
density enables it to (b) float on water. (credit a: modification of work by Jane Whitney; credit b: modi fication of work by Carlos
Ponte)
Water Is an Excellent Solvent
Because water is polar, with slight positive and negati ve charges, ionic compounds and polar molecules can readily dissolve in it.
Water is, therefore, what is referred to as a solvent—a substance capable of dissolving another substance. Th e charged particles will
form hydrogen bonds with a surrounding layer of water molecules. This is referred to as a sphere of hydratio n and serves to keep
the particles separated or dispersed in the water. In th e case of table salt (NaCl) mixed in water (Figure), the sodium and
chloride ions separate, or dissociate, in the water, and spheres of hydration are formed around the ions. A positively charged sodium
ion is surrounded by the partially negative charges of oxygen atoms in water molecules. A negatively cha rged chloride ion is
surrounded by the partially positive charges of hyd rogen atoms in water molecules. These spheres of hydrati on are also referred to
as hydration shells. The polarity of the water molec ule makes it an effective solvent and is important i n its many roles in living
systems.
Figure: When table salt (NaCl) is mixed in water, spheres of h ydration form around the ions.
Water Is Cohesive
Have you ever filled up a glass of water to the very t op and then slowly added a few more drops? Before it o verflows, the water
actually forms a dome-like shape above the rim of the glass. This water can stay above the glass because o f the property of

2.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64702cohesion. In cohesion, water molecules are attracted t o each other (because of hydrogen bonding), keeping the molecules together
at the liquid-air (gas) interface, although there is no more room in the glass. Cohesion gives rise to s urface tension, the capacity of a
substance to withstand rupture when placed under tensio n or stress. When you drop a small scrap of paper onto a droplet of water,
the paper floats on top of the water droplet, althoug h the object is denser (heavier) than the water. Thi s occurs because of the
surface tension that is created by the water molecul es. Cohesion and surface tension keep the water molecul es intact and the item
floating on the top. It is even possible to “float” a steel needle on top of a glass of water if you plac e it gently, without breaking the
surface tension (Figure).
Figure: The weight of a needle on top of water pulls the sur face tension downward; at the same time, the surface t ension of
the water is pulling it up, suspending the needle on t he surface of the water and keeping it from sinking. Notice the indentation in
the water around the needle. (credit: Cory Zanker)
These cohesive forces are also related to the water’s p roperty of adhesion, or the attraction between water m olecules and other
molecules. This is observed when water “climbs” up a st raw placed in a glass of water. You will notice that th e water appears to be
higher on the sides of the straw than in the middle. T his is because the water molecules are attracted to the straw and therefore
adhere to it.
Cohesive and adhesive forces are important for susta ining life. For example, because of these forces, water can flow up from the
roots to the tops of plants to feed the plant.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. March 22, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9....0BfSb7@4/Water
2.3: Water is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/647032.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
The pH of a solution is a measure of its acidity or alkalinity. You have probably used litmus paper, paper that has b een treated
with a natural water-soluble dye so it can be used as a pH indicator, to test how much acid or base (alkalini ty) exists in a solution.
You might have even used some to make sure the water in an outdoor swimming pool is properly treated. In both cases, this pH test
measures the amount of hydrogen ions that exists in a given solution. High concentrations of hydrogen io ns yield a low pH,
whereas low levels of hydrogen ions result in a high pH. T he overall concentration of hydrogen ions is invers ely related to its pH
and can be measured on the pH scale (Figure). Therefor e, the more hydrogen ions present, the lower the pH; conversely, the
fewer hydrogen ions, the higher the pH.
The pH scale ranges from 0 to 14. A change of one unit on the pH scale represents a change in the concentra tion of hydrogen ions
by a factor of 10, a change in two units represents a change in the concentration of hydrogen ions by a factor of 100. Thus, small
changes in pH represent large changes in the concentr ations of hydrogen ions. Pure water is neutral. It is neither acidic nor basic,
and has a pH of 7.0. Anything below 7.0 (ranging from 0.0 to 6.9) is acidic, and anything above 7.0 (from 7.1 to 14.0) is alkaline
(basic). The blood in your veins is slightly alkaline (pH = 7.4). The environment in your stomach is highly acidi c (pH = 1 to 2).
Orange juice is mildly acidic (pH = approximately 3.5), wher eas baking soda is basic (pH = 9.0).
Figure: The pH scale measures the amount of hydrogen ions (H) in a substance. (credit: modification of work by Edwa rd
Stevens)
Acids are substances that provide hydrogen ions (H) an d lower pH, whereas bases provide hydroxide ions (OH) a nd raise pH.
The stronger the acid, the more readily it donates H. For example, hydrochloric acid and lemon juice are v ery acidic and readily
give up H when added to water. Conversely, bases are t hose substances that readily donate OH. The OH ions com bine with H
to produce water, which raises a substance’s pH. Sodium hydroxide and many household cleaners are very alkali ne and give up
OH rapidly when placed in water, thereby raising the pH.
Most cells in our bodies operate within a very narrow wi ndow of the pH scale, typically ranging only from 7.2 t o 7.6. If the pH of
the body is outside of this range, the respiratory sy stem malfunctions, as do other organs in the body. Cells no longer function
properly, and proteins will break down. Deviation outside of the pH range can induce coma or even cause death.
So how is it that we can ingest or inhale acidic or ba sic substances and not die? Buffers are the key. Buffers readily absorb excess
H or OH, keeping the pH of the body carefully maintai ned in the aforementioned narrow range. Carbon dioxid e is part of a
prominent buffer system in the human body; it keeps t he pH within the proper range. This buffer system involv es carbonic acid
(H CO) and bicarbonate (HCO) anion. If too much H ent ers the body, bicarbonate will combine with the H to c reate carbonic
acid and limit the decrease in pH. Likewise, if too mu ch OH is introduced into the system, carbonic acid will rapidly dissociate
into bicarbonate and H ions. The H ions can combine wit h the OH ions, limiting the increase in pH. While carbo nic acid is an
important product in this reaction, its presence is fl eeting because the carbonic acid is released from th e body as carbon dioxide gas
each time we breathe. Without this buffer system, the pH in o ur bodies would fluctuate too much and we would fail to survi ve.+
2 3 3– + +

2.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64703References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. March 22, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9....0BfSb7@4/Water
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/647042.5: Absolutely Necessary Chemistry Summary
Matter
Matter is anything that occupies space and has mass.
Matter is made up of atoms of different elements.
All of the 92 elements that occur naturally have unique q ualities that allow them to combine in various ways to cre ate
compounds or molecules.
Atoms consist of protons, neutrons, and electrons.
Atoms are the smallest units of an element that retain all o f the properties of that element.
Chemical Bonds
Electrons can be donated or shared between atoms to create bo nds.
Ionic bonds form between a positively and a negatively ch arged atom. They are fairly strong bonds.
Covalent bonds form when atoms share one or more electrons. They are very strong bonds.
Hydrogen bonds form between partially charged atoms. They a re weak bonds.
van der Waals interactions form between polar, covalently bound atoms. They are weak attractions that are often te mporary.
Water
is POLAR, allowing for the formation of hydrogen bonds,
is an excellent SOLVENT: because water is polar, it allows ion s and other polar molecules to dissolve.
STABILIZES TEMPERATURE: the hydrogen bonds between water m olecules give water the ability to hold heat better than
many other substances. As the temperature rises, the hydr ogen bonds between water continually break and reform, allowi ng for
the overall temperature to remain stable, although incr eased energy is added to the system.
is COHESIVE: hydrogen bonds allow for the property of surface ten sion.
pH, Acids, Bases, and Buffers
The pH of a solution is a measure of the concentration of hy drogen ions in the solution. The pH scale ranges from 0 to 14.
A solution with an equal number of hydrogen ions and hydr oxide ions is neutral and has a pH of 7.
A solution with a high number of hydrogen ions is acidic and has a low pH value (below 7).
A solution with a high number of hydroxide ions is basic and has a high pH value (above 7).
Buffers are solutions that moderate pH changes when an acid o r base is added to the buffer system. Buffers are important in
biological systems because of their ability to maintain constant pH conditions.
2.5: Absolutely Necessary Chemistry Summary is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3: Biological Molecules
Describe the structure of biologically-important mole cules (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, nucleic acids, wate r) and how
their structure leads to their function.
Food provides an organism with nutrients—the matter i t needs to survive. Many of these critical nutrients c ome in the form of
biological macromolecules, or large molecules necessary for life. These macro molecules are built from different combinations of
smaller organic molecules. What specific types of biol ogical macromolecules do living things require? How are these molecules
formed? What functions do they serve? In this chapter, we will explore these questions.
There are four major classes of biological macromol ecules (carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids), and each is an
important component of the cell and performs a wide array of functions. Combined, these molecules make u p the majority of a
cell’s mass. Biological macromolecules are organic, meaning that they contain carbon atoms. In addition, they may contain atoms
of hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur, and ad ditional minor elements.
These molecules are made up of subunits called monom ers. Each type of biological molecule is made up of different monomers.
The monomers are connected together into a chain by strong covalent bonds. It is important that covale nt bonds connect the
monomers. If they were connected by hydrogen bonds t he monomers would easily separate from each other and the biological
molecule would come apart. If ionic bonds connected the monomers, the biological molecule would be likely to fall apart if it came
into contact with water.
Figure: The structure of a macromolecule can be compared to a necklace: both are larger structures that are buil t out of small
pieces connected together into a chain. The “string” in a macromolecule would be strong covalent bonds con necting the individual
subunits together. (“Beads on a string” by Daniel is lic ensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
3.1: Carbohydrates
3.2: Lipids
3.3: Proteins
3.4: Nucleic Acids
3.5: Biological Macromolecule Practice Questions
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:QhGQhr4x@6/Biologica l-Molecules
Thumbnail: 1K6F_Crystal Structure Of The Collagen Triple Hel ix Model Pro- Pro-Gly103. (CC-SA-BY-3.0; Nevit Dilmen v ia
Wikimedia Commons).
3: Biological Molecules is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Outcomes

3.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685463.1: Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are macromolecules with which most consumers are somewha t familiar. To lose weight, some individuals adhere
to “low-carb” diets. Athletes, in contrast, often “carb-l oad” before important competitions to ensure that the y have sufficient energy
to compete at a high level. Carbohydrates are, in fa ct, an essential part of our diet; grains, fruits, an d vegetables are all natural
sources of carbohydrates. Carbohydrates provide energ y to the body, particularly through glucose, a simple sugar. Carbohydrates
also have other important functions in humans, animals, and plants.
Figure: Bread, pasta, and sugar all contain high levels of ca rbohydrates. (“Wheat products” by US Department of Agr iculture
is in the Public Domain)
Carbohydrates can be represented by the stoichiomet ric formula (CH O), where n is the number of carbons i n the molecule. In
other words, the ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxyg en is 1:2:1 in carbohydrate molecules. This formula also explains the origin of
the term “carbohydrate”: the components are carbon (“carbo”) and the components of water (hence, “hydrate ”). Carbohydrates are
classified into three subtypes: monosaccharides, disacchari des, and polysaccharides.
Monosaccharides
Monosaccharides (mono- = “one”; sacchar- = “sweet”) ar e simple sugars, the most common of which is glucose. In
monosaccharides, the number of carbons usually ranges from three to seven. Most monosaccharide names end with the su ffix -ose.
The chemical formula for glucose is C H O. In humans, g lucose is an important source of energy. During cellu lar respiration,
energy is released from glucose, and that energy is used to help make adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Plant s synthesize glucose
using carbon dioxide and water, and glucose in turn is used for energy requirements for the plant. Excess glu cose is often stored as
starch that is catabolized (the breakdown of larger molec ules by cells) by humans and other animals that feed on plants.
Galactose (part of lactose, or milk sugar) and fructo se (found in sucrose, in fruit) are other common mo nosaccharides. Although
glucose, galactose, and fructose all have the same ch emical formula (C H O), they differ structurally and c hemically (and are
known as isomers) because of the different arrangement of functional groups around the asymmetric carbon; all of these
monosaccharides have more than one asymmetric carbon. Within one monosaccharide, all of the atoms are conn ected to each other
with strong covalent bonds.2 n
6 12 6
6 12 6

3.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68546
Figure: Glucose, galactose, and fructose are all hexoses. They are structural isomers, meaning they have the same chem ical
formula (C H O) but a different arrangement of atoms. The lines between atoms represent covalent bonds.
Disaccharides
Disaccharides (di- = “two”) form when two monosaccharides undergo a dehydration reaction (also known as a conden sation
reaction or dehydration synthesis). During this proce ss, the hydroxyl (OH) group of one monosaccharide combi nes with the
hydrogen of another monosaccharide, releasing a mole cule of water and forming a covalent bond which joins the two
monosaccharides together.
Common disaccharides include lactose, maltose, and su crose (Figure). Lactose is a disaccharide consisting of the monomers
glucose and galactose. It is formed by a dehydration reaction between the glucose and the galactose mole cules, which removes a
water molecule and forms a covalent bond. It is foun d naturally in milk. Maltose, or malt sugar, is a disac charide composed of two
glucose molecules connected by a covalent bond. The most common disaccharide is sucrose, or table sugar, wh ich is composed of
the monomers glucose and fructose, also connected by a c ovalent bond.6 12 6

3.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68546
Figure: Common disaccharides include maltose (grain sugar), la ctose (milk sugar), and sucrose (table sugar).
Polysaccharides
A long chain of monosaccharides linked by glycosidi c bonds is known as a polysaccharide (poly- = “many”). The chain may be
branched or unbranched, and it may contain differen t types of monosaccharides. All of the monosaccharides a re connected together
by covalent bonds. The molecular weight may be 100,000 daltons or more depending on the number of monomer s joined. Starch,
glycogen, cellulose, and chitin are primary examples of po lysaccharides.
Starch is the stored form of sugars in plants and is made u p of a mixture of amylose and amylopectin (both poly mers of glucose).
Basically, starch is a long chain of glucose monomer s. Plants are able to synthesize glucose, and the exces s glucose, beyond the
plant’s immediate energy needs, is stored as starch in different plant parts, including roots and seeds. T he starch in the seeds
provides food for the embryo as it germinates and ca n also act as a source of food for humans and animals. The starch that is
consumed by humans is broken down by enzymes, such as s alivary amylases, into smaller molecules, such as mal tose and glucose.
The cells can then absorb the glucose.
Glycogen is the storage form of glucose in humans and other v ertebrates and is made up of monomers of glucose. Gl ycogen is the
animal equivalent of starch and is a highly branched molecule usually stored in liver and muscle cells. Whenever blood glucose
levels decrease, glycogen is broken down to release glucose in a process known as glycogenolysis.

3.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68546
Figure: Amylose and amylopectin are two different forms of st arch. Amylose is composed of unbranched chains of gluco se
monomers. Amylopectin is composed of branched chains of glucose monomers. Because of the way the subunits are j oined, the
glucose chains have a helical structure. Glycogen (not shown) is similar in structure to amylopectin but more highly branched.
Cellulose is the most abundant natural biopolymer. The cell wal l of plants is mostly made of cellulose; this provide s structural
support to the cell. Wood and paper are mostly cellulosi c in nature. Cellulose is made up of glucose monomers (Figur e).
Figure: In cellulose, glucose monomers are linked in unbranch ed chains. Because of the way the glucose subunits are j oined,
every glucose monomer is flipped relative to the next one resulting in a linear, fibrous structure.
Carbohydrates serve various functions in different a nimals. Arthropods (insects, crustaceans, and others) h ave an outer skeleton,
called the exoskeleton, which protects their internal body parts (as seen in the bee in Figure). This exoske leton is made of the
biological macromolecule chitin, which is a polysacc haride-containing nitrogen. It is made of repeating units of N-acetyl- β-dglucosamine, a modified sugar. Chitin is also a major component of fungal cell walls; fungi are neither ani mals nor plants and form
a kingdom of their own in the domain Eukarya.

3.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68546
Figure: Insects have a hard outer exoskeleton made of chitin, a type of polysaccharide. (credit: Louise Docker)
How does carbohydrate structure relate to function?
Energy can be stored within the bonds of a molecule. B onds connecting two carbon atoms or connecting a car bon atom to a
hydrogen atom are high energy bonds. Breaking these bo nds releases energy. This is why our cells can get energ y from a molecule
of glucose (C H O).
Polysaccharides form long, fibrous chains which are able to bui ld strong structures such as cell walls.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:QhGQhr4x@6/Biologica l-Molecules
3.1: Carbohydrates is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.6 12 6

3.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685473.2: Lipids
Lipids are a diverse group of compounds that are un ited by a common feature. Lipids are hydrophobic (“water-fearing”), or
insoluble in water. Lipids perform many different fun ctions in a cell. Cells store energy for long-term u se in the form of lipids
called fats. Lipids also provide insulation from the environment for plants and animals. For example, they help keep aquatic birds
and mammals dry because of their water-repelling nat ure. Lipids are also the building blocks of many hor mones and are an
important constituent of the plasma membrane. Lipids incl ude fats, oils, waxes, phospholipids, and steroids.
Fats and Oils
A fat molecule consists of two main components—glyce rol and fatty acids. Glycerol is an organic compound (an alcohol) that
contains three carbons, five hydrogens, and three h ydroxyl (OH) groups. Fatty acids have a long chain of hydrocarbons to which a
carboxyl group is attached, hence the name “fatty ac id.” The number of carbons in the fatty acid may ran ge from 4 to 36; most
common are those containing 12–18 carbons. In a fat molecule, the fatty acids are attached to each of t he three carbons of the
glycerol molecule with a covalent bond. This molecule i s called a triglyceride.

3.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68547
Figure: Triacylglycerol is formed by the joining of three f atty acids to a glycerol backbone in a dehydration r eaction
(remember this removes a water molecule and forms a co valent bond). Three molecules of water are released i n the process.
Waxes
Wax covers the feathers of some aquatic birds and th e leaf surfaces of some plants. Because of the hydro phobic nature of waxes,
they prevent water from sticking on the surface (Figur e). Waxes are made up of long fatty acid chains cov alently bonded to
long-chain alcohols.
Figure: Waxy coverings on some leaves are made of lipids. (cre dit: Roger Griffith)

3.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68547Phospholipids
Phospholipids are major constituents of the plasma me mbrane, the outermost layer of animal cells. Like fat s, they are composed of
fatty acid chains covalently bonded to a glycerol o r sphingosine backbone. Instead of three fatty acid s attached as in triglycerides,
however, there are two fatty acids forming diacylglyce rol, and the third carbon of the glycerol backbone i s occupied by a modified
phosphate group (Figure). Phosphatidylcholine and pho sphatidylserine are two important phospholipids that are found in
plasma membranes.
Figure: A phospholipid is a molecule with two fatty acids and a modified phosphate group attached to a glycerol b ackbone.
The phosphate may be modified by the addition of cha rged or polar chemical groups. Two chemical groups th at may modify the
phosphate, choline and serine, are shown here. Both ch oline and serine attach to the phosphate group at the position labeled R via
the hydroxyl group indicated in green.
A phospholipid is an amphipathic molecule, meaning it has a hydrophobic and a hydrop hilic part. The fatty acid chains are
hydrophobic and cannot interact with water, whereas the phosphate-containing group is hydrophilic and inter acts with water
(Figure). The head is the hydrophilic part, and the tail contains the hydrophobic fatty acids. In a me mbrane, a bilayer of
phospholipids forms the matrix of the structure, the fatty acid tails of phospholipids face inside, away f rom water, whereas the
phosphate group faces the outside, aqueous side. This forms a hydrophobic layer on the inside of the bila yer, where the tails are
located.
Figure: The phospholipid bilayer is the major component of a ll cellular membranes. The hydrophilic head groups of the
phospholipids face the aqueous solution. The hydrophobi c tails are sequestered in the middle of the bilayer.
Phospholipids are responsible for the dynamic nature o f the plasma membrane. If a drop of phospholipids is p laced in water, it
spontaneously forms a structure known as a micelle, wher e the hydrophilic phosphate heads face the outside and the fatty acids
face the interior of this structure (Figure).

3.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68547
Figure: A micelle may be the very early precursor of a cell. It is a single layer of phospholipids that form sponta neously.
Credit AmitWo, Wikimedia; https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Micelle.svg
Steroids
Unlike the phospholipids and fats discussed earlier, ster oids have a fused ring structure. Although they do no t resemble the other
lipids, they are grouped with them because they are also hydrophobic and insoluble in water. All steroids h ave four linked carbon
rings and several of them, like cholesterol, have a short tail (Figure). Many steroids also have the –OH fun ctional group,
which puts them in the alcohol classification (sterols). Remember that each line in these diagrams of che mical structures represents
a covalent bond. The points where the lines connect to each other show the location of carbon atoms – thes e carbon atoms are not
labeled, but their existence is implied in the chemical structure.
Figure: Steroids such as cholesterol and cortisol are composed of four fused hydrocarbon rings.
Cholesterol is the most common steroid. Cholesterol is mainly synthesized in the liver and is the precursor to many steroid
hormones such as testosterone and estradiol, which are se creted by the gonads and endocrine glands. It is also t he precursor to
Vitamin D. Cholesterol is also the precursor of bile s alts, which help in the emulsification of fats and the ir subsequent absorption
by cells. Although cholesterol is often spoken of in n egative terms by lay people, it is necessary for pr oper functioning of the body.
It is a component of the plasma membrane of animal c ells and is found within the phospholipid bilayer. Be ing the outermost
structure in animal cells, the plasma membrane is re sponsible for the transport of materials and cellula r recognition and it is
involved in cell-to-cell communication.
How does lipid structure relate to function?
Fats (triglycerides) are made up of three fatty acid hydrocarbon chains connected to a glycerol. Fatty ac id chains contain large
numbers of carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds – they are typically made up of between 4 and 28 carbo ns connected
together in a chain. Just like the carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds in glucose allow that molecul e to store energy, the
bonds in fatty acids allow triglycerides to store ener gy. In fact, triglycerides can store much more energy than carbohydrates
because they contain so many more bonds! This is why fats cont ain more calories (a measure of energy) than sugars do.

3.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68547Waxes function to provide a waterproof coating on a surface. Because they are hydrophobic, they can for m a coating that repels
water.
The structure of phospholipids is very important to their function. Because they are amphipathic (have a hydrophobic and a
hydrophilic portion), they self-assemble into struct ures where the hydrophobic tails are hidden away from the watery environment.
This gives the cell membrane a structure that prevents many molecules from moving through it.
Cholesterol is also amphipathic. It can insert into ce ll membranes in a manner similar to phospholipids. T he presence of cholesterol
within a membrane prevents the phospholipid tails fr om packing together tightly. This allows the membrane to remain fluid at
lower temperatures.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:QhGQhr4x@6/Biologica l-Molecules
3.2: Lipids is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685483.3: Proteins
Proteins are one of the most abundant organic molecules in li ving systems and have the most diverse range of funct ions of all
macromolecules. Proteins may be structural, regulatory, contractile, or protective; they may serve in tran sport, storage, or
membranes; or they may be toxins or enzymes. Each ce ll in a living system may contain thousands of diffe rent proteins, each with
a unique function. Their structures, like their functio ns, vary greatly. They are all, however, polymers of ami no acids, arranged in a
linear sequence and connected together by covalent bon ds.
Amino acids are the monomers that make up proteins (Figure). Eac h amino acid has the same fundamental structure, which
consists of a central carbon atom, also known as the alpha (α) carbon, bonded to an amino group (NH), a carboxyl gro up (COOH),
and to a hydrogen atom. Every amino acid also has an other atom or group of atoms bonded to the central atom known as the R
group.
Figure: Amino acids have a central asymmetric carbon to whic h an amino group, a carboxyl group, a hydrogen atom, and a
side chain (R group) are attached.
Function Examples Description
Defense ImmunoglobulinsAntibodies bind to specific foreign particles, such as vi ruses and bacteria,
to help protect the body.
EnzymeDigestive enzymes such as
amylase, lipase, pepsin, trypsinEnzymes carry out almost all of the thousands of chemical r eactions that
take place in cells. They also assist with the formation of new molecules
by reading the genetic information stored in DNA.
Messenger Insulin, thyroxineMessenger proteins, such as some types of hormones, transmit signals to
coordinate biological processes between different cells, tissues, and
organs.
Structural
componentActin, tubulin, keratinThese proteins provide structure and support for cells. On a larger scale,
they also allow the body to move.
Transport/
storageHemoglobin, albumin, Legume
storage proteins, egg white
(albumin)These proteins bind and carry atoms and small molecul es within cells and
throughout the body. Some provide nourishment in early development of
the embryo and the seedling.
Contractile Actin, myosin Affect muscle contraction.
You may have noticed that “source of energy” was not listed among the function of proteins. This is beca use proteins in our diet are
typically broken back down into individual amino aci ds that our cells then assemble into our own proteins. Humans are actually
unable to build some amino acids inside our own cells – we require them in our diet (these are the so-called “essential” amino
acids). Our cells can digest proteins to release energy, bu t will usually only do so when carbohydrates or lipids are no t available.2

3.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68548
Figure: Examples of foods that contain high levels of protein. (“Protein” by National Cancer Institute is in the Pu blic
Domain)
The functions of proteins can be very diverse because they are made up of 20 different chemically distinct amino acids that form
long chains, and the amino acids can be in any order. The function of the protein is dependent on the prot ein’s shape. The shape of
a protein is determined by the order of the amino a cids. Proteins are often hundreds of amino acids long a nd they can have very
complex shapes because there are so many different possibl e orders for the 20 amino acids (Figure)!
Figure: There are 20 common amino acids commonly found in p roteins, each with a different R group (variant grou p) that
determines its chemical nature.
The chemical nature of the side chain determines th e nature of the amino acid (that is, whether it is aci dic, basic, polar, or
nonpolar). For example, the amino acid glycine has a hydrogen atom as the R group. Amino acids such as va line, methionine, and
alanine are nonpolar or hydrophobic in nature, while amino acids such as serine, threonine, and cysteine a re polar and have

3.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68548hydrophilic side chains. The side chains of lysine an d arginine are positively charged, and therefore the se amino acids are also
known as basic amino acids. Proline has an R group th at is linked to the amino group, forming a ring-lik e structure. Proline is an
exception to the standard structure of an amino acid since its amino group is not separate from the side ch ain (Figure). Amino
acids are represented by a single upper case letter as well as a three-letter abbreviation. For example, valine is known by the letter
V or the three-letter symbol val.
Just as some fatty acids are essential to a diet, some a mino acids are necessary as well. They are known as e ssential amino acids,
and in humans they include isoleucine, leucine, and c ysteine. Essential amino acids refer to those necessa ry for construction of
proteins in the body, although not produced by the body; which amino acids are essential varies from organism to organism.
The sequence and the number of amino acids ultimatel y determine the protein’s shape, size, and function. Each amino acid is
attached to another amino acid by a covalent bond, k nown as a peptide bond, which is formed by a dehydrat ion reaction. The
carboxyl group of one amino acid and the amino grou p of the incoming amino acid combine, releasing a mo lecule of water. The
resulting bond is the peptide bond (Figure).
Figure: Peptide bond formation is a dehydration synthesis react ion. The carboxyl group of one amino acid is linked to the
amino group of the incoming amino acid. In the proc ess, a molecule of water is released.
Protein Structure
As discussed earlier, the shape of a protein is critical to its function. For example, an enzyme can bind to a s pecific substrate at a
site known as the active site. If this active site i s altered because of local changes or changes in overa ll protein structure, the
enzyme may be unable to bind to the substrate. To u nderstand how the protein gets its final shape or con formation, we need to
understand the four levels of protein structure: primar y, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary (Figure).

3.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68548
Figure: Main levels of protein structure. (“Main protein stru cture levels en” by LadyofHats is in the Public Domain)
Primary Structure
The unique sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide chain is its primary structure. For example, the pancre atic hormone insulin
has two polypeptide chains, A and B, and they are linke d together by disulfide bonds. The N terminal amino ac id of the A chain is
glycine, whereas the C terminal amino acid is asparagi ne (Figure). The sequences of amino acids in the A and B chains are
unique to insulin.

3.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68548
Figure: Bovine serum insulin is a protein hormone made of two peptide chains, A (21 amino acids long) and B (30 am ino
acids long). In each chain, primary structure is indic ated by three-letter abbreviations that represent the names of the amino acids in
the order they are present. The amino acid cysteine (cys) has a sulfhydryl (SH) group as a side chain. Two sulf hydryl groups can
react in the presence of oxygen to form a disulfide (S-S) bond. Two disulfide bonds connect the A and B cha ins together, and a third
helps the A chain fold into the correct shape. Note t hat all disulfide bonds are the same length, but are d rawn different sizes for
clarity.
Secondary Structure
The local folding of the polypeptide in some region s gives rise to the secondary structure of the protei n. The most common are the
α-helix and β-pleated sheet structures (Figure). Both structures ar e held in shape by hydrogen bonds. The hydrogen bonds
form between the oxygen atom in the carbonyl group i n one amino acid and another amino acid that is four amino acids farther
along the chain.
Figure: The α-helix and β-pleated sheet are secondary structu res of proteins that form because of hydrogen bonding between
carbonyl and amino groups in the peptide backbone. C ertain amino acids have a propensity to form an α-hel ix, while others have a
propensity to form a β-pleated sheet.

3.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68548Tertiary Structure
The unique three-dimensional structure of a polypept ide is its tertiary structure (Figure). This structure is in part due to
chemical interactions at work on the polypeptide cha in. Primarily, the interactions among R groups (the variable part of the amino
acid) create the complex three-dimensional tertiary structure of a protein. The nature of the R groups f ound in the amino acids
involved can counteract the formation of the hydrog en bonds described for standard secondary structure s. For example, R groups
with like charges are repelled by each other and tho se with unlike charges are attracted to each other (i onic bonds). When protein
folding takes place, the hydrophobic R groups of nonp olar amino acids lay in the interior of the protein, whereas the hydrophilic R
groups lay on the outside. The former types of inter actions are also known as hydrophobic interactions. In teraction between
cysteine side chains forms disulfide linkages in the prese nce of oxygen, the only covalent bond forming during p rotein folding.
Figure: The tertiary structure of proteins is determined by a variety of chemical interactions. These include hydr ophobic
interactions, ionic bonding, hydrogen bonding and di sulfide linkages.
Quaternary Structure
In nature, some proteins are formed from several pol ypeptides, also known as subunits, and the interaction o f these subunits forms
the quaternary structure. Weak interactions between th e subunits help to stabilize the overall structure. For example, insulin (a
globular protein) has a combination of hydrogen bon ds and disulfide bonds that cause it to be mostly cl umped into a ball shape.
Insulin starts out as a single polypeptide and loses some internal sequences in the presence of post-tran slational modification after
the formation of the disulfide linkages that hold t he remaining chains together. Silk (a fibrous protein), however, has a β-pleated
sheet structure that is the result of hydrogen bonding be tween different chains.
The four levels of protein structure (primary, secondar y, tertiary, and quaternary) are illustrated in Figure.

3.3.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68548
Figure: The four levels of protein structure can be observed in these illustrations. (credit: modification of work by National
Human Genome Research Institute)
The unique shape for every protein is ultimately det ermined by the gene that encodes the protein. Any cha nge in the gene sequence
may lead to a different amino acid being added to t he polypeptide chain, causing a change in protein st ructure and function.
Individuals who are affected by sickle cell anemia c an have a variety of serious health problems, such a s breathlessness, dizziness,
headaches, and abdominal pain. In this disease, the hem oglobin β chain has a single amino acid substitution, c ausing a change in
both the structure (shape) and function (job) of the protein. What is most remarkable to consider is tha t a hemoglobin molecule is
made up of about 600 amino acids. The structural di fference between a normal hemoglobin molecule and a s ickle cell molecule is a
single amino acid of the 600 (Figure).

3.3.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68548
Figure: The unique shape of the normal hemoglobin protein. (“Structure of hemoglobin Gower 2” by Emw is licensed under
CC BY-SA 3.0)
Denaturation and Protein Folding
Each protein has its own unique sequence and shape t hat are held together by chemical interactions. If the protein is subject to
changes in temperature, pH, or exposure to chemicals, the protein structure may change, losing its shape with out losing its primary
sequence in what is known as denaturation. Denaturation is often reversible because the primary structure o f the polypeptide is
conserved in the process if the denaturing agent is removed, allowing the protein to resume its function. Sometimes denaturation is
irreversible, leading to loss of function. One exampl e of irreversible protein denaturation is when an egg is fried. The albumin
protein in the liquid egg white is denatured when pla ced in a hot pan. Not all proteins are denatured at high temperatures; for
instance, bacteria that survive in hot springs have p roteins that function at temperatures close to boili ng. The stomach is also very
acidic, has a low pH, and denatures proteins as part of the digestion process; however, the digestive enzymes of the stomach retain
their activity under these conditions.
Figure: The reason an egg white turns white as you cook it is because the albumin in the white denatures and then
reconnects in an abnormal fashion. Credit Matthew Mur dock; https://www.flickr.com/photos/544232...05/13916201522
Protein folding is critical to its function. It was ori ginally thought that the proteins themselves were re sponsible for the folding
process. Only recently was it found that often they rece ive assistance in the folding process from protein h elpers known as
chaperones (or chaperonins) that associate with the ta rget protein during the folding process. They act by preventing aggregation of
polypeptides that make up the complete protein structure, and they disassociate from the protein once the target pro tein is folded.
How does protein structure relate to function?
Recall that a protein is built from a long chain of amino acids connected together in a specific order. The specific order of amino
acids determines how they will interact together to f orm the 3-D shape of the protein. The shape of a prot ein determines its
function. Therefore, the order of the amino acids determin es the protein’s shape, which determines its function.
Because there are 20 different amino acids, they can be combined together in a practically infinite numb er of ways. This means that
there is a huge number of different protein shapes th at can be assumed based on the amino acid order. This is very important since
proteins fulfill so many different functions within ce lls.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:QhGQhr4x@6/Biologica l-Molecules
3.3: Proteins is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685493.4: Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acids are key macromolecules in the continuity of life. They carry the genetic blueprint of a cel l and carry instructions for
the functioning of the cell. The two main types of nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA).
DNA is the genetic material found in all living organi sms, ranging from single-celled bacteria to multicellu lar mammals. The other
type of nucleic acid, RNA, is mostly involved in protein synthesis. The DNA molecules never leave the nucleus, but instead use an
RNA intermediary to communicate with the rest of the cell. Other types of RNA are also involved in protein synthesis and its
regulation. We will be going into more detail about nucl eic acids in a later section.
DNA and RNA are made up of monomers known as nucleotides connected together in a chain with covalent bonds. Each
nucleotide is made up of three components: a nitroge nous base, five-carbon sugar, and a phosphate group (Figure). The
nitrogenous base in one nucleotide is attached to the sugar molecule, which is attached to the phosphate group.
Figure: A nucleotide is made up of three components: a nitro genous base, a pentose sugar, and one or more phosphate groups.
The nitrogenous bases, important components of nucle otides, are organic molecules and are so named beca use they contain carbon
and nitrogen. They are bases because they contain a n amino group that has the potential of binding an e xtra hydrogen, and thus,
decreases the hydrogen ion concentration in its envi ronment, making it more basic. Each nucleotide in DNA c ontains one of four

3.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68549possible nitrogenous bases: adenine (A), guanine (G) cy tosine (C), and thymine (T). RNA contains the base ura cil (U) instead of
thymine. The order of the bases in a nucleic acid de termines the information that the molecule of DNA or RNA carries. This is
because the order of the bases in a DNA gene determines the ord er that amino acids will be assembled together to form a p rotein.
The pentose sugar in DNA is deoxyribose, and in RNA, the sugar is ribose (Figure). The difference between the sugars is the
presence of the hydroxyl group on the second carbon of the ribose and hydrogen on the second carbon of the deoxyribose. The
carbon atoms of the sugar molecule are numbered as 1′, 2′, 3′, 4′, and 5′ (1′ is read as “one prime”). The phosphate residue is
attached to the hydroxyl group of the 5′ carbon of one sugar and the hydroxyl group of the 3′ carbon o f the sugar of the next
nucleotide, which forms a 5′–3′ phosphodiester linkag e (a specific type of covalent bond). A polynucleoti de may have thousands of
such phosphodiester linkages.
DNA Double-Helical Structure
DNA has a double-helical structure (Figure). It is composed of two strands, or chains, of nucleot ides. The double helix of
DNA is often compared to a twisted ladder. The strands (t he outside parts of the ladder) are formed by linkin g the phosphates and
sugars of adjacent nucleotides with strong chemical bonds, called covalent bonds. The rungs of the twisted ladder are made up of
the two bases attached together with a weak chemical bon d, called a hydrogen bond. Two bases hydrogen bonded together is
called a base pair. The ladder twists along its length, hence the “double helix” description, which means a double spiral.
Figure: The double-helix model shows DNA as two parallel stran ds of intertwining molecules. (credit: Jerome Walker, Dennis
Myts).
The alternating sugar and phosphate groups lie on th e outside of each strand, forming the backbone of t he DNA. The nitrogenous
bases are stacked in the interior, like the steps of a staircase, and these bases pair; the pairs are boun d to each other by hydrogen
bonds. The bases pair in such a way that the distance bet ween the backbones of the two strands is the same all along the m olecule.
How does nucleic acid structure determine function?
The major function of both DNA and RNA is to store and carry genetic information. The specific order of nuc leotides in the
molecule of DNA or RNA is what determines the genetic i nformation it carries. You can think of it like lette rs in a book – if the
order of the letters were changed, the book would no longe r contain the same (or correct) information.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...and-Sequencing
3.4: Nucleic Acids is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685503.5: Biological Macromolecule Practice Questions
3.5: Biological Macromolecule Practice Questions is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4: What is Life?
What is biology? In simple terms, biology is the stu dy of living organisms and their interactions with one another and their
environments. This is a very broad definition because the scope of biology is vast. Biologists may study an ything from the
microscopic or submicroscopic view of a cell to ecosyst ems and the whole living planet. Listening to the dail y news, you will
quickly realize how many aspects of biology are discu ssed every day. For example, recent news topics include Zika virus and using
a new technology called CRISPR to specifically target a nd edit human genes. Other subjects include efforts toward finding a cure
for AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease, and cancer. On a global scale, many researchers are committed to finding ways to pr otect the
planet, solve environmental issues, and reduce the ef fects of climate change. All of these diverse endeavo rs are related to different
facets of the discipline of biology.
4.1: What makes something living?
4.2: Levels of Organization
4.3: The Diversity of Life
Thumbnail: Phylogenetic Tree of Life. (CC BY 3.0; Crion via Wikimedia Commons).
4: What is Life? is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685564.1: What makes something living?
All living organisms share several key characteristic s or functions: order, sensitivity or response to the env ironment, reproduction,
adaptation, growth and development, homeostasis, energy processing, and evolution. When viewed together, thes e characteristics
serve to define life. Different sources may use slight ly different terms to describe these characteristics, but the basic ideas are
always present.
Order
Figure: A toad represents a highly organized structure consistin g of cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems. (credit:
“Ivengo”/Wikimedia Commons)
Organisms are highly organized, coordinated structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, sing le-celled organisms
are remarkably complex: inside each cell, atoms make up molecules; these in turn make up cell organelles and other cellular
inclusions. In multicellular organisms, such as the t oad seen in Figure, similar cells form tissues. Tiss ues, in turn, collaborate
to create organs (body structures with a distinct func tion). Organs work together to form organ systems.
In this class, we will be focusing on how cells function, so we will be concentrating on biological molecules, ho w they make up
cells, and how those cells function.
Sensitivity or Response to Stimuli
Figure: The leaves of this sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) will instantly droop and fold when touched. After a few minutes,
the plant returns to normal. (credit: Alex Lomas)
Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plant s can bend toward a source of light, climb on fences a nd walls, or respond
to touch (Figure). Even tiny bacteria can move towar d or away from chemicals (a process called chemotaxis) or light
(phototaxis).
Reproduction
Single-celled organisms reproduce by first duplicating their DNA, and then dividing it equally as the cell pr epares to divide to form
two new cells. Multicellular organisms often produce spe cialized reproductive germline (reproductive) cells that will form new
individuals. When reproduction occurs, DNA is passed from the organism to that organism’s offspring. DNA contai ns the
instructions to produce all the physical traits for the organism. This means that because parents and o ffspring share DNA, it ensures
that the offspring will belong to the same species and will ha ve similar characteristics, such as size and shape.
Growth and Development
All living things increase in size and/or change over t heir lifespan. For example, a human grows from a baby into an adult and goes
through developmental processes such as puberty. Orga nisms grow and develop following specific instructions coded for by their

4.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68556genes (DNA). These genes provide instructions that will d irect cellular growth and development, ensuring that a species’ young
will grow up to exhibit many of the same characteristics as i ts parents, like the kittens seen in Figure.
Figure: Although no two look alike, these kittens have inheri ted genes from both parents and share many of the same
characteristics. (credit: Rocky Mountain Feline Rescue)
Homeostasis and Regulation
Figure: Polar bears (Ursus maritimus) and other mammals living in ice-covered regions mai ntain their body temperature by
generating heat and reducing heat loss through thick fur and a dense layer of fat under their skin. (credi t: “longhorndave”/Flickr)
In order to function properly, cells need to have a ppropriate conditions such as proper temperature, pH, and appropriate
concentration of diverse chemicals. These condition s may, however, change from one moment to the next. Orga nisms are able to
maintain internal conditions within a narrow range al most constantly, despite environmental changes, through homeostasis
(literally, “steady state”)—the ability of an organis m to maintain constant internal conditions. For examp le, an organism needs to
regulate body temperature through a process known as t hermoregulation. Organisms that live in cold climates, s uch as the polar
bear (Figure), have body structures that help them withstand low temperatures and conserve body heat. Stru ctures that aid in
this type of insulation include fur, feathers, blubbe r, and fat. In hot climates, organisms have methods (s uch as perspiration in
humans or panting in dogs) that help them to shed excess body heat.
Even the smallest organisms are complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate intern al functions, respond to
stimuli, and cope with environmental stresses. Two exampl es of internal functions regulated in an organism ar e nutrient transport
and blood flow. Organs (groups of tissues working togeth er) perform specific functions, such as carrying oxygen throughout the
body, removing wastes, delivering nutrients to every cell, and cooling the body.
Energy Processing
Figure: The California condor (Gymnogyps californianus) uses chemical energy derived from food to power fli ght. California
condors are an endangered species; this bird has a wing tag that helps biologists identify the individual. (cr edit: Pacific Southwest
Region U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)

4.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68556All organisms use a source of energy for their metab olic activities. Some organisms capture energy from th e sun and convert it into
chemical energy in food (such as grass and bacteria t hat can perform photosynthesis); others use chemical energy in molecules they
take in as food (such as the condor seen in Figure).
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 25, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...ptsof-Biology
4.1: What makes something living? is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685574.2: Levels of Organization
Living things are highly organized and structured, f ollowing a hierarchy that can be examined on a scale from small to large. The
atom is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. It consists of a nucleus surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules.
A molecule is a chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms held together by one or more chemica l bonds. Many molecules
that are biologically important are macromolecules, large molecules that are typically formed by polym erization (a polymer is a
large molecule that is made by combining smaller un its called monomers, which are simpler than macromole cules). An example of
a macromolecule is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (Figure), which contains the instructions for the structure an d functioning of
all living organisms. See the section of your textbook about the chemistry of biological molecules for more information.
Figure: All molecules, including this DNA molecule, are compo sed of atoms. (credit: “brian0918”/Wikimedia Commons)
Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surr ounded by membranes; these are called organelles. Organelles are small
structures that exist within cells. Examples of organel les include mitochondria and chloroplasts, which carry out indispensable
functions: mitochondria produce energy to power the cell, while chloroplasts enable green plants to utilize the energy in sunlight to
make sugars. All living things are made of cells; th e cell itself is the smallest fundamental unit of stru cture and function in living
organisms. This requirement is one of the reasons why vi ruses are not considered living: they are not made of cells. To make new
viruses, they have to invade and hijack the reproduc tive mechanism of a living cell; only then can they obtain the materials they
need to reproduce. Some organisms consist of a single c ell and others are multicellular. Cells are classifi ed as prokaryotic or
eukaryotic. Prokaryotes are single-celled or colonial organisms that do not have membrane-bound nuclei; in contrast, the cells of
eukaryotes do have membrane-bound organelles and a me mbrane-bound nucleus.
In larger organisms, cells combine to make tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out simila r or related functions.
Organs are collections of tissues grouped together perform ing a common function. Organs are present not only in animals but also
in plants. An organ system is a higher level of organi zation that consists of functionally related organs. Mammals have many organ
systems. For instance, the circulatory system transports bloo d through the body and to and from the lungs; it inc ludes organs such
as the heart and blood vessels. Organisms are individual living entities. For example, each tree in a forest is an organism. Singlecelled prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are a lso considered organisms and are typically referred to as microorganisms.
All the individuals of a species living within a speci fic area are collectively called a population. For example, a forest may include
many pine trees. All of these pine trees represent the population of pine trees in this forest. Different p opulations may live in the
same specific area. For example, the forest with the pin e trees includes populations of flowering plants and also insects and
microbial populations. A community is the sum of populations inhabiting a particular a rea. For instance, all of the trees, flowers,
insects, and other populations in a forest form the forest’s community. The forest itself is an ecosyste m. An ecosystem consists of
all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic, non-living parts of that environm ent such as nitrogen in the soil or

4.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68557rain water. At the highest level of organization, the biosphere is the collection of all ecosystems, and it represents the zones of life
on earth. It includes land, water, and even the atmosphere t o a certain extent.
Figure: The biological levels of organization of living thi ngs are shown. From a single organelle to the entire b iosphere,
living organisms are parts of a highly structured hiera rchy. (credit “organelles”: modification of work by Umberto Salvagnin; credit
“cells”: modification of work by Bruce Wetzel, Harry Schaefer/ National Cancer Institute; credit “tissues”: modification of work by
Kilbad; Fama Clamosa; Mikael Häggström; credit “organ s”: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal; credit “organisms”:
modification of work by “Crystal”/Flickr; credit “eco systems”: modification of work by US Fish and Wildlife Ser vice
Headquarters; credit “biosphere”: modification of wor k by NASA)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 25, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...ptsof-Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685584.3: The Diversity of Life
The fact that biology, as a science, has such a broad s cope has to do with the tremendous diversity of life o n earth. The source of
this diversity is evolution, the process of gradual c hange during which new species arise from older specie s. Evolutionary
biologists study the evolution of living things in everyth ing from the microscopic world to ecosystems.
The evolution of various life forms on Earth can be summarized in a phylogenetic tree (Figure). A phylog enetic tree is a
diagram showing the evolutionary relationships among biological species based on similarities and diffe rences in genetic or
physical traits or both. A phylogenetic tree is compo sed of branches (the lines) and nodes (places where two lines diverge). The
internal nodes represent ancestors and are points in evolution when, based on scientific evidence, an ancest or is thought to have
diverged to form two new species. The length of each branc h is proportional to the time elapsed since the split.
Figure: This phylogenetic tree was constructed by microbiolog ist Carl Woese using data obtained from sequencing ribo somal
RNA genes. The tree shows the separation of living orga nisms into three domains: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukar ya. Bacteria and
Archaea are prokaryotes, single-celled organisms lackin g intracellular organelles. (credit: Eric Gaba; NASA Astrobiology Institute)
While this is the most common way that is used to group orga nisms, other divisions have been proposed.
Some scientists believe that organisms should be divided into two groups: Prokaryota (or Monera) and Eukaryota. In th is
method, Archae is typically included in Prokaryota. This v iew has become less popular due to scientific advancements,
specifically genetic analysis of various organisms.
Another two-group division groups Archae with Eukaryotes. T his is often called the “Eocyte hypothesis”. This hypoth esis has
become more popular as the genomes of more Archaeic organ isms are sequenced.
Figure: The relationship between Archae (in red) and Eukary otes (green) may be closer than you think. Figure cre dit: Crion,
Wikimedia. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/F...hypothesis.png
Viruses
None of the three systems currently include non-cellu lar life. As of 2011 there is talk about Nucleocytoplasm ic large DNA viruses
possibly being a fourth branch/domain of life, a view supp orted by researchers in 2012.
Stefan Luketa in 2012 proposed a five-domain system, adding Prionobiota (acellular and without nucleic ac id) and Virusobiota
(acellular but with nucleic acid) to the traditional thre e domains.

4.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68558In the past, biologists grouped living organisms into five kingdoms: animals, plants, fungi, protists, an d bacteria. The
organizational scheme was based mainly on physical f eatures, as opposed to physiology, biochemistry, or mo lecular biology,
all of which are used by modern systematics. The pionee ring work of American microbiologist Carl Woese in th e early 1970s
has shown, however, that life on Earth has evolved al ong three lineages, now called domains—Bacteria, Archae a, and Eukarya.
The first two are prokaryotic cells with microbes tha t lack membrane-enclosed nuclei and organelles. The third domain
contains the eukaryotes and includes unicellular mi croorganisms together with the four original kingdoms (excluding bacteria).
Woese defined Archaea as a new domain, and this result ed in a new taxonomic tree (Figure). Many organisms b elonging
to the Archaea domain live under extreme conditions a nd are called extremophiles. To construct his tree, W oese used genetic
relationships rather than similarities based on morphology (shape).
Woese’s tree was constructed from comparative sequencin g of the genes that are universally distributed, pres ent in every
organism, and conserved (meaning that these genes hav e remained essentially unchanged throughout evolutio n). Woese’s
approach was revolutionary because comparisons of phy sical features are insufficient to differentiate bet ween the prokaryotes
that appear fairly similar in spite of their tremen dous biochemical diversity and genetic variability (Figure). The
comparison of homologous DNA and RNA sequences provided Woese with a sensitive device that revealed the ext ensive
variability of prokaryotes, and which justified the sepa ration of the prokaryotes into two domains: bacteria and arc haea.
Figure: These images represent different domains. The (a) bact eria in this micrograph belong to Domain Bacteria, w hile
the (b) extremophiles (not visible) living in this hot vent belong to Domain Archaea. Both the (c) sunflow er and (d) lion are
part of Domain Eukarya. (credit a: modification of work by Drew March; credit b: modification of work by Steve Jurvetson;
credit c: modification of work by Michael Arrighi; credit d: modification of work by Leszek Leszcynski)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from:
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 25, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...pts-of-Biology
Eocyte Hypothesis, Wikipedia. May 25, 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eocyte_hypothesis
Domain (biology), Wikipedia. May 25, 2017. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_(biology)
4.3: The Diversity of Life is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Evolution Connection: Carl Woese and the Phylogenetic Tree

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5: Cell Structure and Function
Course Objectives for this section:
1. Explain how basic units of cellular structure define the function of all livi ng things.
Explain how various cell structures participate in the f unction of a cell and/or organism.
Discuss the role of evolution in shaping cellular structure and function.
Close your eyes and picture a brick wall. What is the basic building block of that wall? It is a single br ick, of course. Like a brick
wall, your body is composed of basic building blocks, and the building blocks of your body are cells (Figure a-c).
Your body has many kinds of cells, each specialized f or a specific purpose. Just as a home is made from a v ariety of building
materials, the human body is constructed from many c ell types. For example, epithelial cells protect the su rface of the body and
cover the organs and body cavities within. Bone cells h elp to support and protect the body. Cells of the immun e system fight
invading bacteria. Additionally, red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body. Each of these cell type s plays a vital role during
the growth, development, and day-to-day maintenance of the body. In spite of their enormous variety, howeve r, all cells share
certain fundamental characteristics.
Figure: (a) Nasal sinus cells (viewed with a light microscope), (b) onion cells (viewed with a light microscope), an d (c) Vibrio
tasmaniensis bacterial cells (viewed using a scanning electron mic roscope) are from very different organisms, yet all sha re certain
characteristics of basic cell structure. (credit a: mod ification of work by Ed Uthman, MD; credit b: modif ication of work by
Umberto Salvagnin; credit c: modification of work b y Anthony D’Onofrio; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
5.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm
5.4: Ribosomes
5.5: The Cytoskeleton
5.6: Flagella and Cilia
5.7: The Endomembrane System
5.8: The Nucleus
5.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum
5.10: The Golgi Apparatus
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and Peroxisomes
5.12: Mitochondria and ChloroplastsLearning Objectives

25.13: The Cell Wall
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular junctions
5.15: The Production of a Protein
5.16: Summary Table of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells an d Functions
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
Thumbnail: Structure of a prokaryotic cell. (CC-BY 4.0; OpenStax).
5: Cell Structure and Function is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685595.1: How Cells Are Studied
A cell is the smallest unit of a living thing. A livi ng thing, like you, is called an organism. Thus, cell s are the basic building blocks
of all organisms.
In multicellular organisms, cells of one particular cell type interconnect with each other and perform shared functions to form
tissues (for example, muscle tissue, connective tissue, and n ervous tissue), several tissues combine to form an organ (for example,
stomach, heart, or brain), and several organs make up an organ system (such as the digestive system, circulatory system, or
nervous system). Several systems functioning together form a n organism (such as an elephant, for example).
There are many types of cells, and all are grouped into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Animal cells,
plant cells, fungal cells, and protist cells are cl assified as eukaryotic, whereas bacteria and archaea ce lls are classified as
prokaryotic. Before discussing the criteria for dete rmining whether a cell is prokaryotic or eukaryotic, let us first examine how
biologists study cells.
Microscopy
Cells vary in size. With few exceptions, individual c ells are too small to be seen with the naked eye, so sc ientists use microscopes
to study them. A microscope is an instrument that magnifies an object. Most ima ges of cells are taken with a microscope and are
called micrographs.
Light Microscopes
To give you a sense of the size of a cell, a typical human red blood cell is about eight millionths of a meter or eight micrometers
(abbreviated as μm) in diameter; the head of a pin i s about two thousandths of a meter (millimeters, or mm) in diameter. That
means that approximately 250 red blood cells could fit o n the head of a pin.
The optics of the lenses of a light microscope changes the orientation of the image. A specimen that is ri ght-side up and facing right
on the microscope slide will appear upside-down and fac ing left when viewed through a microscope, and vice v ersa. Similarly, if
the slide is moved left while looking through the micr oscope, it will appear to move right, and if moved do wn, it will seem to move
up. This occurs because microscopes use two sets of len ses to magnify the image. Due to the manner in which light travels through
the lenses, this system of lenses produces an inverte d image (binoculars and a dissecting microscope work i n a similar manner, but
include an additional magnification system that makes th e final image appear to be upright).
Figure: (a) Most light microscopes used in a college biology l ab can magnify cells up to approximately 400 times. (b)
Dissecting microscopes have a lower magnification than light microscopes and are used to examine larger objec ts, such as tissues.
Most student microscopes are classified as light microsc opes (Figure a). Visible light both passes through and is bent by the
lens system to enable the user to see the specimen. Lig ht microscopes are advantageous for viewing living org anisms, but since
individual cells are generally transparent, their co mponents are not distinguishable unless they are colo red with special stains.
Staining, however, usually kills the cells.
Light microscopes commonly used in the undergraduate college laboratory magnify up to approximately 400 times. Two
parameters that are important in microscopy are mag nification and resolving power. Magnification is the degree of enlargement of
an object. Resolving power is the ability of a microscope to allow the eye to d istinguish two adjacent structures as separate; the
higher the resolution, the closer those two objects can be, and the better the clarity and detail of the i mage. When oil immersion

5.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68559lenses are used, magnification is usually increased to 1,000 times for the study of smaller cells, like most prokaryotic cells. Because
light entering a specimen from below is focused onto the eye of an observer, the specimen can be viewed usi ng light microscopy.
For this reason, for light to pass through a specimen, the sample must be thin or translucent.
A second type of microscope used in laboratories is th e dissecting microscope (Figure b). These microscopes have a lower
magnification (20 to 80 times the object size) than light microscopes and can provide a three-dimension al view of the specimen.
Thick objects can be examined with many components i n focus at the same time. These microscopes are design ed to give a
magnified and clear view of tissue structure as well as th e anatomy of the whole organism.
Like light microscopes, most modern dissecting microsc opes are also binocular, meaning that they have two se parate lens systems,
one for each eye. The lens systems are separated by a certain distance, and therefore provide a sense of depth in the view of their
subject to make manipulations by hand easier. Dissecti ng microscopes also have optics that correct the imag e so that it appears as if
being seen by the naked eye and not as an inverted i mage. The light illuminating a sample under a disse cting microscope typically
comes from above the sample, but may also be directed from below.
Electron Microscopes
In contrast to light microscopes, electron microscope s use a beam of electrons instead of a beam of light (Figure). Not only
does this allow for higher magnification and, thus, mor e detail, it also provides higher resolving power. Prepar ation of a specimen
for viewing under an electron microscope will kill it; therefore, live cells cannot be viewed using this typ e of microscopy. In
addition, the electron beam moves best in a vacuum, m aking it impossible to view living materials. There ar e two major types of
electron microscopes which differ in the images they provide:
In a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Figure), a beam of electrons moves back and forth across a cell’s sur face,
rendering the details of cell surface characteristics by reflection. Cells and other structures are usually coate d with a metal like
gold.
In a transmission electron microscope (TEM), the electr on beam is transmitted through the cell and provides de tails of a cell’s
internal structures. As you might imagine, electron micros copes are significantly more bulky and expensive than are light
microscopes.
Figure: Salmonella bacteria are viewed with a light microscope. (credi t: modification of work by CDC, Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, Charles N. Farmer)
Figure: This scanning electron micrograph (SEM) shows Salmonella bacteria (in red) invading human cells. (credit:
modification of work by Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Cell Theory
The microscopes we use today are far more complex tha n those used in the 1600s by Antony van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch
shopkeeper who had great skill in crafting lenses. De spite the limitations of his now-ancient lenses, van Leeuwenhoek observed the

5.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68559movements of protists (a type of single-celled organism) and sperm, which he collectively termed “animalcules.”
In a 1665 publication called Micrographia, experimental scientist Robert Hooke coined the ter m “cell” (from the Latin cella,
meaning “small room”) for the box-like structures h e observed when viewing cork tissue through a lens. In the 1670s, van
Leeuwenhoek discovered bacteria and protozoa. Later advances in lenses and microscope construction enab led other scientists to
see different components inside cells.
By the late 1830s, botanist Matthias Schleiden and zoolo gist Theodor Schwann were studying tissues and proposed th e unified cell
theory. This theory has three principles which still stand today. They are:
1. All living things are composed of one or more cells.
2. The cell is the basic unit of life.
3. All new cells arise from existing cells.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.1: How Cells Are Studied is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685605.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
Cells fall into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. The predominantly single-celled organisms of the
domains Bacteria and Archaea are classified as prokary otes (pro– = before; – karyon – = nucleus). Animal cells, plant cells, fungi,
and protists are eukaryotes (eu– = true).
All cells share four common components: 1) a plasma membrane, an outer covering that separates the cell’ s interior from its
surrounding environment; 2) cytoplasm, consisting of a gel-like region within the cell in which other cell ular components are
found; 3) DNA, the genetic material of the cell; and 4) ribos omes, particles that synthesize proteins.
Components of Prokaryotic Cells
Prokaryotes differ from eukaryotic cells in several i mportant ways. A prokaryotic cell is a simple, single-celled (unicellular)
organism that lacks a nucleus, or any other membrane -bound organelle. We will shortly come to see that th is is significantly
different in eukaryotes. Prokaryotic DNA is found in th e central part of the cell: a darkened region calle d the nucleoid (Figure
Figure: This figure shows the generalized structure of a proka ryotic cell.
Unlike Archaea and eukaryotes, bacteria have a cell wa ll made of peptidoglycan, comprised of sugars and amino acids, and many
have a polysaccharide (carbohydrate) capsule (Figure). The cell wall acts as an extra layer of protection, helps the cell
maintain its shape, and prevents dehydration. The cap sule enables the cell to attach to surfaces in its en vironment. Some
prokaryotes have flagella, pili, or fimbriae. Flagella are used for locomotion, while most pili are used to exchange genetic material
during a type of reproduction called conjugation.
Components of Eukaryotic Cells
In nature, the relationship between form and function is apparent at all levels, including the level of the cell, and this will become
clear as we explore eukaryotic cells. The principle “fo rm follows function” is found in many contexts. For e xample, birds and fish
have streamlined bodies that allow them to move quic kly through the medium in which they live, be it air or water. It means that, in
general, one can deduce the function of a structure by looking at its form, because the two are matched.
A eukaryotic cell is a cell that has a membrane-bound nucleus and othe r membrane-bound compartments or sacs, called
organelles, which have specialized functions. The rest of this c hapter will discuss functions of the various organelles. The word
eukaryotic means “true kernel” or “true nucleus,” a lluding to the presence of the membrane-bound nucle us in these cells. The word
“organelle” means “little organ,” and, as already men tioned, organelles have specialized cellular functi ons, just as the organs of
your body have specialized functions.

5.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68560
Figure: A generalized eukaryotic cell showing some of the or ganelles. (Photo credit: Mediran, Wikimedia. 14 Aug 2002)
Both animals and plants are eukaryotes. Despite their f undamental similarities, there are some striking diff erences between animal
and plant cells. Animal cells have centrioles, centros omes (discussed under the cytoskeleton), and lysosomes, whereas plant cells
do not. Plant cells have a cell wall, chloroplasts, plasm odesmata, and plastids used for storage, and a large cen tral vacuole, whereas
animal cells do not.
Cell Size
At 0.1–5.0 μm in diameter, prokaryotic cells are signi ficantly smaller than eukaryotic cells, which have dia meters ranging from 10–
100 μm (Figure). The small size of prokaryotes allows ions and org anic molecules that enter them to quickly spread to other
parts of the cell. Similarly, any wastes produced within a prokaryotic cell can quickly move out. However, larger eukaryotic cells
have evolved different structural adaptations to enh ance cellular transport. Indeed, the large size of t hese cells would not be
possible without these adaptations. In general, cell s ize is limited because volume increases much more quic kly than does cell
surface area. As a cell becomes larger, it becomes mo re and more difficult for the cell to acquire suffic ient materials to support the
processes inside the cell, because the relative size of th e surface area across which materials must be transported declines.

5.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68560
Figure: This figure shows the relative sizes of different kinds of cells and cellular components. An adult human is sho wn for
comparison.
Small size, in general, is necessary for all cells, wheth er prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Let’s examine why that is so. First, we’ll
consider the area and volume of a typical cell. Not a ll cells are spherical in shape, but most tend to appro ximate a sphere. You may
remember from your geometry course that the formula for the surface area of a sphere is 4πr, while the formula for its volume is
4πr /3. Thus, as the radius of a cell increases, its surfac e area increases as the square of its radius, but its v olume increases as the
cube of its radius (much more rapidly). Therefore, as a cell increases in size, its surface area-to-volume rat io decreases. This same
principle would apply if the cell had the shape of a cube (Figure). If the cell grows too large, the plas ma membrane will not
have sufficient surface area to support the rate of diffusion required for the increased volume. In other words, as a cell grows, it
becomes less efficient. One way to become more efficien t is to divide; another way is to develop organelles th at perform specific
tasks. These adaptations lead to the development of more sophisticated cells called eukaryotic cells.
Figure: V olume increases faster than surface area. The surface area of the small cell is 1mm x 1mm x 6 sides = 6mm. Th e
volume of the small cell is 1mm x 1mm x 1mm = 1mm. Th is gives a surface area to volume ratio of 6:1. The sur face area of the
larger cell is 2mm x 2mm x 6 sides = 24mm. The volume of the large cell is 2mm x 2mm x 2mm = 8mm. This give s a surface
area to volume ratio of 3:1 (24:8 reduces to 3:1).
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
2 3

5.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685615.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm
At this point, it should be clear that eukaryotic cel ls have a more complex structure than do prokaryotic cells. Organelles allow for
various functions to occur in the cell at the same ti me. Before discussing the functions of organelles within a eukaryotic cell, let us
first examine two important components of all cells (prok aryotic and eukaryotic): the plasma membrane and the cyto plasm.
Figure: A prokaryotic cell. The cytoplasm is not labeled, bu t is the light blue area inside the cell membrane. Th e ribosome
label is pointing to one of the small brown dots repre senting the ribosome.
Figure: This figure shows a typical animal cell.
Figure: This figure shows a typical plant cell.

5.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68561The Plasma Membrane
Like prokaryotes, eukaryotic cells have a plasma membrane (Find it in Figures -, then look at the detailed structure in
Figure) made up of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded pr oteins that separates the internal contents of the ce ll from its
surrounding environment. A phospholipid is a lipid molecule composed of two fatty acid chains, a glycerol backbone, and a
phosphate group. The plasma membrane regulates the pa ssage of some substances, such as organic molecules, ions, and water,
preventing the passage of some to maintain internal co nditions, while actively bringing in or removing other s. Other compounds
move passively across the membrane.
Figure: The plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with em bedded proteins. There are other components, such as
cholesterol and carbohydrates, which can be found in the membrane in addition to phospholipids and protein.
The plasma membranes of cells that specialize in abso rption are folded into fingerlike projections calle d microvilli (singular =
microvillus). This folding increases the surface are a of the plasma membrane. Such cells are typically fo und lining the small
intestine, the organ that absorbs nutrients from di gested food (Figure). This is an excellent example of form matching the
function of a structure.
Figure: Microvilli, shown here as they appear on cells lining the small intestine, increase the surface area availab le for
absorption. These microvilli are only found on the ar ea of the plasma membrane that faces the cavity from which substances will be
absorbed. (credit “micrograph”: modification of work by Louisa Howard)
The Cytoplasm
The cytoplasm comprises the contents of a cell between the plasma m embrane and the nuclear envelope (a structure to be
discussed shortly). It is made up of organelles suspend ed in the gel-like cytosol, the cytoskeleton, and various chemicals (Find it
in Figures -). Even though the cytoplasm consists of 70 to 80 pe rcent water, it has a semi-solid consistency, which comes
from the proteins within it. However, proteins are not t he only organic molecules found in the cytoplasm. Glu cose and other simple
sugars, polysaccharides, amino acids, nucleic acids, fatty acids, and derivatives of glycerol are found th ere too. Ions of sodium,
potassium, calcium, and many other elements are also dissolved in the cytoplasm. Many metabolic reactions, i ncluding protein
synthesis, take place in the cytoplasm. Take note th at the cytoplasm is not “empty” or “filler” – it is a vitally important component
of cells that allows chemical reactions to take place!
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10

5.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685615.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685625.4: Ribosomes
Ribosomes are the cellular structures responsible for protein synthesis. The word “synthesis” means “to combine things to produce
something else.” In this context, protein synthesis mea ns combining different amino acids together to form a protein. Ribosomes
join amino acids together in a chain to form a prot ein (Figure). This amino acid chain then folds into a complex 3dimensional structure. The shape of a protein is what gives t he protein its specific function.
Figure: Protein structure. The colored balls at the top of th is diagram represent different amino acids. Amino acid s are the
subunits that are joined together by the ribosome to f orm a protein. This chain of amino acids then folds to form a complex 3D
structure. (Credit: Lady of Hats from Wikipedia; public domain)
Proteins are not typically used as a source of energy for the body. Protein from your diet is broken down in to individual amino
acids which are reassembled by your ribosomes into prot eins that your cells need. Ribosomes do not produce ener gy.
When viewed through an electron microscope, free ribo somes appear as either clusters or single tiny dots f loating freely in the
cytoplasm. Ribosomes may be attached to either the cy toplasmic side of the plasma membrane or the cytopla smic side of the rough
endoplasmic reticulum (Figure).
Figure: Ribosomes can be found free in the cytoplasm (not show n in this diagram), or attached to the outer membran e of the
nucleus and the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). Cr edit CFCF; Wikimedia; CC license.
Because protein synthesis is essential for all cells, ri bosomes are found in practically every cell, althoug h they are smaller in
prokaryotic cells. They are particularly abundant i n immature red blood cells for the synthesis of hem oglobin, which functions in
the transport of oxygen throughout the body. Electro n microscopy has shown us that ribosomes, which are lar ge complexes of
protein and RNA, consist of two subunits, aptly called la rge and small (Figure). Ribosomes receive their “orders” for protein
synthesis from the nucleus where the DNA is transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA travels to the ribo somes,
which translate the code provided by the sequence of the nitrogenous bases in the mRNA into a specific order of amino acids in a
protein. Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins.Helpful Hint

5.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68562
Figure: Ribosomes are made up of a large subunit (top) and a small subunit (bottom). During protein synthesis, ribosom es
assemble amino acids into proteins.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.4: Ribosomes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685635.5: The Cytoskeleton
If you were to remove all the organelles from a cell, would the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm be the o nly components left?
No. Within the cytoplasm, there would still be ions an d organic molecules, plus a network of protein fibers kn own as the
cytoskeleton.
Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes have a cytoskeleton. Both types of organisms use their cytoskeleton for c ell division, protection,
and shape determination.
In addition, in eukaryotes the cytoskeleton also fun ctions to secure certain organelles in specific positi ons, and to allow cytoplasm
and vesicles to move within the cell. It also enables unicellular organisms to move independently. There are three types of fibers
within the cytoskeleton: microfilaments, also known as act in filaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules (Figure).
Figure: Microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtub ules compose a cell’s cytoskeleton.
Microfilaments
Of the three types of protein fibers in the cytoskelet on, microfilaments are the narrowest. They function in cellular movemen t,
have a diameter of about 7 nm, and are made of two i ntertwined strands of a globular protein called actin. For this reason,
microfilaments are also known as actin filaments.
ATP is required for actin proteins to assemble into lo ng filaments. These long actin filaments serve as a tr ack for the movement of a
motor protein called myosin. Actin and myosin are plen tiful in muscle cells. When your actin and myosin f ilaments slide past each
other, your muscles contract. Actin also enables your c ells to engage in cellular events requiring motion, su ch as cell division in
animal cells and cytoplasmic streaming, which is the circ ular movement of the cell cytoplasm in plant cells.
Microfilaments also provide some rigidity and shape to the cell. They can depolymerize (disassemble) and reform quickly, thus
enabling a cell to change its shape and move. White blood cells (your body’s infection-fighting cells) ma ke good use of this ability.
They can move to the site of an infection and phagocyti ze the pathogen.
Intermediate Filaments
Intermediate filaments are made of several strands of fibrous proteins that are wound together. These ele ments of the cytoskeleton
get their name from the fact that their diameter, 8 to 1 0 nm, is between those of microfilaments and microtubules.
Intermediate filaments have no role in cell movemen t. Their function is purely structural. They bear tens ion, thus maintaining the
shape of the cell, and anchor the nucleus and other organelles in place. Figure shows how intermediate f ilaments create a
supportive scaffolding inside the cell.
The intermediate filaments are the most diverse gro up of cytoskeletal elements. Several types of fibrou s proteins are found in the
intermediate filaments. You are probably most familia r with keratin, the fibrous protein that strengthens y our hair, nails, and the
epidermis of the skin.

5.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68563Microtubules
As their name implies, microtubules are small hollow t ubes. The walls of the microtubule are made of polyme rized dimers of αtubulin and β-tubulin, two globular proteins. With a diameter of about 25 nm, microtubules are the widest components of the
cytoskeleton. They help the cell resist compression, p rovide a track along which vesicles move through the c ell, and pull replicated
chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing cell. Like mic rofilaments, microtubules can dissolve and reform quickl y.
Microtubules are also the structural elements of fla gella, cilia, and centrioles (the latter are the two perpendicular bodies of the
centrosome). In fact, in animal cells, the centrosome is the microtubule-organizing center. In eukaryotic cells, flagella and cilia are
quite different structurally from their counterparts i n prokaryotes, as discussed below.
The centrosome replicates itself before a cell divi des, and the centrioles play a role in pulling the du plicated chromosomes to
opposite ends of the dividing cell. However, the exact function of the centrioles in cell division is not c lear, since cells that have the
centrioles removed can still divide, and plant cells, whi ch lack centrioles, are capable of cell division.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.5: The Cytoskeleton is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685645.6: Flagella and Cilia
Flagella (singular = flagellum) are long, hair-like structure s that extend from the plasma membrane and are used to move an entire
cell, (for example, sperm, Euglena). When present, the cell has just one flagellum or a few flagella. Prokaryotes sometimes have
flagella, but they are structurally very different f rom eukaryotic flagella. Prokaryotes can have more t han one flagella. They serve
the same function in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes (to move an entire cell).
Figure: Examples of bacterial flagella arrangement schemes. C redit Adenosine; Wikimedia.
When cilia (singular = cilium) are present, however, they are man y in number and extend along the entire surface of th e plasma
membrane. They are short, hair-like structures that are used to move entire cells (such as paramecium) o r move substances along
the outer surface of the cell (for example, the cili a of cells lining the fallopian tubes that move the o vum toward the uterus, or cilia
lining the cells of the respiratory tract that move particulate matter toward the throat that mucus has t rapped). Cilia are not found on
prokaryotes.
Figure: Scanning electron microscope image of lung trachea e pithelium. There are both ciliated and non-ciliated cells in this
epithelium. Note the difference in size between the cilia and the microvilli (on the non-ciliated cell surface). Photo credit Charles
Daghlian; Wikimedia; public domain.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.6: Flagella and Cilia is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685655.7: The Endomembrane System
The endomembrane system (endo = within) is a group of membranes and organelles (see Figure) in eukaryotic cells that
work together to modify, package, and transport lipid s and proteins. It includes the nuclear envelope, lys osomes, and vesicles, the
endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus, which we wil l cover shortly. Although not technically within the cell, the plasma
membrane is included in the endomembrane system bec ause, as you will see, it interacts with the other endom embranous
organelles. None of the organelles that make up the en domembrane system are found in prokaryotes with the e xception of the
plasma membrane.
Figure: Membrane and secretory proteins are synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). The RER also
sometimes modifies proteins. In this illustration, a (gre en) integral membrane protein in the ER is modified by attachment of a
(purple) carbohydrate. Vesicles with the integral pro tein bud from the ER and fuse with the cis face of th e Golgi apparatus. As the
protein passes along the Golgi’s cisternae, it is further modified by the addition of more carbohydrates. Aft er its synthesis is
complete, it exits as integral membrane protein of th e vesicle that bud from the Golgi’s trans face and whe n the vesicle fuses with
the cell membrane the protein becomes integral porti on of that cell membrane. (credit: modification of work by Magnus Manske)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.7: The Endomembrane System is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685665.8: The Nucleus
Typically, the nucleus is the most prominent organelle in a cell. The nucleus (plural = nuclei) houses the cell’s DNA in the form of
chromatin and directs the synthesis of ribosomes and prot eins. Let us look at it in more detail (Figure).
Figure: The outermost boundary of the nucleus is the nuclear envelope. Notice that the nuclear envelope consists of two
phospholipid bilayers (membranes)—an outer membrane an d an inner membrane—in contrast to the plasma membran e, which
consists of only one phospholipid bilayer. (credit: mod ification of work by NIGMS, NIH)
The nuclear envelope is a double-membrane structure that constitutes the outermost portion of the nucleus (Figure). Both the
inner and outer membranes of the nuclear envelope are ph ospholipid bilayers.
Figure: This illustration shows the double membrane structure su rrounding the nucleus. Notice that both membranes are
composed of a phospholipid bilayer. Credit Boumphreyf r; Wikimedia
Chromatin
The nuclear envelope is punctuated with pores that c ontrol the passage of ions, molecules, and RNA between th e nucleoplasm and
the cytoplasm (Figure). The nucleoplasm is the semi-solid fluid inside th e nucleus, where we find the chromatin and the
nucleolus.
You may remember that in prokaryotes, DNA is organized into a single circular chromosome. In eukaryotes, chr omosomes are
linear structures. In eukaryotes, chromosomes are stru ctures within the nucleus that are made up of DNA, the h ereditary material,
and proteins. This combination of DNA and proteins is called chromatin. Every species has a specific number of chromosomes in
the nucleus of its body cells. For example, in humans, the chromosome number is 46, whereas in fruit flies, the chromosome
number is eight.

5.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68566
Figure: This image shows paired chromosomes. Each pair of chrom osomes is shown in a different color. In reality,
chromosomes are not colorful and typically look grayi sh. (Credit: modification of work by NIH; scale-bar d ata from Matt Russell)
Chromosomes are only visible and distinguishable fro m one another when the cell is getting ready to divid e. When the cell is in the
growth and maintenance phases of its life cycle, the c hromosomes resemble an unwound, jumbled bunch of thread s. These
unwound protein-chromosome complexes are called chrom atin (Figure); chromatin describes the material that makes up the
chromosomes both when condensed and decondensed.
Figure: This image shows various levels of the organization of chromatin (DNA and protein).
Nucleolus
We already know that the nucleus directs the synthesis of ribosomes, but how does it do this? Some chromosomes h ave sections of
DNA that encode ribosomal RNA. A darkly staining area wit hin the nucleus, called the nucleolus (plural = nucleoli) (see Figure
), aggregates the ribosomal RNA with associated protein s to assemble the ribosomal subunits that are then tra nsported through
the nuclear pores into the cytoplasm.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.8: The Nucleus is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685675.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a series of interconnected membranous tubules th at collectively modify proteins and
synthesize lipids. However, these two functions are perfo rmed in separate areas of the endoplasmic reticulum: the rough
endoplasmic reticulum and the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, respectively.
Figure: The rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum are part of the endomembrane system.
The hollow portion of the ER tubules is called the l umen or cisternal space. The membrane of the ER, which is a phospholipid
bilayer embedded with proteins, is continuous with the nucle ar envelope (Figure).
The rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) is so named because the ribosomes attached to its cyt oplasmic surface give it a studded
appearance when viewed through an electron microscope (Figure). The ribosomes synthesize proteins while attached to the
ER, resulting in transfer of their newly synthesized p roteins into the lumen of the RER where they undergo modifications such as
folding or addition of sugars. The RER also makes phosphol ipids for cell membranes.

5.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68567
Figure: (a) The ER is a winding network of thin membranous sacs fo und in close association with the cell nucleus. The
smooth and rough endoplasmic reticula are very differ ent in appearance and function (source: mouse tissue). (b) Rough ER is
studded with numerous ribosomes, which are sites of prote in synthesis (source: mouse tissue). EM × 110,000. (c) Smooth ER
synthesizes phospholipids, steroid hormones, regulates the concentration of cellular Ca, metabolizes some carboh ydrates, and
breaks down certain toxins (source: mouse tissue). EM × 1 10,510. (Micrographs provided by the Regents of Unive rsity of
Michigan Medical School © 2012). Figure from The Cytoplasm and Cellular Organelles; OpenStax.
If the phospholipids or modified proteins are not de stined to stay in the RER, they will be packaged withi n vesicles and transported
from the RER by budding from the membrane (Figure). Since the RER is engaged in modifying proteins that will be secreted
from the cell, it is abundant in cells that secrete protein s, such as the liver.
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) is continuous with the RER but has few or no ribosomes on its cytoplasmic surface
(see Figures -). The SER’s functions include synthesis of carbohydr ates, lipids, and steroid hormones; detoxification of
medications and poisons; alcohol metabolism; and storage o f calcium ions.
In muscle cells, a specialized SER called the sarcopl asmic reticulum is responsible for storage of the cal cium ions that are needed
to trigger the coordinated contractions of the muscle ce lls.++

5.9.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68567
Figure: The endomembrane system works to modify, package, and transport lipids and proteins. (credit: modification of work
by Magnus Manske)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685685.10: The Golgi Apparatus
We have already mentioned that vesicles can bud from the ER, but where do the vesicles go? Before reachin g their final
destination, the lipids or proteins within the transpo rt vesicles need to be sorted, packaged, and tagged so that they wind up in the
right place. The sorting, tagging, packaging, and di stribution of lipids and proteins take place in the Golgi apparatus (also called
the Golgi body), a series of flattened membranous sacs (Figure).
Figure: The Golgi apparatus in this transmission electron micro graph of a white blood cell is visible as a stack of
semicircular flattened rings in the lower portion of this image. Several vesicles can be seen near the Golgi apparatus. (credit:
modification of work by Louisa Howard; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The Golgi apparatus has a receiving face near the en doplasmic reticulum (the cis face) and a releasing face on the side away from
the ER, toward the cell membrane (the trans face) (Figure). The transport vesicles that form from the ER trave l to the
receiving face, fuse with it, and empty their contents into the lumen (empty space inside) of the Golgi app aratus. As the proteins
and lipids travel through the Golgi, they undergo fur ther modifications. The most frequent modification is the addition of short
chains of sugar molecules. The newly modified protein s and lipids are then tagged with small molecular grou ps to enable them to
be routed to their proper destinations.
Figure: Diagram of the Golgi apparatus showing the cis and trans faces. The cis face would be near the nucleus while the
trans face would be facing the cell membrane. Credit Kelvinsong; Wikimedia
Finally, the modified and tagged proteins are packaged into vesicles that bud from the opposite face of t he Golgi. While some of
these vesicles, transport vesicles, deposit their conte nts into other parts of the cell where they will be us ed, others, secretory
vesicles, fuse with the plasma membrane and release their c ontents outside the cell.
The amount of Golgi in different cell types again il lustrates that form follows function within cells. Ce lls that engage in a great deal
of secretory activity (such as cells of the salivary glands that secrete digestive enzymes or cells of t he immune system that secrete
antibodies) have an abundant number of Golgi.
In plant cells, the Golgi has an additional role of sy nthesizing polysaccharides, some of which are incorpora ted into the cell wall
and some of which are used in other parts of the cell.

5.10.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68568References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.10: The Golgi Apparatus is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685695.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and Peroxisomes
Vesicles and Vacuoles
Vesicles and vacuoles are membrane-bound sacs that function in storage and transport. Vacuoles are somewhat larger than vesicles,
and the membrane of a vacuole does not fuse with the membranes of other cellular components. Vesicles can fuse with other
membranes within the cell system (Figure). Additionally, enzymes within plant vacuoles can break do wn macromolecules.
Figure: The endomembrane system works to modify, package, and transport lipids and proteins. (credit: modification of
work by Magnus Manske)
The Central Vacuole (plants)
Previously, we mentioned vacuoles as essential component s of plant cells. If you look at Figure, you will see that plant cells
each have a large, central vacuole that occupies most of the cell.
Figure: Diagram of a plant cell.

5.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68569The central vacuole plays a key role in regulating the cell’s concentrat ion of water in changing environmental conditions. I n plant
cells, the liquid inside the central vacuole provide s turgor pressure, which is the outward pressure cause d by the fluid inside the
cell. Have you ever noticed that if you forget to wate r a plant for a few days, it wilts? That is because as th e water concentration in
the soil becomes lower than the water concentration in the plant, water moves out of the central vacuoles a nd cytoplasm and into
the soil. As the central vacuole shrinks, it leaves the cell wall unsupported. This loss of support to the cell walls of a plant results in
the wilted appearance. Additionally, this fluid has a very bitter taste, which discourages consumption by inse cts and animals. The
central vacuole also functions to store proteins in developing seed cells.
Lysosome
In animal cells, the lysosomes are the cell’s “garbage disposal.” Digestive enzymes wit hin the lysosomes aid the breakdown of
proteins, polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids, and even worn-out organelles. In single-celled eukaryote s, lysosomes are important
for digestion of the food they ingest and the recyc ling of organelles. These enzymes are active at a m uch lower pH (more acidic)
than those located in the cytoplasm. Many reactions th at take place in the cytoplasm could not occur at a low pH, thus the
advantage of compartmentalizing the eukaryotic cell int o organelles is apparent.
Lysosomes also use their hydrolytic enzymes to destro y disease-causing organisms that might enter the cell. A good example of this
occurs in a group of white blood cells called macropha ges, which are part of your body’s immune system. In a process known as
phagocytosis, a section of the plasma membrane of the macrophage invaginates (folds in) and engulfs a path ogen. The invaginated
section, with the pathogen inside, then pinches itself o ff from the plasma membrane and becomes a vesicle. The vesicle fuses with
a lysosome. The lysosome’s hydrolytic enzymes then destro y the pathogen (Figure).
Lysosomes are basically small bags of membrane containin g enzymes, so they look structurally similar to a small va cuole.
Figure: A macrophage has phagocytized a potentially pathoge nic bacterium into a vesicle, which then fuses with a lysosome
within the cell so that the pathogen can be destroyed. Other organelles are present in the cell, but for si mplicity, are not shown.
Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes are small, round organelles enclosed by single membra nes (so again, they look similar to small vacuoles). They carry
out oxidation reactions that break down fatty acids and amino acids. They also detoxify many poisons that may enter the body.
Alcohol is detoxified by peroxisomes in liver cells. A byproduct of these oxidation reactions is hydrogen peroxide, H O, which is
contained within the peroxisomes to prevent the chem ical from causing damage to cellular components out side of the organelle.
Hydrogen peroxide is safely broken down by peroxisomal enzy mes into water and oxygen.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and Peroxisomes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.2 2

5.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685705.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
Mitochondria
Mitochondria (singular = mitochondrion) are often called the “po werhouses” or “energy factories” of a cell because th ey are
responsible for making adenosine triphosphate (ATP), t he cell’s main energy-carrying molecule. The formati on of ATP from the
breakdown of glucose is known as cellular respiration. Mitochondria are oval-shaped, double-membrane organe lles (Figure)
that have their own ribosomes and DNA. Each membrane is a phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins. The inn er layer has
folds called cristae, which increase the surface area of the inner membrane. The area surrounded by the fo lds is called the
mitochondrial matrix. The cristae and the matrix have di fferent roles in cellular respiration.
In keeping with our theme of form following function, it is important to point out that muscle cells have a very high concentration
of mitochondria because muscle cells need a lot of energ y to contract.
Figure: This transmission electron micrograph shows a mitochondr ion as viewed with an electron microscope. Notice the
inner and outer membranes, the cristae, and the mitoc hondrial matrix. (credit: modification of work by M atthew Britton; scale-bar
data from Matt Russell)
Chloroplasts
Like mitochondria, chloroplasts also have their own DNA and ribosomes. Chloroplasts function in photosynthesis and can be
found in eukaryotic cells such as plants and algae. Ca rbon dioxide (CO), water, and light energy are used to make glucose and
oxygen in photosynthesis. This is the major difference b etween plants and animals: Plants (autotrophs) are ab le to make their own
food, like glucose, whereas animals (heterotrophs) must re ly on other organisms for their organic compounds or food source.
Like mitochondria, chloroplasts have outer and inne r membranes, but within the space enclosed by a chlor oplast’s inner membrane
is a set of interconnected and stacked, fluid-filled membrane sacs called thylakoids (Figure). Each stack of thylakoids is
called a granum (plural = grana). The fluid enclosed by the inner membrane and surrounding the grana is called th e stroma.
Figure: This simplified diagram of a chloroplast shows the oute r membrane, inner membrane, thylakoids, grana, and st roma.
The chloroplasts contain a green pigment called chlorophyll, which captures the energy of sunlight for photosyn thesis. Like plant
cells, photosynthetic protists also have chloroplast s. Some bacteria also perform photosynthesis, but they do not have chloroplasts.
Their photosynthetic pigments are located in the thylakoi d membrane within the cell itself.2

5.12.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68570We have mentioned that both mitochondria and chloro plasts contain DNA and ribosomes. Have you wondered why? Strong
evidence points to endosymbiosis as the explanation.
Symbiosis is a relationship in which organisms from two s eparate species live in close association and typical ly exhibit specific
adaptations to each other. Endosymbiosis (endo-= withi n) is a relationship in which one organism lives insi de the other.
Endosymbiotic relationships abound in nature. Microbe s that produce vitamin K live inside the human gut. T his relationship is
beneficial for us because we are unable to synthesize vitamin K. It is also beneficial for the microbes be cause they are
protected from other organisms and are provided a s table habitat and abundant food by living within the larg e intestine.
Scientists have long noticed that bacteria, mitochond ria, and chloroplasts are similar in size. We also k now that mitochondria
and chloroplasts have DNA and ribosomes, just as bact eria do. Scientists believe that host cells and bacter ia formed a mutually
beneficial endosymbiotic relationship when the host c ells ingested aerobic bacteria and cyanobacteria but did not destroy them.
Through evolution, these ingested bacteria became mo re specialized in their functions, with the aerobic b acteria becoming
mitochondria and the photosynthetic bacteria becoming c hloroplasts.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Theory of Endosymbiosis

5.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685715.13: The Cell Wall
The cell wall is a rigid covering that protects the cell, provide s structural support, and gives shape to the cell. Ce ll walls are found
in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, although not all cells have cell walls. In Figure, the diagram of a p lant cell, you see a
structure external to the plasma membrane which is t he cell wall. The cell wall is the reason why vegetable s such as celery crunch
when you bite into them.
Fungal and protist cells also have cell walls, but they are s tructurally different from those found in plants.
Figure: Note that the cell wall is located outside the cell membrane.
While the chief component of prokaryotic cell walls is peptidoglycan, the major organic molecule in the plant cell wall is cellulose,
a polysaccharide made up of long, straight chains of glucose units. When nutritional information refers t o dietary fiber, it is
referring to the cellulose content of food. Fungal cell wa lls are made up of a molecule called chitin.
Animal cells do not have cell walls. Steak does not crunch when you bite it.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.13: The Cell Wall is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.14.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685725.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular junctions
Extracellular Matrix of Animal Cells
Most animal cells release materials into the extracell ular space. The primary components of these materials are glycoproteins and
the protein collagen. Collectively, these materials are called the extracellular matrix (Figure). Not only does the
extracellular matrix hold the cells together to for m a tissue, but it also allows the cells within the t issue to communicate with each
other.
Figure: The extracellular matrix consists of a network of subst ances secreted by cells.
Blood clotting provides an example of the role of the extra cellular matrix in cell communication.
When the cells lining a blood vessel are damaged, they display a protein receptor called tissue factor. When tissue factor binds with
another factor in the extracellular matrix, it cause s platelets to adhere to the wall of the damaged bloo d vessel, stimulates adjacent
smooth muscle cells in the blood vessel to contract (t hus constricting the blood vessel), and initiates a series of steps that stimulate
the platelets to produce clotting factors.
Intercellular Junctions
Cells can also communicate with each other by direct contact, referred to as intercellular junctions. The re are some differences in
the ways that plant and animal cells do this. Plasmodesmata (singular = plasmodesma) are junctions between plant cells, whereas
animal cell contacts include tight and gap junctions, a nd desmosomes.
In general, long stretches of the plasma membranes of neighboring plant cells cannot touch one another b ecause they are separated
by the cell walls surrounding each cell. Plasmodesmata are numerous channels that pass between the cell walls of adjacent plant
cells, connecting their cytoplasm and enabling signal mole cules and nutrients to be transported from cell to cell (Figure a).

5.14.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68572
Figure: There are four kinds of connections between cells. (a) A plasmodesma is a channel between the cell walls of two
adjacent plant cells. (b) Tight junctions join adjace nt animal cells. (c) Desmosomes join two animal cells to gether. (d) Gap
junctions act as channels between animal cells. (credit b, c, d: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Vill areal)
A tight junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cells (Figure b). Proteins hold the cells tightly against each
other. This tight adhesion prevents materials from leaking between the cells. Tight junctions are typicall y found in the epithelial
tissue that lines internal organs and cavities, and com poses most of the skin. For example, the tight junction s of the epithelial cells
lining the urinary bladder prevent urine from leaking into the extracellular space.
Also found only in animal cells are desmosomes, which act like spot welds between adjacent epithelia l cells (Figure c). They
keep cells together in a sheet-like formation in organs and tissues that stretch, like the skin, heart, and muscles.
Gap junctions in animal cells are like plasmodesmata in plant cell s in that they are channels between adjacent cells th at allow for
the transport of ions, nutrients, and other substanc es that enable cells to communicate (Figure d). Structurally, however, gap
junctions and plasmodesmata differ.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular juncti ons is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.15.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685735.15: The Production of a Protein
Proteins are one of the most abundant organic molecules in l iving systems and have an incredibly diverse range of functions.
Proteins are used to:
Build structures within the cell (such as the cytoskeleton)
Regulate the production of other proteins by controllin g protein synthesis
Slide along the cytoskeleton to cause muscle contraction
Transport molecules across the cell membrane
Speed up chemical reactions (enzymes)
Act as toxins
Each cell in a living system may contain thousands of different proteins, each with a unique function. T heir structures, like their
functions, vary greatly. They are all, however, polymers of amino acids, arranged in a linear sequence (Figure).
The functions of proteins are very diverse because t hey are made up of are 20 different chemically disti nct amino acids that form
long chains, and the amino acids can be in any order. The function of the protein is dependent on the prot ein’s shape. The shape of
a protein is determined by the order of the amino a cids. Proteins are often hundreds of amino acids long a nd they can have very
complex shapes because there are so many different possibl e orders for the 20 amino acids!
Figure: Protein structure. The colored balls at the top of th is diagram represent different amino acids. Amino acid s are the
subunits that are joined together by the ribosome to f orm a protein. This chain of amino acids then folds to form a complex 3D
structure. (Credit: Lady of Hats from Wikipedia; public domain)
Contrary to what you may believe, proteins are not typ ically used as a source of energy by cells. Protein from your diet is broken
down into individual amino acids which are reassembled by your ribosomes into proteins that your cells need. Ribosomes do not
produce energy.

5.15.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68573
Figure: Examples of foods that contain high levels of protein. (“Protein” by National Cancer Institute is in the Public
Domain)
The information to produce a protein is encoded in the cell’s DNA. When a protein is produced, a copy of th e DNA is made (called
mRNA) and this copy is transported to a ribosome. Riboso mes read the information in the mRNA and use that in formation to
assemble amino acids into a protein. If the protein i s going to be used within the cytoplasm of the cell, the ribosome creating the
protein will be free-floating in the cytoplasm. If th e protein is going to be targeted to the lysosome, b ecome a component of the
plasma membrane, or be secreted outside of the cell, t he protein will be synthesized by a ribosome located on the rough
endoplasmic reticulum (RER). After being synthesized, the protein will be carried in a vesicle from the RE R to the cis face of the
Golgi (the side facing the inside of the cell). As the protein moves through the Golgi, it can be modified. Onc e the final modified
protein has been completed, it exits the Golgi in a ve sicle that buds from the trans face. From there, the vesicle can be targeted to a
lysosome or targeted to the plasma membrane. If the vesicle fuses with the plasma membrane, the protein will become part of the
membrane or be ejected from the cell.
Figure: Diagram of a eukaryotic cell. (Photo credit: Mediran, Wikimedia. 14 Aug 2002)
Insulin is a protein hormone that is made by specifi c cells inside the pancreas called beta cells. When th e beta cells sense that
glucose (sugar) levels in the bloodstream are high, t hey produce insulin protein and secrete it outside of the cells into the
bloodstream. Insulin signals cells to absorb sugar from t he bloodstream. Cells can’t absorb sugar without insuli n. Insulin
protein is first produced as an immature, inactive chain of amino acids (preproinsulin – see Figure). I t contains a signal
sequence that targets the immature protein to the r ough endoplasmic reticulum, where it folds into the c orrect shape. The
targeting sequence is then cut off of the amino acid chain to form proinsulin. This trimmed, folded prot ein is then shipped to
the Golgi inside a vesicle. In the Golgi, more amino aci ds (chain C) are trimmed off of the protein to prod uce the final mature
insulin. Mature insulin is stored inside special vesicles un til a signal is received for it to be released into the bl oodstream.Insulin

5.15.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68573
Figure: Insulin maturation. (Photo credit: Beta Cell Biology Consortium, Wikimedia. 2004. This picture is in the public
domain.)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.15: The Production of a Protein is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.16.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/685745.16: Summary Table of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells and Functions
Components of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells and Functions

5.16.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68574Cell
ComponentFunctionPresent in
ProkaryotesPresent in
Animal
CellsPresent in
Plant Cells
Plasma
MembraneSeparates cell from external environment; controls
passage of organic molecules, ions, water, oxygen,
and wastes into and out of the cellYes Yes Yes
Cytoplasm Provides structure to cell; site of many metabolic
reactions; medium in which organelles are foundYes Yes Yes
Nucleoid Location of DNA Yes No No
Nucleus Cell organelle that houses DNA and directs synthesis
of ribosomes and proteinsNo Yes Yes
Ribosomes Protein synthesis Yes Yes Yes
Mitochondria ATP production/cellular respiration No Yes Yes
Peroxisomes
Oxidizes and breaks down fatty acids and amino
acids, and detoxifies poisonsNo Yes Yes
Vesicles and
vacuoles
Storage and transport; digestive function in plant
cellsNo Yes Yes
Centrosome
Unspecified role in cell division in animal cells;
organizing center of microtubules in animal cellsNo Yes No
Lysosomes
Digestion of macromolecules; recycling of worn-out
organellesNo Yes No
Cell wall
Protection, structural support and maintenance of
cell shapeYes, primarily
peptidoglycan in
bacteria but not
ArchaeaNo Yes, primarily
cellulose
Chloroplasts Photosynthesis No No Yes
Endoplasmic
reticulumModifies proteins and synthesizes lipids No Yes Yes
Golgi
apparatusModifies, sorts, tags, packages, and distributes lipids
and proteinsNo Yes Yes
Cytoskeleton Maintains cell’s shape, secures organelles in specific
positions, allows cytoplasm and vesicles to move
within the cell, and enables unicellular organisms to
move independentlyYes Yes Yes
Flagella Cellular locomotion Some Some No, except for
some plant
sperm
Cilia Cellular locomotion, movement of particles along
extracellular surface of plasma membrane, and
filtrationNo Some No
Table: The components of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells and their respective functions.

5.16.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/68574References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
5.16: Summary Table of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cel ls and Functions is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6: The Cell Membrane and Transport
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain how the structure of cell membranes leads to i ts various functions including selective permeability and transport,
and cell signaling.
The plasma membrane, which is also called the cell mem brane, has many functions, but the most basic one is to define the borders
of the cell and keep the cell functional. The plasma membrane is selectively permeable. This means that t he membrane allows some
materials to freely enter or leave the cell, while o ther materials cannot move freely, but require the u se of a specialized structure,
and occasionally, even energy investment for crossing.
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
6.2: Transport Across Membranes
6.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion
6.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
6.6: Active Transport
References
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016
https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...2/Introduction
Thumbnail: The cell membrane. (Public domain; LadyofHats via Wikimedia Commons).
6: The Cell Membrane and Transport is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

6.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690316.1: The Plasma Membrane
Cells closely control the exchange of substances in an d out of the cell. Some substances are excluded, other s are taken in, and still
others are excreted – all in controlled quantities. Alt hough the plasma membrane encloses the cell’s borders, it is far from being a
static barrier; it is dynamic and constantly in flux. The plasma membrane must be sufficiently flexible t o allow certain cells, such as
red blood cells and white blood cells, to change shap e as they pass through narrow capillaries. In additio n to these more obvious
functions, the surface of the plasma membrane carrie s markers which allow cells to recognize one another. This is vital as these
markers play a role in the “self” versus “non-self” di stinction of the immune response.
Fluid Mosaic Model
In 1972, S. J. Singer and Garth L. Nicolson proposed a ne w model of the plasma membrane. This theory, compared t o earlier
theories, best explains both microscopic observations and the function of the plasma membrane. This theor y is called the fluid
mosaic model. The model has evolved somewhat over time, but still best accounts for the structure and functions of the plasma
membrane as we now understand them. The fluid mosaic m odel describes the structure of the plasma membrane a s comprised of
diverse components—including phospholipids, cholestero l, proteins, and carbohydrates—that are able to flow and change position,
while maintaining the basic integrity of the membran e. Both phospholipid molecules and embedded proteins are able to move
laterally in the membrane. The fluidity of the plas ma membrane is necessary for the activities of certai n enzymes and transport
molecules within the membrane.
Plasma membranes range from 5–10 nm thick. As a compar ison, human red blood cells, visible via light micros copy, are
approximately 8 μm thick, or approximately 1,000 times th icker than a plasma membrane.
Figure: The fluid mosaic model of the plasma membrane structu re describes the plasma membrane as a fluid combination of
phospholipids, cholesterol, proteins, and carbohydrates.
Components of the Plasma Membrane
The plasma membrane is made up primarily of a bilayer of phospholipids with embedded proteins, carbohydrat es, glycolipids, and
glycoproteins, and, in animal cells, cholesterol (Figure).
Phospholipids
The main fabric of the membrane is composed of two la yers of phospholipid molecules, and the polar ends o f these molecules
(which look like a collection of balls in an artist’ s rendition of the model) (Figure) are in contact with aqueous fluid both
inside and outside the cell. Thus, both surfaces of the plasma membrane are hydrophilic (“water loving”). In contrast, the interior
of the membrane, between its two surfaces, is a hydrophobic (“water fearing”) or nonpolar region because of the fatty acid tails.
This region has no attraction for water or other polar mol ecules.

6.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69031
Figure: Phospholipid bilayer. “Extracellular” = outside the c ell; “Intracellular” = inside the cell. Photo credit: OpenStax
Anatomy and Physiology.
A phospholipid molecule (Figure) consists of a three-carbon glycerol backbone with two fatty acid molecules attached to
carbons 1 and 2, and a phosphate-containing group att ached to the third carbon. This arrangement gives th e overall molecule an
area described as its head (the phosphate-containin g group), which has a polar character or negative ch arge, and an area called the
tail (the fatty acids), which has no charge. The head can form hydrogen bonds, but the tail cannot.
Figure: This phospholipid molecule is composed of a hydrophili c head and two hydrophobic tails. The hydrophilic he ad
group consists of a phosphate-containing group attached to a glycerol molecule. The hydrophobic tails, each containing either a
saturated or an unsaturated fatty acid, are long hydr ocarbon chains.
Proteins
Proteins make up the second major chemical component of plasma membranes (see Figure). Integral proteins are embedded
in the plasma membrane and may span all or part of th e membrane (Figure). Integral proteins may serve as channels or pumps
to move materials into or out of the cell. Peripheral proteins are found on the exterior or interior surfaces of m embranes, attached
either to integral proteins or to phospholipid molec ules (Figure). Both integral and peripheral proteins may serve as enzymes,
as structural attachments for the fibers of the cytoskel eton, or as part of the cell’s recognition sites.
The recognition sites on the plasma membrane are cal led receptors, which are attachment sites for substances that inte ract with the
cell. Each receptor is structured to bind with a spec ific substance. The binding of a specific substance to its receptor on the plasma
membrane can activate processes within the interior of the cell – such as activating enzymes involved in metabolic pathways. These
metabolic pathways might be vital for providing the cell with energy, making substances for the cell, or b reaking down cellular
waste or toxins for disposal. Likewise, extracellular h ormones and neurotransmitters bind to plasma membrane receptors which
transmit a signal into the cell to intracellular mol ecules. Some recognition sites are used by viruses as a ttachment points. Although
they are highly specific, pathogens like viruses may ev olve to exploit receptors to gain entry to a cell b y mimicking the specific
substance that the receptor is meant to bind. This sp ecificity helps to explain why human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or any of
the five types of hepatitis viruses invade only speci fic cells.

6.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69031Cystic Fibrosis is caused by a defect in an integral protein in the cell membrane which acts as a channel. The CFTR protein
moves ions from one side of the membrane to another. When it is not functioning correctly, this causes v ery thick mucus to
build up in the lungs and digestive tract.
When the CFTR channel protein is functioning correct ly (1), ions (small balls) are able to pass through the membrane. When it
is not functioning correctly (2), ions are unable to cross the membrane. Photo credit: LBudd14, May, 2013. Wikimedia.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are the third major component of plasm a membranes. They are always found on the exterior sur face of cells and are
bound either to proteins (forming glycoproteins) or to lipids (forming glycolipids). These carbohydrate chains may consist of 2–60
monosaccharide units and may be either straight or branched. Along with peripheral proteins, carbohydrate s form specialized sites
on the cell surface that allow cells to recognize eac h other. These sites have unique patterns that allow the cell to be recognized,
much the way that the facial features unique to each person allow him or her to be recognized. This recogn ition function is very
important to cells, as it allows the immune system to di fferentiate between body cells (called “self”) and f oreign cells or tissues
(called “non-self”). Similar types of glycoproteins an d glycolipids are found on the surfaces of viruses and may change frequently,
preventing immune cells from recognizing and attackin g them.
The carbohydrates that make up glycoproteins are res ponsible for determining human A, B, O blood types. The se glycoproteins
are recognized by the immune system, which leads to inco mpatibility in blood types.
ABO Blood types. In this figure, the membrane carbohy drate is represented by the “lollipops”. They are term ed “antigens”.
Photo credit: InvictaHOG, 2006. Wikimedia.Cystic Fibrosis
Blood Types

6.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69031Membrane Fluidity
The mosaic characteristic of the membrane, described in the fluid mosaic model, helps to illustrate its nat ure. The proteins and
other components that exist in the membrane can mov e with respect to each other, rather like boats float ing on a lake. The
membrane is not like a balloon, however, that can expan d and contract; rather, it is fairly rigid and can b urst if penetrated or if a cell
takes in too much water. However, because of its mosaic nature, a very fine needle can easily penetrate a pla sma membrane without
causing it to burst, and the membrane will flow and self- seal when the needle is extracted.
The mosaic characteristics of the membrane explain s ome but not all of its fluidity. There are two other factors that help maintain
this fluid characteristic. One factor is the nature of the phospholipids themselves. The structure of the fa tty acid tails in each
phospholipid can make the membrane more dense and r igid, or less dense and flexible. The relative fluidi ty of the membrane is
particularly important in a cold environment. A col d environment tends to make membranes less fluid and more susceptible to
rupturing. Many organisms (fish are one example) are capable of adapting to cold environments by changin g the proportion of
different types of fatty acids in their membranes in resp onse to the lowering of the temperature.
Animals have an additional membrane constituent that assists in maintaining fluidity. Cholesterol, which lies alongside the
phospholipids in the membrane, tends to dampen the ef fects of temperature on the membrane. Thus, this lipi d functions as a buffer,
preventing lower temperatures from inhibiting fluidi ty and preventing increased temperatures from incre asing fluidity too much.
Thus, cholesterol extends, in both directions, the r ange of temperature in which the membrane is appropri ately fluid and
consequently functional. Cholesterol also serves ot her functions, such as organizing clusters of transme mbrane proteins into lipid
rafts.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
6.1: The Plasma Membrane is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690326.2: Transport Across Membranes
Plasma membranes act not only as a barrier, but also as a gatekeeper. It must allow needed substances to en ter and cell products to
leave the cell, while preventing entrance of harmful material and exit of essential material. In other word s, plasma membranes are
selectively permeable —they allow some substances through but not others. If the membrane were to lose this selectivity, the cell
would no longer be able to maintain homeostasis, or t o sustain itself, and it would be destroyed. Some cells require larger amounts
of specific substances than other cells; they must have a way of obtaining these materials from the extracellular fluid s.
This may happen passively, as certain materials move b ack and forth, or the cell may have special mechanism s that ensure
transport. Most cells expend most of their energy, in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to create and maintain an uneven
distribution of ions on the opposite sides of their membra nes. The structure of the plasma membrane contributes to these functions.
Selective Permeability
Plasma membranes are asymmetric, meaning that despite the mirror image formed by the phospholipids, the i nterior of the
membrane is not identical to the exterior of the me mbrane. Integral proteins that act as channels or pump s work in one direction.
Carbohydrates, attached to lipids or proteins, are also f ound on the exterior surface of the plasma membrane.
These carbohydrate complexes help the cell bind subst ances in the extracellular fluid that the cell needs. This adds considerably to
the selective nature of plasma membranes.
Recall that plasma membranes have hydrophilic and h ydrophobic regions. This characteristic helps the m ovement of certain
materials through the membrane and hinders the move ment of others. Lipid-soluble material can easily slip through the
hydrophobic lipid core of the membrane. Substances su ch as the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K readily pa ss through the
plasma membranes in the digestive tract and other ti ssues. Fat-soluble drugs also gain easy entry into cel ls and are readily
transported into the body’s tissues and organs. Molecul es of oxygen and carbon dioxide have no charge and p ass through by simple
diffusion.
Polar substances, with the exception of water, present problems for the membrane. While some polar molecule s connect easily with
the outside of a cell, they cannot readily pass throu gh the lipid core of the plasma membrane. Additional ly, whereas small ions
could easily slip through the spaces in the mosaic o f the membrane, their charge prevents them from doi ng so. Ions such as sodium,
potassium, calcium, and chloride must have a special means of penetrating plasma membranes. Simple sugars and amino acids also
need help with transport across plasma membranes.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
6.2: Transport Across Membranes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690336.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion
The most direct forms of membrane transport are pas sive. Passive transport is a naturally occurring phenomenon and does not
require the cell to expend energy to accomplish the movement. In passive transport, substances move from an area of higher
concentration to an area of lower concentration in a process called diffusion. A physical space in which there is a different
concentration of a single substance is said to have a concentration gradient.
Diffusion
Diffusion is a passive process of transport. A single substance te nds to move from an area of high concentration to a n area of low
concentration until the concentration is equal acro ss the space. You are familiar with diffusion of subs tances through the air. For
example, think about someone opening a bottle of pe rfume in a room filled with people. The perfume is at its highest concentration
in the bottle and is at its lowest at the edges of th e room. The perfume vapor will diffuse, or spread away, from the bottle, and
gradually, more and more people will smell the perfum e as it spreads. Materials move within the cell’s cyto sol by diffusion, and
certain materials move through the plasma membrane b y diffusion (Figure). Diffusion expends no energy. Rather the different
concentrations of materials in different areas are a form of potential energy, and diffusion is the dis sipation of that potential energy
as materials move down their concentration gradients, f rom high to low.
Figure: Diffusion through a permeable membrane follows the c oncentration gradient of a substance, moving the substa nce
from an area of high concentration to one of low co ncentration. (credit: modification of work by Maria na Ruiz Villarreal)
Each separate substance in a medium, such as the ex tracellular fluid, has its own concentration gradient, independent of the
concentration gradients of other materials. Additionally, each substance will diffuse according to that gradient.
Several factors affect the rate of diffusion:
Extent of the concentration gradient: The greater the di fference in concentration, the more rapid the diffusi on. The closer the
distribution of the material gets to equilibrium, the slo wer the rate of diffusion becomes.
Mass of the molecules diffusing: More massive molecules move more slowly, because it is more difficult for them to move
between the molecules of the substance they are moving thr ough; therefore, they diffuse more slowly.
Temperature: Higher temperatures increase the energy and therefore the movement of the molecules, increasing th e rate of
diffusion.
Solvent density: As the density of the solvent increases, the rate of diffusion decreases. The molecules slow down becaus e they
have a more difficult time getting through the dense r medium.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
6.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690346.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport
In facilitated transport, also called facilitated diffusion, material moves ac ross the plasma membrane with the assistance of
transmembrane proteins down a concentration gradient (from high to low concentration) without the expenditure of cellular energy.
However, the substances that undergo facilitated trans port would otherwise not diffuse easily or quickly acro ss the plasma
membrane. The solution to moving polar substances a nd other substances across the plasma membrane rests in the proteins that
span its surface. The material being transported is f irst attached to protein or glycoprotein receptors o n the exterior surface of the
plasma membrane. This allows the material that is need ed by the cell to be removed from the extracellular fluid. The substances are
then passed to specific integral proteins that facilit ate their passage, because they form channels or pore s that allow certain
substances to pass through the membrane. The integral p roteins involved in facilitated transport are collec tively referred to as
transport proteins, and they function as either channels f or the material or carriers.
Channels
The integral proteins involved in facilitated trans port are collectively referred to as transport protei ns, and they function as either
channels for the material or carriers. In both case s, they are transmembrane proteins (they span across the membrane). Channels are
specific for the substance that is being transported. Channel proteins have hydrophilic domains exposed t o the intracellular and
extracellular fluids; they additionally have a hydr ophilic channel through their core that provides a hydrated opening through the
membrane layers (Figure). Passage through the channel allows polar compounds to avoid the nonpolar central layer of the
plasma membrane that would otherwise slow or prevent th eir entry into the cell. Aquaporins are channel prot eins that allow water
to pass through the membrane at a very high rate.
Figure: Facilitated transport moves substances down their conce ntration gradients. They may cross the plasma membrane
with the aid of channel proteins. (credit: modificat ion of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Carrier Proteins
Another type of protein embedded in the plasma membra ne is a carrier protein. This aptly named protein bi nds a substance and, in
doing so, triggers a change of its own shape, moving t he bound molecule from the outside of the cell to i ts interior (Figure);
depending on the gradient, the material may move in the opposite direction. Carrier proteins are typical ly specific for a single
substance. This selectivity adds to the overall selec tivity of the plasma membrane. The exact mechanism f or the change of shape is
poorly understood. Proteins can change shape when the ir hydrogen bonds are affected, but this may not full y explain this
mechanism. Each carrier protein is specific to one subs tance, and there are a finite number of these prote ins in any membrane. This
can cause problems in transporting enough of the ma terial for the cell to function properly. When all of the proteins are bound to
their ligands, they are saturated and the rate of tr ansport is at its maximum. Increasing the concentrat ion gradient at this point will
not result in an increased rate of transport.

6.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69034
Figure: (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villa real)
An example of this process occurs in the kidney. Gluco se, water, salts, ions, and amino acids needed by the bo dy are filtered in one
part of the kidney. This filtrate, which includes gluc ose, is then reabsorbed in another part of the kidn ey. Because there are only a
finite number of carrier proteins for glucose, if mo re glucose is present than the proteins can handle, t he excess is not transported
and it is excreted from the body in the urine. In a d iabetic individual, this is described as “spilling glu cose into the urine.” A
different group of carrier proteins called glucose tra nsport proteins, or GLUTs, are involved in transporting g lucose and other
hexose sugars through plasma membranes within the body.
Channel and carrier proteins transport material at different rates. Channel proteins transport much mor e quickly than do carrier
proteins. Channel proteins facilitate diffusion at a rate of tens of millions of molecules per second, whe reas carrier proteins work at
a rate of a thousand to a million molecules per second.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
6.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690356.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
Osmosis is the diffusion of water through a semipermeable mem brane according to the concentration gradient of wat er across the
membrane. Whereas diffusion transports material acro ss membranes and within cells, osmosis transports only water across a
membrane and the membrane limits the diffusion of sol utes in the water. Osmosis is a special case of diffusio n. Water, like other
substances, moves from an area of higher concentration to one of lower concentration. Imagine a beaker with a semipermeable
membrane, separating the two sides or halves (Figure). On both sides of the membrane, the water level is th e same, but there
are different concentrations on each side of a dissolv ed substance, or solute, that cannot cross the membrane. If the volume of t he
water is the same, but the concentrations of solute are different, then there are also different concentrat ions of water, the solvent, on
either side of the membrane.
Figure: In osmosis, water always moves from an area of higher c oncentration (of water) to one of lower concentrati on (of
water). In this system, the solute cannot pass through th e selectively permeable membrane.
A principle of diffusion is that the molecules move around and will spread evenly throughout the medium if they can. However,
only the material capable of getting through the me mbrane will diffuse through it. In this example, the solute cannot diffuse
through the membrane, but the water can. Water has a concentration gradient in this system. Therefore, wa ter will diffuse down its
concentration gradient, crossing the membrane to the side where it is less concentrated. This diffusion of wa ter through the
membrane— osmosis —will continue until the concentration gradient of wa ter goes to zero. Osmosis proceeds constantly in livi ng
systems.
Tonicity
Tonicity describes the amount of solute in a solution. The mea sure of the tonicity of a solution, or the total am ount of solutes
dissolved in a specific amount of solution, is called its osmolarity. Three terms—hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic—are used to
relate the osmolarity of a cell to the osmolarity of the extracellular fluid that contains the cells. Al l three of these terms are a
comparison between two different solutions (for example, inside a cell compared to outside the cell).
In a hypotonic solution, such as tap water, the extracellular fluid has a lower concentration of solutes than the fluid inside the cell,
and water enters the cell. (In living systems, the poi nt of reference is always the cytoplasm, so the prefix hypo – means that the
extracellular fluid has a lower concentration of solu tes, or a lower osmolarity, than the cell cytoplasm.) It also means that the
extracellular fluid has a higher concentration of wa ter than does the cell. In this situation, water will fol low its concentration
gradient and enter the cell. This may cause an animal cel l to burst, or lyse.
In a hypertonic solution (the prefix hyper – refers to the extracellular fluid having a higher concentration of solutes than the cell’s
cytoplasm), the fluid contains less water than the cell does, such as seawater. Because the cell has a lower c oncentration of solutes,
the water will leave the cell. In effect, the solute i s drawing the water out of the cell. This may cause an animal cell to shrivel, or
crenate.
In an isotonic solution, the extracellular fluid has the same osmol arity as the cell. If the concentration of solutes o f the cell matches
that of the extracellular fluid, there will be no ne t movement of water into or out of the cell. The cel l will retain its “normal”
appearance. Blood cells in hypertonic, isotonic, and hypo tonic solutions take on characteristic appearances (Figure).
Remember that all three of these terms are comparisons between two solutions (i.e. inside and outside the ce ll). A solution can’t be
hypotonic, that would be like saying that Bob is talle r. That doesn’t make sense – you need to say that Bob is taller than Mike. You
can say that the solution inside the cell is hypoton ic to the solution outside the cell. That also means that the solution outside is
hypertonic to the solution inside (just like Mike would be shorter than Bob).

6.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69035
Figure: Osmotic pressure changes the shape of red blood cells in hypertonic, isotonic, and hypotonic solutions. (credi t:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)
Some organisms, such as plants, fungi, bacteria, and some protists, have cell walls that surround the plasma membrane and prevent
cell lysis. The plasma membrane can only expand to the limit of the cell wall, so the cell will not lyse. In fact, the cytoplasm in
plants is always slightly hypertonic compared to the c ellular environment, and water will always enter the pl ant cell if water is
available. This influx of water produces turgor pressure, which stiffens the cell walls of the plant (Figure). In nonwoody
plants, turgor pressure supports the plant. If the p lant cells become hypertonic, as occurs in drought or if a plant is not watered
adequately, water will leave the cell. Plants lose turgor pres sure in this condition and wilt.
Figure: The turgor pressure within a plant cell depends on th e tonicity of the solution that it is bathed in. (cre dit: modification
of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690366.6: Active Transport
Active transport mechanisms require the use of the cell’s energy, usual ly in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). If a
substance must move into the cell against its concentr ation gradient, that is, if the concentration of the substance inside the cell
must be greater than its concentration in the extrac ellular fluid, the cell must use energy to move the substance. Some active
transport mechanisms move small-molecular weight mate rial, such as ions, through the membrane.
In addition to moving small ions and molecules thro ugh the membrane, cells also need to remove and take in larger molecules and
particles. Some cells are even capable of engulfing e ntire unicellular microorganisms. You might have cor rectly hypothesized that
the uptake and release of large particles by the cell requires energy. A large particle, however, cannot pa ss through the membrane,
even with energy supplied by the cell.
Electrochemical Gradient
We have discussed simple concentration gradients—diff erential concentrations of a substance across a space or a membrane.
However, in living systems gradients are more complex. C ells contain many proteins, most of which are negativ ely charged. Due
to these negatively charged proteins, coupled with th e movement of ions into and out of cells, there is a n electrical gradient (a
difference of charge) across the plasma membrane. The interior of living cells is electrically negative a s compared to the
extracellular fluid in which cells are bathed; at th e same time, cells contain higher concentrations of p otassium (K) and lower
concentrations of sodium (Na) than does the extracel lular fluid. Thus, in a living cell, the concentrat ion gradient and electrical
gradient of Na promotes diffusion of the ion into the cell, and the electrical gradient of Na (a positive ion) tends to drive it inward
to the negatively charged interior. The situation is more complex, however, for other elements such as po tassium. The electrical
gradient of K promotes diffusion of the ion into the cell, but the concentration gradient of K promot es diffusion out of the cell
(Figure). The combined gradient that affects an ion is call ed its electrochemical gradient, and it is especially important to
muscle and nerve cells.
Figure: Electrochemical gradients arise from the combined ef fects of concentration gradients and electrical gradi ents. (credit:
modification of work by “Synaptitude”/Wikimedia Comm ons)
Moving Against a Gradient
To move substances against a concentration or an el ectrochemical gradient, the cell must use energy. Th is energy is harvested from
ATP that is generated through cellular metabolism. Ac tive transport mechanisms, collectively called pumps or carrier proteins,
work against electrochemical gradients. With the exc eption of ions, small substances constantly pass throu gh plasma membranes.
Active transport maintains concentrations of ions and other substances needed by living cells in the face of these passive changes.
Much of a cell’s supply of metabolic energy may be sp ent maintaining these processes. As active transport m echanisms depend on
cellular metabolism for energy, they are sensitive to man y metabolic poisons that interfere with the supply of AT P.
Two mechanisms exist for the transport of small-mole cular weight material and macromolecules. Primary active transport moves
ions across a membrane and creates a difference in c harge across that membrane. The primary active transp ort system uses ATP to
move a substance, such as an ion, into the cell, and often at the same time, a second substance is moved ou t of the cell. The+

6.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69036sodium-potassium pump, an important pump in animal c ells, expends energy to move potassium ions into the cell and a different
number of sodium ions out of the cell. The action of this pump results in a concentration and charge diff erence across the
membrane.
Secondary active transport describes the movement of material using the energy of the electrochemical gradient established by
primary active transport. Using the energy of the el ectrochemical gradient created by the primary activ e transport system, other
substances such as amino acids and glucose can be brou ght into the cell through membrane channels. ATP its elf is formed through
secondary active transport using a hydrogen ion gradien t in the mitochondrion.
Endocytosis
Endocytosis is a type of active transport that moves particles, such as large molecules, parts of cells, and even whole cells, into a
cell. There are different variations of endocytosis, but all share a common characteristic: The plasma membra ne of the cell
invaginates, forming a pocket around the target par ticle. The pocket pinches off, resulting in the partic le being contained in a newly
created vacuole that is formed from the plasma membr ane.
Figure: Three variations of endocytosis are shown. (a) In one form of endocytosis, phagocytosis, the cell membrane
surrounds the particle and pinches off to form an intr acellular vacuole. (b) In another type of endocytosi s, pinocytosis, the cell
membrane surrounds a small volume of fluid and pinches off, forming a vesicle. (c) In receptor-mediated end ocytosis, uptake of
substances by the cell is targeted to a single type of su bstance that binds at the receptor on the external ce ll membrane. (credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal)
Phagocytosis is the process by which large particles, such as cells, are taken in by a cell. For example, when microorga nisms
invade the human body, a type of white blood cell cal led a neutrophil removes the invader through this p rocess, surrounding and
engulfing the microorganism, which is then destroyed by th e neutrophil (Figure a).
A variation of endocytosis is called pinocytosis. This literally means “cell drinking” and was named at a time when the assumption
was that the cell was purposefully taking in extracel lular fluid. In reality, this process takes in solutes that the cell needs from the
extracellular fluid (Figure b).
A targeted variation of endocytosis employs binding proteins in the plasma membrane that are specific for certain substances
(Figure c). The particles bind to the proteins and the plasma membrane invaginates, bringing the substance and th e proteins
into the cell. If passage across the membrane of the target of receptor-mediated endocytosis is ineffective, it will not be removed
from the tissue fluids or blood. Instead, it will stay in those fluids and increase in concentration.
Some human diseases are caused by a failure of recepto r-mediated endocytosis. For example, the form of cho lesterol termed lowdensity lipoprotein or LDL (also referred to as “bad ” cholesterol) is removed from the blood by receptor mediated endocytosis. In
the human genetic disease familial hypercholesterol emia, the LDL receptors are defective or missing entir ely. People with this
condition have life-threatening levels of cholesterol in their blood, because their cells cannot clear the che mical from their blood.
Exocytosis
In contrast to these methods of moving material into a cell is the process of exocytosis. Exocytosis is the opposite of the processes
discussed above in that its purpose is to expel mat erial from the cell into the extracellular fluid. A particle enveloped in membrane
fuses with the interior of the plasma membrane. This fusion opens the membranous envelope to the exterior of the cell, and the
particle is expelled into the extracellular space (Figure).

6.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69036
Figure: In exocytosis, a vesicle migrates to the plasma membran e, binds, and releases its contents to the outside of the cell.
(credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villa rreal)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
6.6: Active Transport is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7: Cell Communication
Course Outcomes for this section:
Explain how basic units of cellular structure define the function of all livi ng things.
Explain how the structure of cell membranes leads to i ts various functions including selective permeability and transport,
and cell signaling.
Imagine what life would be like if you and the people around you could not communicate. You would not be able to express your
wishes to others, nor could you ask questions to find out more about your environment. Social organization is dependent on
communication between the individuals that comprise that so ciety; without communication, society would fall apart.
As with people, it is vital for individual cells to be able to interact with their environment. This is true whether a cell is growing by
itself in a pond or is one of many cells that form a larger organism. In order to properly respond to e xternal stimuli, cells have
developed complex mechanisms of communication that ca n receive a message, transfer the information across the plasma
membrane, and then produce changes within the cell in respo nse to the message.
In multicellular organisms, cells send and receive che mical messages constantly to coordinate the actions of distant organs, tissues,
and cells. The ability to send messages quickly and eff iciently enables cells to coordinate and fine-tune th eir functions.
While the necessity for cellular communication in large r organisms seems obvious, even single-celled organism s communicate with
each other. Yeast cells signal each other to aid mat ing. Some forms of bacteria coordinate their actions i n order to form large
complexes called biofilms or to organize the producti on of toxins to remove competing organisms. The abilit y of cells to
communicate through chemical signals originated in single cells and was essential for the evolution of mul ticellular organisms. The
efficient and error-free function of communication sy stems is vital for all life as we know it.
7.1: A Summary of Cell Communication
7.2: Types of Receptors
7.3: Types of signaling molecules
7.4: Propagation of the signal
7.5: Response to the signal
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. October 13, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...2/Introduction
Thumbnail: Signaling across gap junctions. (CC-BY 4.0 / crop ped from original; OpenStax).
7: Cell Communication is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

7.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690377.1: A Summary of Cell Communication
Receptors are protein molecules inside the target cell or on its surface that receive a chemical signal. Chemical s ignals are released
by signaling cells in the form of small, usually vola tile or soluble molecules called ligands. A ligand is a molecule that binds
another specific molecule, in some cases, delivering a signal in the process. Ligands can thus be thought o f as signaling molecules.
Ligands and receptors exist in several varieties; howe ver, a specific ligand will have a specific receptor th at typically binds only
that ligand.
There are two basic types of receptors: internal receptors and cell surface receptors.
Internal receptors are found in the cytoplasm of the cell and respond to lig ands that cross the cell membrane into the cell.
These receptors can have a direct effect on protein produ ction by binding directly to the DNA.
Cell-surface receptors are found on the cell membrane. They bind to ligands that do not cross the cell membrane. After the
ligand binds, the receptor responds in some way. One response is to open a channel to allow ions to pass through the membran e.
A second response is to activate an enzyme that sets off a response inside the cell. A third response is to activat e a protein which
is not an enzyme, but which can affect other cell compone nts.
There are several different types of ligands.
Small hydrophobic ligands can pass directly through the cel l membrane. They typically interact with internal recept ors. Steroid
hormones are an example.
Water soluble hydrophilic ligands can not pass directl y through the cell membrane. They typically interact with ce ll-surface
receptors. Peptide (protein) hormones are an example.
There are a variety of other ligands such as nitric oxid e (NO) gas. Nitroglycerin and Viagra affect the NO pathway.
Once a ligand binds to a receptor, the signal is transmi tted through the membrane and into the cytoplasm. C ontinuation of a signal
in this manner is called signal transduction. Signal transduction only occurs with cell-surface re ceptors because internal receptors
are able to interact directly with DNA in the nucleus to ini tiate protein synthesis.
Signal transduction pathways can be extremely complic ated and involve large numbers of enzymes and other proteins. These
pathways can help amplify a signal received by one re ceptor. There can also be different effects from the same ligand in different
cell types due to different proteins present in different t ypes of cells.
Kinases are a type of enzyme that adds a phosphate group to anot her molecule (including other proteins). This is called
phosphorylation. Phosphorylation can activate or deactivate other protein s.
Second messengers are small molecules that help to spread a signal through the cytoplasm after a ligand binds to a receptor.
They do this by altering the behavior of certain cellula r proteins. Some examples of second messengers are cAMP (a modified
version of AMP, which is related to ATP but only contains on e phosphate) and calcium ions.
There are several categories of cellular responses to signals.
Changes in gene expression: an increase or decrease in the production of a protein p roduced by a specific gene.
An increase in cellular metabolism: the conversion of glucose to glycogen (and back) can be regulated depending on the
energy needs of the cell.
Cell growth: cells do not normally divide unless they are stimulated b y signals from other cells.
Cell death: apoptosis is controlled cell death; cells can be stimulat ed to die if they are abnormal, infected with a bacteria or
virus, or during specific parts of development (for exa mple, to separate the fingers).
Stopping cell signaling pathways at the right time is just as important as starting them correctly. Tumor s often display abnormal
responses to cell signaling pathways.
7.1: A Summary of Cell Communication is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690387.2: Types of Receptors
A cell within a multicellular organism may need to si gnal to other cells that are at various distances fro m the original cell (Figure
). Not all cells are affected by the same signals. Different t ypes of signaling are used for different purposes.
Figure: In chemical signaling, a cell may target itself (aut ocrine signaling), a cell connected by gap junctions, a nearby cell
(paracrine signaling), or a distant cell (endocrine si gnaling). Paracrine signaling acts on nearby cells, end ocrine signaling uses the
circulatory system to transport ligands, and autocrine signaling acts on the signaling cell. Signaling via ga p junctions involves
signaling molecules moving directly between adjacent cells.
Receptors are protein molecules inside the target cell or on its surface that receive a chemical signal. Chemical s ignals are released
by signaling cells in the form of small, usually vola tile or soluble molecules called ligands. A ligand is a molecule that binds
another specific molecule, in some cases, delivering a signal in the process. Ligands can thus be thought o f as signaling molecules.
Ligands and receptors exist in several varieties; howe ver, a specific ligand will have a specific receptor th at typically binds only
that ligand.
Internal receptors
Internal receptors, also known as intracellular or cytoplasmic receptor s, are found in the cytoplasm of the cell and respond to
hydrophobic ligand molecules that are able to trave l across the plasma membrane. Once inside the cell, man y of these molecules
bind to proteins that act as regulators of mRNA synth esis. Recall that mRNA carries genetic information fro m the DNA in a cell’s
nucleus out to the ribosome, where the protein is assem bled. When the ligand binds to the internal receptor, a change in shape is
triggered that exposes a DNA-binding site on the recept or protein. The ligand-receptor complex moves into t he nucleus, then binds
to specific regions of the DNA and promotes the produc tion of mRNA from specific genes (Figure). Internal receptors can
directly influence gene expression (how much of a spe cific protein is produced from a gene) without havin g to pass the signal on to
other receptors or messengers.
Figure: Hydrophobic signaling molecules typically diffuse acr oss the plasma membrane and interact with intracellula r
receptors in the cytoplasm. Many intracellular recept ors are transcription factors that interact with DNA i n the nucleus and regulate
gene expression.

7.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69038Cell-Surface Receptors
Cell-surface receptors, also known as transmembrane receptors, are proteins that are found attached to the cell m embrane.
These receptors bind to external ligand molecules (li gands that do not travel across the cell membrane). T his type of receptor spans
the plasma membrane and performs signal transduction, in which an extracellular signal is converted into an intercellular signal.
Ligands that interact with cell-surface receptors do n ot have to enter the cell that they affect. Cell-sur face receptors are also called
cell-specific proteins or markers because they are sp ecific to individual cell types.
Each cell-surface receptor has three main components: an external ligand-binding domain, a hydrophobic m embrane-spanning
region, and an intracellular domain inside the cell. The size and extent of each of these domains vary wid ely, depending on the type
of receptor.
Figure: Cell-surface receptors function by transmitting a sign al through the cell membrane. The ligand does not di rectly enter
the cell. Photo credit Laozhengzz; Wikimedia Commons.

Cell-surface receptors are involved in most of the signa ling in multicellular organisms. There are three gene ral categories of cellsurface receptors: ion channel-linked receptors, G-prot ein-linked receptors, and enzyme-linked receptors.
Ion channel-linked receptors
Ion channel-linked receptors bind a ligand and open a channel through the membr ane that allows specific ions to pass through. To
form a channel, this type of cell-surface receptor ha s an extensive membrane-spanning region. When a ligan d binds to the
extracellular region of the channel, there is a conf ormational change in the proteins structure that all ows ions such as sodium,
calcium, magnesium, and hydrogen to pass through (Figure).
Figure: Gated ion channels form a pore through the plasma me mbrane that opens when the signaling molecule binds. T he
open pore then allows ions to flow into or out of the cell.
G-protein-coupled receptors
G-protein-coupled receptors bind a ligand and activate a membrane protein call ed a G-protein. The activated G-protein then
interacts with either an ion channel or an enzyme in the membrane (Figure). Before the ligand binds, the inactive G-protein
can bind to a site on a specific receptor. Once the G-p rotein binds to the receptor, the G-protein changes sh ape, becomes active, and
splits into two different subunits. One or both of these subun its may be able to activate other proteins as a result.

7.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69038
Figure: When a signaling molecule binds to a G-protein-coupl ed receptor in the plasma membrane, a GDP molecule
associated with the G-protein is exchanged for GTP. Th e subunits come apart from each other, and a cellular response is triggered
either by one or both of the subunits. Hydrolysis of GT P to GDP terminates the signal.
Enzyme-linked receptors
Enzyme-linked receptors are cell-surface receptors with intracellular domain s that are associated with an enzyme. In some cases,
the intracellular domain of the receptor itself is a n enzyme. Other enzyme-linked receptors have a small i ntracellular domain that
interacts directly with an enzyme. When a ligand bin ds to the extracellular domain, a signal is transfer red through the membrane,
activating the enzyme. Activation of the enzyme sets off a chain of events within the cell that eventually leads t o a response.
Unlike living cells, many viruses do not have a plas ma membrane or any of the structures necessary to su stain life. Some
viruses are simply composed of an inert protein shell containing DNA or RNA. To reproduce, viruses must invade a living cell,
which serves as a host, and then take over the hosts cellular a pparatus. But how does a virus recognize its host?
Viruses often bind to cell-surface receptors on the host cell. For example, the virus that causes human influenza (flu) binds
specifically to receptors on membranes of cells of th e respiratory system. Chemical differences in the cell- surface receptors
among hosts mean that a virus that infects a specifi c species (for example, humans) cannot infect another species (for example,
chickens).
However, viruses have very small amounts of DNA or RNA com pared to humans, and, as a result, viral reproduction can occur
rapidly. Viral reproduction invariably produces erro rs that can lead to changes in newly produced viruses; these changes mean
that the viral proteins that interact with cell-surfac e receptors may evolve in such a way that they can b ind to receptors in a new
host. Such changes happen randomly and quite often in the reproductive cycle of a virus, but the changes on ly matter if a virus
with new binding properties comes into contact with a suitable host. In the case of influenza, this situation can occur in settings
where animals and people are in close contact, such a s poultry and swine farms (Sigalov, 2010). Once a viru s jumps to a new
host, it can spread quickly. Scientists watch newly appear ing viruses (called emerging viruses) closely in th e hope that such
monitoring can reduce the likelihood of global viral epi demics.
References
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. October 13, 2 017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...llul#footnote1
A. B. Sigalov, The School of Nature. IV. Learning from Vi ruses, Self/Nonself 1, no. 4 (2010): 282-298. Y. Cao, X. Koh, L. Dong, X.
Du, A. Wu, X. Ding, H. Deng, Y. Shu, J. Chen, T. Jiang, Rapid Estimation of Binding Activity of Influenza Virus Hem agglutinin to
Human and Avian Receptors, PLoS One 6, no. 4 (2011): e18664.
7.2: Types of Receptors is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.How Viruses Recognize a Host

7.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690397.3: Types of signaling molecules
Ligands are produced by signaling cells and act as chemical signals that travel to target cells to coor dinate responses. The types of
molecules that serve as ligands are incredibly varied a nd range from small proteins to small ions like calcium (Ca).
Small Hydrophobic Ligands
Small hydrophobic ligands can directly diffuse through the plasma membrane and interact with internal rece ptors. Important
members of this class of ligands are the steroid hormones. Steroids are lipids that have a hydrocarbon skeleto n with four fused
rings; different steroids have different functional groups attached to the carbon skeleton. Steroid horm ones include the female sex
hormone, estradiol, which is a type of estrogen; the m ale sex hormone, testosterone; and cholesterol, which is an important
structural component of biological membranes and a p recursor of steroid hormones (Figure). Other hydrophobic hormones
include thyroid hormones and vitamin D.
Figure: Steroid hormones have similar chemical structures to th eir precursor, cholesterol. Because these molecules are small
and hydrophobic, they can diffuse directly across the plasma membrane into the cell, where they interact w ith internal receptors.
Water-Soluble Ligands
Water-soluble ligands are polar and therefore canno t pass through the plasma membrane unaided; sometim es, they are too large to
pass through the membrane at all. Instead, most water- soluble ligands bind to the portion of a cell-surfa ce receptor which is on the
outside of the cell. This group of ligands is quite diverse and includes small molecules, peptides (short ch ains of amino acids), and
proteins.
Other Ligands
Nitric oxide (NO) is a gas that also acts as a ligand. It is able to diffuse directly across the plasma membra ne, and one of its roles is
to interact with receptors in smooth muscle and indu ce relaxation of the tissue. NO has a very short half-l ife and therefore only
functions over short distances. Nitroglycerin, a trea tment for heart disease, acts by triggering the relea se of NO, which causes blood
vessels to dilate (expand), thus restoring blood flow to the heart. NO has become better known recently becau se the pathway that it
affects is targeted by prescription medications for ere ctile dysfunction, such as Viagra (erection involves di lated blood vessels).
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. October 13, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...llul#footnote1
7.3: Types of signaling molecules is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2+

7.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690407.4: Propagation of the signal
Once a ligand binds to a receptor, the signal is transmi tted through the membrane and into the cytoplasm. C ontinuation of a signal
in this manner is called signal transduction. Signal transduction only occurs with cell-surface re ceptors because internal receptors
are able to interact directly with DNA in the nucleus to ini tiate protein synthesis.
Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway
After the ligand binds to the cell-surface receptor, the activation of the receptor’s intracellular compo nents sets off a chain of events
that is called a signaling pathway or a signaling cascade. Signaling pathways can get very complicated very qui ckly because most
cellular proteins can affect different downstream ev ents, depending on the conditions within the cell. A single pathway can branch
off toward different endpoints based on the interplay between two or more signaling pathways, and the same ligands are often used
to initiate different signals in different cell type s. This variation in response is due to differences i n protein expression in different
cell types. Another complicating element is signal inte gration of the pathways, in which signals from two or mo re different cellsurface receptors merge to activate the same response in the cell. This process can ensure that multiple e xternal requirements are
met before a cell commits to a specific response.
The effects of extracellular signals can also be am plified by enzymatic cascades. At the initiation of the signal, a single ligand binds
to a single receptor. However, activation of a recepto r-linked enzyme can activate many copies of a compon ent of the signaling
cascade, which amplifies the signal.
Figure: Example of a signal transduction cascade. In this exam ple, insulin serves as the ligand and activates a cascade that
leads to activation of the GLUT4 glucose transporter o n the cell membrane. Photo credit Luuis12321; Wikimedia Commons.
Methods of Intracellular Signaling
The activation of a signaling pathway depends on the m odification of a cellular component by an enzyme. T here are numerous
types of enzymatic modifications that can occur, and t hey are recognized in turn by the next component do wnstream. The following
are some of the more common events in intracellular signal ing.
Phosphorylation
One of the most common chemical modifications that o ccurs in signaling pathways is the addition of a phospha te group (PO) to
a molecule such as a protein in a process called phosphorylation. The transfer of the phosphate is catalyzed by an en zyme called a
kinase. Various kinases are named for the substrate they phos phorylate. Phosphorylation can create a binding site that interacts
with downstream components in the signaling cascade. Ph osphorylation may activate or inactivate enzymes, a nd the reversal of
phosphorylation, dephosphorylation by a phosphatase, wil l reverse the effect.4–3

7.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69040Second Messengers
Second messengers are small molecules that help to spread a signal th rough the cytoplasm after a ligand binds to a recepto r. They
do this by altering the behavior of certain cellula r proteins. Some examples of second messengers are cAMP (a modified version of
AMP, which is related to ATP but only contains one phosphat e) and calcium ions.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. October 13, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...-of-the-Signal
7.4: Propagation of the signal is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/690417.5: Response to the signal
Ligands which can enter the cell and bind to interna l receptors are able to directly affect the cell’s DNA and protein-producing
machinery. Ligands which can not enter the cell bind to receptors in the plasma membrane and use signal tra nsduction pathways to
produce a variety of effects. The results of signali ng pathways are extremely varied and depend on the ty pe of cell involved as well
as the external and internal conditions. A small sampling of responses is described below.
Gene Expression
Some signal transduction pathways regulate the product ion of mRNA. Others regulate the synthesis of proteins fr om mRNA by
ribosomes. Typically these pathways increase gene expres sion so that more of a specific protein is produced f rom a gene, but some
pathways do decrease gene expression.
An example of a protein that regulates translation in the nucleus is the MAP kinase ERK. ERK is activated in a phosphorylation
cascade when epidermal growth factor (EGF) binds the EGF r eceptor. Upon phosphorylation, ERK enters the nucleus and activates
a protein kinase that, in turn, regulates protein translat ion (Figure).
Figure: ERK is a MAP kinase that activates translation when it is phosphorylated. ERK phosphorylates MNK1, which in t urn
phosphorylates eIF-4E, an elongation initiation factor that, with other initiation factors, is associated wit h mRNA. When eIF-4E
becomes phosphorylated, the mRNA unfolds, allowing pro tein synthesis in the nucleus to begin.
Increase in Cellular Metabolism
The result of another signaling pathway affects muscle cells. The activation of β-adrenergic receptors in m uscle cells by adrenaline
leads to an increase in cyclic AMP (cAMP) inside the ce ll. Also known as epinephrine, adrenaline is a hormone (produced by the
adrenal gland attached to the kidney) that readies t he body for short-term emergencies. Cyclic AMP activate s PKA (protein kinase
A), which in turn phosphorylates two enzymes. The first enzyme promotes the degradation of glycogen by acti vating intermediate
glycogen phosphorylase kinase (GPK) that in turn activa tes glycogen phosphorylase (GP) that catabolizes glyco gen into glucose.
(Recall that your body converts excess glucose to glyc ogen for short-term storage. When energy is needed, gl ycogen is quickly
reconverted to glucose.) Phosphorylation of the secon d enzyme, glycogen synthase (GS), inhibits its ability to form glycogen from
glucose. In this manner, a muscle cell obtains a ready pool of glucose by activating its formation via gl ycogen degradation and by
inhibiting the use of glucose to form glycogen, thu s preventing a futile cycle of glycogen degradation and synthesis. The glucose is
then available for use by the muscle cell in response to a sudden surge of adrenaline—the “fight or flight” refl ex.
Cell Growth
Cell signaling pathways also play a major role in cel l division. Cells do not normally divide unless they are stimulated by signals
from other cells. The ligands that promote cell growt h are called growth factors. Most growth factors bind to cell-surface receptors
that are linked to tyrosine kinases. These cell-surface receptors are called receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Activation of RTKs
initiates a signaling pathway that includes a G-prote in called RAS, which activates the MAP kinase pathway desc ribed earlier. The
enzyme MAP kinase then stimulates the expression of protei ns that interact with other cellular components to ini tiate cell division.

7.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69041Cell Death
When a cell is damaged, superfluous, or potentially d angerous to an organism, a cell can initiate a mecha nism to trigger
programmed cell death, or apoptosis. Apoptosis allows a cell to die in a controlled manner that prevents the release of potentially
damaging molecules from inside the cell. There are m any internal checkpoints that monitor a cell’s healt h; if abnormalities are
observed, a cell can spontaneously initiate the proce ss of apoptosis. However, in some cases, such as a viral infection or
uncontrolled cell division due to cancer, the cell’s normal checks and balances fail. External signaling can also initiate apoptosis.
For example, most normal animal cells have receptors that interact with the extracellular matrix, a networ k of glycoproteins that
provides structural support for cells in an organism. T he binding of cellular receptors to the extracellul ar matrix initiates a signaling
cascade within the cell. However, if the cell moves away from the extracellular matrix, the signaling ceases, and the cell undergoes
apoptosis. This system keeps cells from traveling thro ugh the body and proliferating out of control, as ha ppens with tumor cells that
metastasize.
Another example of external signaling that leads to a poptosis occurs in T-cell development. T-cells are im mune cells that bind to
foreign macromolecules and particles, and target the m for destruction by the immune system. Normally, T-c ells do not target “self”
proteins (those of their own organism), a process that can lead to autoimmune diseases. In order to develop the ability to
discriminate between self and non-self, immature T-cell s undergo screening to determine whether they bind to so-called self
proteins. If the T-cell receptor binds to self proteins, the cell initiates apoptosis to remove the potentially d angerous cell.
Apoptosis is also essential for normal embryological d evelopment. In vertebrates, for example, early stages o f development include
the formation of web-like tissue between individual fi ngers and toes (Figure). During the course of normal development, these
unneeded cells must be eliminated, enabling fully se parated fingers and toes to form. A cell signaling me chanism triggers
apoptosis, which destroys the cells between the developing d igits.
Figure: The histological section of a foot of a 15-day-old m ouse embryo, visualized using light microscopy, reveals areas of
tissue between the toes, which apoptosis will eliminate before the mouse reaches its full gestational age at 27 days. (credit:
modification of work by Michal Mañas)
Termination of the Signal Cascade
The aberrant signaling often seen in tumor cells is proof that the termination of a signal at the approp riate time can be just as
important as the initiation of a signal. One method of stopping a specific signal is to degrade the ligan d or remove it so that it can
no longer access its receptor. One reason that hydrop hobic hormones like estrogen and testosterone trigg er long-lasting events is
because they bind carrier proteins. These proteins all ow the insoluble molecules to be soluble in blood, b ut they also protect the
hormones from degradation by circulating enzymes.
Inside the cell, many different enzymes reverse the cellular modifications that result from signaling casc ades. For example,
phosphatases are enzymes that remove the phosphate gr oup attached to proteins by kinases in a process ca lled dephosphorylation.
Cyclic AMP (cAMP) is degraded into AMP by phosphodiesterase, and the release of calcium stores is reversed by t he Ca pumps
that are located in the external and internal membranes of the cell.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. October 13, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...-to-the-Signal
7.5: Response to the signal is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2+

7.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69041

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8: Enzyme-catalyzed reactions
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Explain the role of enzyme-catalyzed reactions in cell ular metabolism.
Figure: A hummingbird needs energy to maintain prolonged fl ight. The bird obtains its energy from taking in food and
transforming the energy contained in food molecules i nto forms of energy to power its flight through a seri es of biochemical
reactions. (credit: modification of work by Cory Zan ker)
Virtually every task performed by living organisms re quires energy. Energy is needed to perform heavy labor and exerci se, but
humans also use energy while thinking, and even during sleep. In fact, the living cells of every organism c onstantly use energy.
Nutrients and other molecules that are imported into the cell have many different potential paths: meta bolized (broken down) and
used for energy, synthesized into new molecules, modif ied if needed, transported around the cell, and even distributed to the entire
organism. For example, the large proteins that make u p muscles are built from smaller molecules imported f rom dietary amino
acids. Complex carbohydrates are broken down into sim ple sugars that the cell uses for energy. Just as e nergy is required to both
build and demolish a building, energy is required f or the synthesis and breakdown of molecules as well as t he transport of
molecules into and out of cells. In addition, proce sses such as ingesting and breaking down pathogenic bacteria and viruses,
exporting wastes and toxins, and movement of the cell requ ire energy.
8.1: Energy
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
8.3: Thermodynamics
8.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy
8.5: Free and Activation Energy
8.6: Enzymes
8.7: Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
Thumbnail: Diagram showing the induced fit model in enzymes. (Public Domain; LadyofHats).
8: Enzyme-catalyzed reactions is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

8.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/648148.1: Energy
Scientists use the term bioenergetics to describe the concept of energy flow (Figure) through living systems, such as cells.
Cellular processes such as the building and breaking down of complex molecules occur through stepwise chemi cal reactions. Some
of these chemical reactions are spontaneous and release ener gy, whereas others require energy to proceed.
Just as living things must continually consume food t o replenish their energy supplies, cells must continual ly produce more energy
to replenish that used by the many energy-requiring chemical reactions that constantly take place. Toge ther, all of the chemical
reactions that take place inside cells, including those that consume or generate energy, are referred to as the c ell’s metabolism.
Figure: Ultimately, most life forms get their energy from th e sun. Plants use photosynthesis to capture sunlight, and
herbivores eat the plants to obtain energy. Carnivore s eat the herbivores, and eventual decomposition of pl ant and animal material
contributes to the nutrient pool.
Energy
Thermodynamics refers to the study of energy and energy transfer in volving physical matter. The matter relevant to a pa rticular
case of energy transfer is called a system, and everythi ng outside of that matter is called the surroundings. For instance, when
heating a pot of water on the stove, the system includ es the stove, the pot, and the water. Energy is trans ferred within the system
(between the stove, pot, and water). There are two types of systems: open and closed. In an open system, energy can be exchanged
with its surroundings. The stovetop system is open be cause heat can be lost to the air. A closed system cannot exchange energy
with its surroundings.
Biological organisms are open systems. Energy is exch anged between them and their surroundings as they use energy from the sun
to perform photosynthesis or consume energy-storing molecules and release energy to the environment by doing work and
releasing heat. Like all things in the physical world, energy is subject to physical laws. The laws of thermod ynamics govern the
transfer of energy in and among all systems in the universe.
In general, energy is defined as the ability to do work, or to create s ome kind of change. Energy exists in different form s. For
example, electrical energy, light energy, and heat en ergy are all different types of energy. To apprecia te the way energy flows into
and out of biological systems, it is important to understan d two of the physical laws that govern energy.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
8.1: Energy is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/648158.2: Metabolic Pathways
Consider the metabolism of sugar. This is a classic example of one of the many cellular processes that u se and produce energy.
Living things consume sugars as a major energy source, because sugar molecules have a great deal of energ y stored within their
bonds. For the most part, photosynthesizing organisms li ke plants produce these sugars. During photosynthesis, plants use energy
(originally from sunlight) to convert carbon dioxid e gas (CO) into sugar molecules (like glucose: C H O). Th ey consume carbon
dioxide and produce oxygen as a waste product. This reactio n is summarized as:
Because this process involves synthesizing an energy-st oring molecule, it requires energy input to proceed. During the light
reactions of photosynthesis, energy is provided by a molecule called adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is the primary energy
currency of all cells. Just as the dollar is used as cu rrency to buy goods, cells use molecules of ATP as e nergy currency to perform
immediate work. In contrast, energy-storage molecules such as glucose are consumed only to be broken down to use their energy.
The reaction that harvests the energy of a sugar mole cule in cells requiring oxygen to survive can be su mmarized by the reverse
reaction to photosynthesis. In this reaction, oxygen is consumed and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product. The reaction is
summarized as:
Both of these reactions involve many steps.
The processes of making and breaking down sugar molec ules illustrate two examples of metabolic pathways. A metabolic
pathway is a series of chemical reactions that takes a starti ng molecule and modifies it, step-by-step, through a se ries of metabolic
intermediates, eventually yielding a final product. In the example of sugar metabolism, the first metab olic pathway synthesized
sugar from smaller molecules, and the other pathway broke sugar down into smaller molecules. These two opposi te processes—the
first requiring energy and the second producing ene rgy—are referred to as anabolic pathways (building polymers) and catabolic
pathways (breaking down polymers into their monomers), respectively. Consequently, metabolism is composed of synthesis
(anabolism) and degradation (catabolism) (Figure).
It is important to know that the chemical reactions o f metabolic pathways do not take place on their own. Each reaction step is
facilitated, or catalyzed, by a protein called an enzyme. Enzymes are important for catalyzing all types of biological reactions—
those that require energy as well as those that release ene rgy.
Figure: Catabolic pathways are those that generate energy by breaking down larger molecules. Anabolic pathways ar e those
that require energy to synthesize larger molecules. Bo th types of pathways are required for maintaining the cell’s energy balance.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
8.2: Metabolic Pathways is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2 6 12 6

8.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/648168.3: Thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics states that the tota l amount of energy in the universe is constant and co nserved. In other words,
there has always been, and always will be, exactly the s ame amount of energy in the universe. Energy exists in many different
forms. According to the first law of thermodynamics, en ergy may be transferred from place to place or transf ormed into different
forms, but it cannot be created or destroyed. The tra nsfers and transformations of energy take place arou nd us all the time. Light
bulbs transform electrical energy into light and he at energy. Gas stoves transform chemical energy from n atural gas into heat
energy. Plants perform one of the most biologically u seful energy transformations on earth: that of conv erting the energy of
sunlight to chemical energy stored within organic mol ecules (Figure 8.1.1). Some examples of energy transformations are shown
in Figure.
The challenge for all living organisms is to obtain e nergy from their surroundings in forms that they ca n transfer or transform into
usable energy to do work. Living cells have evolved t o meet this challenge. Chemical energy stored within organic molecules such
as sugars and fats is transferred and transformed thr ough a series of cellular chemical reactions into ene rgy within molecules of
ATP (adenosine triphosphate). Energy in ATP molecules is easily accessible to do work. Examples of the types of work that cells
need to do include building complex molecules, tran sporting materials, powering the motion of cilia or flagella, and contracting
muscle fibers to create movement.
Figure: Shown are some examples of energy transferred and tran sformed from one system to another and from one form t o
another. (credit “ice cream”: modification of work by D. Sharon Pruitt; credit “kids”: modification of w ork by Max from
Providence; credit “leaf”: modification of work by C ory Zanker)
A living cell’s primary tasks of obtaining, transform ing, and using energy to do work may seem simple. Howeve r, the second law
of thermodynamics explains why these tasks are harder than they appear. All energy transfers and transforma tions are never
completely efficient. In every energy transfer, some a mount of energy is lost in a form that is unusable. In most cases, this form is
heat energy. Thermodynamically, heat energy is defined as the energy transferred from one syste m to another that is not work. For
example, when a light bulb is turned on, some of the energy being converted from electrical energy into light energy is lost as heat
energy. Likewise, some energy is lost as heat energy during ce llular metabolic reactions.
An important concept in physical systems is that of or der and disorder. The more energy that is lost by a system to its surroundings,
the less ordered and more random the system is. Scie ntists refer to the measure of randomness or disorder within a system as
entropy. High entropy means high disorder and low ene rgy. Molecules and chemical reactions have varying e ntropy as well. For
example, entropy increases as molecules at a high co ncentration in one place diffuse and spread out. Th e second law of
thermodynamics says that energy will always be lost a s heat in energy transfers or transformations. Living thi ngs are highly
ordered, requiring constant energy input to be maintain ed in a state of low entropy.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.

8.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64816Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
8.3: Thermodynamics is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/648178.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy
When an object is in motion, there is energy associa ted with that object. Think of a wrecking ball. Even a slow-moving wrecking
ball can do a great deal of damage to other objects. Energy associated with objects in motion is called kinetic energy (Figure
). A speeding bullet, a walking person, and the rapid movement of molecules in the air (which produces hea t) all have kinetic
energy.
Now what if that same motionless wrecking ball is lifte d two stories above ground with a crane? If the suspend ed wrecking ball is
unmoving, is there energy associated with it? The ans wer is yes. The energy that was required to lift the wrecking ball did not
disappear, but is now stored in the wrecking ball by v irtue of its position and the force of gravity actin g on it. This type of energy is
called potential energy (Figure). If the ball were to fall, the potential energy woul d be transformed into kinetic energy until
all of the potential energy was exhausted when the ba ll rested on the ground. Wrecking balls also swing like a pendulum; through
the swing, there is a constant change of potential en ergy (highest at the top of the swing) to kinetic en ergy (highest at the bottom of
the swing). Other examples of potential energy include the energy of water held behind a dam or a person a bout to skydive out of
an airplane.
Figure: Still water has potential energy; moving water, such as in a waterfall or a rapidly flowing river, has kin etic energy.
(credit “dam”: modification of work by “Pascal”/Flick r; credit “waterfall”: modification of work by Frank Gualtieri)
Potential energy is not only associated with the locat ion of matter, but also with the structure of matter. A spring on the ground has
potential energy if it is compressed; so does a rubber band that is pulled taut. On a molecular level, the b onds that hold the atoms of
molecules together exist in a particular structure that has potential energy. Remember that anabolic ce llular pathways require
energy to synthesize complex molecules from simpler o nes and catabolic pathways release energy when complex molecules are
broken down. The fact that energy can be released by the breakdown of certain chemical bonds implies that those bonds have
potential energy. In fact, there is potential energ y stored within the bonds of all the food molecules we eat, which is eventually
harnessed for use. This is because these bonds can rele ase energy when broken. The type of potential energy that exists within
chemical bonds, and is released when those bonds are b roken, is called chemical energy. Chemical energy is responsible for
providing living cells with energy from food. The re lease of energy occurs when the molecular bonds within food molecules are
broken.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
8.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/648188.5: Free and Activation Energy
After learning that chemical reactions release energy when energy-storing bonds are broken, an important n ext question is the
following: How is the energy associated with these chemic al reactions quantified and expressed? How can the ene rgy released from
one reaction be compared to that of another reactio n? A measurement of free energy is used to quantify these energy transfers.
Recall that according to the second law of thermodyna mics, all energy transfers involve the loss of some amount of energy in an
unusable form such as heat. Free energy specifically refers to the energy associated with a chemical react ion that is available after
the losses are accounted for. In other words, free energy is usable energy, or energy that is availa ble to do work. Looking at this
concept in a biological sense, free energy is the en ergy within a molecule that can be used to perform wo rk. Glucose has a lot of
free energy because there is a lot of energy stored within the bonds of the glucose molecule. Carbon di oxide has a much lower free
energy because there is much less energy stored in its bond s.
If energy is released during a chemical reaction, t hen the change in free energy from the conversion of the reactants to the products,
signified as ΔG (delta G) will be a negative number. A negative change in free energy also means that the p roducts of the reaction
have less free energy than the reactants, because the y release some free energy during the reaction. Reac tions that have a negative
change in free energy and consequently release free energy are called exergonic reactions. Think: exergonic means energy is
exiting the system. These reactions are also referred t o as spontaneous reactions, and their products have le ss stored energy than the
reactants. An important distinction must be drawn betwee n the term spontaneous and the idea of a chemical re action occurring
immediately. Contrary to the everyday use of the ter m, a spontaneous reaction is not one that suddenly or quickly occurs. The
rusting of iron is an example of a spontaneous reaction that occurs slowly, little by little, over time.
Figure: Free energy of endergonic and exergonic reactions. I n an exergonic reaction, the reactants have more free energy than
the products. Therefore, energy is released as the reac tion proceeds. In an endergonic reaction, the reacta nts have more less energy
than the products. Therefore, energy must be added to make the reaction move take place.
If a chemical reaction absorbs energy rather than r eleases energy on balance, then the ΔG for that reactio n will be a positive value.
In this case, the products have more free energy than the reactants. Thus, the products of these reaction s can be thought of as
energy-storing molecules. These chemical reactions are call ed endergonic reactions and they are nonspontaneous.
An endergonic reaction will not take place on its own without the addition of free energy.

8.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64818
Figure: Shown are some examples of endergonic processes (ones tha t require energy) and exergonic processes (ones that
release energy). (credit a: modification of work by Natalie Maynor; credit b: modification of work by U SDA; credit c: modification
of work by Cory Zanker; credit d: modification of w ork by Harry Malsch)
There is another important concept that must be cons idered regarding endergonic and exergonic reactions. Exergonic reactions
require a small amount of energy input to get going, be fore they can proceed with their energy-releasing steps.
These reactions have a net release of energy, but stil l require some energy input in the beginning. This sma ll amount of energy
input necessary for all chemical reactions to occur i s called the activation energy (Figure).
Figure: Activation energy is the small amount of energy that must be put into a system in order for the reaction t o take place.
Photo credit Brazosport College; Wikimedia.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
8.5: Free and Activation Energy is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/648198.6: Enzymes
A substance that helps a chemical reaction to occur i s called a catalyst, and the molecules that catalyze biochemical reacti ons are
called enzymes. Most enzymes are proteins and perform the critical task of lowering the activation energies of chemical reactions
inside the cell. Most of the reactions critical to a living cell happen too slowly at normal temperatures to be of any use to the cell.
Without enzymes to speed up these reactions, life coul d not persist. Enzymes do this by binding to the reac tant molecules and
holding them in such a way as to make the chemical b ond-breaking and -forming processes take place more e asily. It is important
to remember that enzymes do not change whether a reac tion is exergonic (spontaneous) or endergonic. This is because they do not
change the free energy of the reactants or products. T hey only reduce the activation energy required for the reaction to go forward
(Figure). In addition, an enzyme itself is unchanged by the reaction it catalyzes. Once one reaction has been c atalyzed, the
enzyme is able to participate in other reactions.
Figure: Enzymes lower the activation energy of the reaction but do not change the free energy of the reaction.
The chemical reactants to which an enzyme binds are c alled the enzyme’s substrates. There may be one or more substrates,
depending on the particular chemical reaction. In so me reactions, a single reactant substrate is broken d own into multiple products.
In others, two substrates may come together to create one larger molecule. Two reactants might also enter a reaction and both
become modified, but they leave the reaction as two products. The location within the enzyme where the sub strate binds is called
the enzyme’s active site. The active site is where the “action” happens. Since enzymes are proteins, there is a unique combination
of amino acid side chains within the active site. Each side chain is characterized by different properties. They can be large or small,
weakly acidic or basic, hydrophilic or hydrophobic, po sitively or negatively charged, or neutral. The uniq ue combination of side
chains creates a very specific chemical environment within the active site. This specific environment is su ited to bind to one
specific chemical substrate (or substrates).
Active sites are subject to influences of the local en vironment. Increasing the environmental temperature g enerally increases
reaction rates, enzyme-catalyzed or otherwise. However, temperatures outside of an optimal range reduce the rate at which an
enzyme catalyzes a reaction. Hot temperatures will eve ntually cause enzymes to denature, an irreversible change in the threedimensional shape and therefore the function of the enzyme (Figure). Enzymes are also suited to function best within a
certain pH and salt concentration range, and, as with temperature, extreme pH and salt concentrations can c ause enzymes to
denature.

8.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64819
Figure: Heat applied to an egg during cooking irreversibly denatures the proteins. (credit: “K-Wall”/Flickr)
Typically, enzymes function optimally in the environ ment where they are typically found and used. For exam ple, the enzyme
amylase is found in saliva, where it functions to brea k down starch (a polysaccharide – carbohydrate chain) into smaller sugars.
Note that in this example, amylase is the enzyme, star ch is the substrate, and smaller sugars are the pro duct. The pH of saliva is
typically between 6.2 and 7.6, with roughly 6.7 being t he average. The optimum pH of amylase is between 6.7 an d 7.0, which is
close to neutral (Figure). The optimum temperature for amylase is close to 37 ºC (which is human body temperature).
Figure: The effect of pH and temperature on the activity o f an enzyme. Amylase is shown in blue in both graphs. (top)
Amylase (blue) has an optimum pH of about 7. The gree n enzyme, which has an optimum pH of about 2.3, migh t function in the
stomach where it is very acidic. (bottom) Amylase (blu e) has an optimum temperature of about 37 degrees C. The orange enzyme,
which has an optimum temperature of about 15 degrees C (about 60F) might function in a plant found outdoo rs.
For many years, scientists thought that enzyme-substr ate binding took place in a simple “lock and key” f ashion. This model
asserted that the enzyme and substrate fit together perfectly in one instantaneous step. However, current research supports a model
called induced fit (Figure). The induced-fit model expands on the lock-and-key model by describing a more dynamic binding
between enzyme and substrate. As the enzyme and substra te come together, their interaction causes a mild sh ift in the enzyme’s
structure that forms an ideal binding arrangement betwee n enzyme and substrate.
When an enzyme binds its substrate, an enzyme-substr ate complex is formed. This complex lowers the activ ation energy of the
reaction and promotes its rapid progression in one of m ultiple possible ways.
On a basic level, enzymes promote chemical reactions tha t involve more than one substrate by bringing the substr ates together
in an optimal orientation for reaction.
Enzymes promote the reaction of their substrates by crea ting an optimal environment within the active site for the reaction to
occur. The chemical properties that emerge from the parti cular arrangement of amino acid R groups (side chains) wit hin an
active site create the perfect environment for an enzym e’s specific substrates to react.

8.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64819The enzyme-substrate complex can also lower activation energ y by compromising the bond structure so that it is easier to break.
Finally, enzymes can also lower activation energies by taking part in the chemical reaction itself. In these cases, it is important
to remember that the enzyme will always return to its original st ate by the completion of the reaction.
One of the hallmark properties of enzymes is that the y remain ultimately unchanged by the reactions they catalyze. After an
enzyme has catalyzed a reaction, it releases its product(s) and can catalyze a new reaction.
Figure: The induced-fit model is an adjustment to the lock-a nd-key model and explains how enzymes and substrates und ergo
dynamic modifications during the transition state to i ncrease the affinity of the substrate for the active si te.
It would seem ideal to have a scenario in which all o f an organism’s enzymes existed in abundant supply a nd functioned optimally
under all cellular conditions, in all cells, at all times. However, a variety of mechanisms ensures that thi s does not happen. Cellular
needs and conditions constantly vary from cell to cel l, and change within individual cells over time. The r equired enzymes of
stomach cells differ from those of fat storage cells, skin cells, blood cells, and nerve cells. Furthermore, a digestive organ cell
works much harder to process and break down nutrients d uring the time that closely follows a meal compared wi th many hours
after a meal. As these cellular demands and conditions var y, so must the amounts and functionality of different enzyme s.
Since the rates of biochemical reactions are control led by activation energy, and enzymes lower and dete rmine activation energies
for chemical reactions, the relative amounts and fun ctioning of the variety of enzymes within a cell ult imately determine which
reactions will proceed and at what rates. This determina tion is tightly controlled in cells. In certain cel lular environments, enzyme
activity is partly controlled by environmental fact ors like pH, temperature, salt concentration, and, in some cases, cofactors or
coenzymes.
Enzymes can also be regulated in ways that either pro mote or reduce enzyme activity. There are many kind s of molecules that
inhibit or promote enzyme function, and various mec hanisms by which they do so. In some cases of enzyme inhibition, an inhibitor
molecule is similar enough to a substrate that it can bind to the active site and simply block the substr ate from binding. When this
happens, the enzyme is inhibited through competitive inhibition, because an inhibitor molecule competes with the sub strate for
binding to the active site.
On the other hand, in noncompetitive inhibition, an inhibitor molecule binds to the enzyme in a loc ation other than the active site,
called an allosteric site, but still manages to block substrate binding to the active site. Some inhibitor molecules bind to enzymes in
a location where their binding induces a conformation al change that reduces the affinity of the enzyme f or its substrate. This type
of inhibition is called allosteric inhibition (Figure). Most allosterically regulated enzymes are made up of more than one
polypeptide, meaning that they have more than one p rotein subunit. When an allosteric inhibitor binds t o a region on an enzyme, all
active sites on the protein subunits are changed slig htly such that they bind their substrates with less ef ficiency. There are allosteric
activators as well as inhibitors. Allosteric activators bind to locations on an enzyme away from the active site, inducing a
conformational change that increases the affinity of th e enzyme’s active site(s) for its substrate(s) (Figure).

8.6.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64819
Figure: Allosteric inhibition works by indirectly inducing a conformational change to the active site such that t he substrate no
longer fits. In contrast, in allosteric activation, th e activator molecule modifies the shape of the active site to allow a better fit of the
substrate.
Many enzymes do not work optimally, or even at all, u nless bound to other specific non-protein helper mol ecules. They may bond
either temporarily through ionic or hydrogen bonds, or permanently through stronger covalent bonds. Bi nding to these molecules
promotes optimal shape and function of their respec tive enzymes. Two examples of these types of helper m olecules are cofactors
and coenzymes. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as ions of iron a nd magnesium. Coenzymes are organic helper molecules, those
with a basic atomic structure made up of carbon and hydrogen. Like enzymes, these molecules participate i n reactions without
being changed themselves and are ultimately recycled and reused. Vitamins are the source of coenzymes. Some vitamins are the
precursors of coenzymes and others act directly as coe nzymes. Vitamin C is a direct coenzyme for multiple e nzymes that take part
in building the important connective tissue, collage n. Therefore, enzyme function is, in part, regulated b y the abundance of various
cofactors and coenzymes, which may be supplied by an organi sm’s diet or, in some cases, produced by the organism.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. Open Stax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
8.6: Enzymes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/648208.7: Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways
Molecules can regulate enzyme function in many ways. The major question remains, however: What are these m olecules and
where do they come from? Some are cofactors and coenz ymes, as you have learned. What other molecules in t he cell provide
enzymatic regulation such as allosteric modulation, a nd competitive and non-competitive inhibition? Perha ps the most relevant
sources of regulatory molecules, with respect to enz ymatic cellular metabolism, are the products of the c ellular metabolic reactions
themselves. In a most efficient and elegant way, cells h ave evolved to use the products of their own reaction s for feedback
inhibition of enzyme activity. Feedback inhibition involves the use of a reaction product to regulate its own further production
(Figure). The cell responds to an abundance of the product s by slowing down production during anabolic or catabo lic
reactions. Such reaction products may inhibit the enzym es that catalyzed their production through the mechanism s described above.
Figure: Metabolic pathways are a series of reactions catalyzed by multiple enzymes. Feedback inhibition, where the end
product of the pathway inhibits an upstream process, is an important regulatory mechanism in cells.
The production of both amino acids and nucleotides i s controlled through feedback inhibition. Additionally, ATP is an allosteric
regulator of some of the enzymes involved in the ca tabolic breakdown of sugar, the process that creates ATP. In this way, when ATP
is in abundant supply, the cell can prevent the prod uction of ATP. On the other hand, ADP serves as a positive allosteric regulator
(an allosteric activator) for some of the same enzym es that are inhibited by ATP. Thus, when relative level s of ADP are high
compared to ATP, the cell is triggered to produce more AT P through sugar catabolism.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
8.7: Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
9: How cells obtain energy
By the end of this section, you will begin to be able to:
Compare energy-generating processes within different ty pes of cells.
9.1: Energy in Living Systems
9.2: From Mouth to Molecule - Digestion
9.3: Metabolism
9.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative Phosphorylation
9.8: Metabolism without Oxygen - Fermentation
9.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose
9.10: Anaerobic Cellular Respiration in Prokaryotes
Thumbnail: A mitochondrion of the eukaryotic cell. (Public domain; LadyofHats via Wikimedia Commons).
9: How cells obtain energy is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

9.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696429.1: Energy in Living Systems
All living organisms require energy to perform their life processes. Energy, as you learned earlier in the chapter about enzymes, is
the ability to do work or to create some kind of cha nge. You are familiar with or have learned about man y processes that can
require energy:
Movement
Reproduction
Maintaining homeostasis of many different conditions
Acquiring and digesting food
Producing proteins
Just as living things must continually consume food t o replenish their energy supplies, cells must continual ly produce more energy
to replenish that used by the many energy-requiring chemical reactions that constantly take place. Toge ther, all of the chemical
reactions that take place inside cells, including those that consume or generate energy, are referred to as the c ell’s metabolism.
A living cell cannot store significant amounts of fr ee energy. Free energy is energy that is not stored in molecules. Excess free
energy would result in an increase of heat in the ce ll, which would denature enzymes and other proteins, an d destroy the cell.
Instead, a cell must be able to store energy safely and release it for use only as needed. Living cells a ccomplish this using ATP,
which can be used to fill any energy need of the cell. How? It functions like a rechargeable battery.
When ATP is broken down, energy is released. This ener gy is used by the cell to do work. For example, in the mechanical work of
muscle contraction, ATP supplies energy to move the contr actile muscle proteins.
ATP Structure and Function
ATP is a complex-looking molecule, but for our purp oses you can think of it as a rechargeable battery. ATP, the fully charged form
of our battery, is made up of three phosphates (the “TP” part of ATP means “tri phosphate”) attached to a su gar and an adenine (the
“A” part of ATP) (Figure). When the last phosphate is broken off of the ATP, energy is released. The result is a single
phosphate and a molecule called ADP (“D” stands for “di” whi ch means two).
Figure: The structure of ATP shows the basic components of a tw o-ring adenine, five-carbon ribose sugar, and three
phosphate groups.
A large amount of energy is required in order to rec harge a molecule of ADP into ATP. This energy is stor ed in the bond between
the second and third phosphates. When this bond is brok en, the energy is released in a way that the cell can use it.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
9.1: Energy in Living Systems is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696439.2: From Mouth to Molecule - Digestion
While plants can produce their own energy using the p rocess of photosynthesis, animals (and other organisms t hat can’t do
photosynthesis) must eat to get energy from food molec ules. Just like energy can be stored in the chemica l bond between the
second and third phosphate of an ATP molecule, ener gy can also be stored in the chemical bonds that mak e up food molecules.
Most of the energy that we use comes from molecules of glucose, a simple sugar.
Food energy is chemical energy that animals (including humans) d erive from their food through the process of cellul ar respiration.
Cellular respiration involves either joining oxygen from air with the molecules of food (aerobic respirat ion) or reorganizing
the atoms within the molecules in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic respiration).
Humans and other animals need a minimum intake of fo od energy to sustain their metabolism and to drive t heir muscles. Foods are
composed chiefly of carbohydrates, fats, proteins, water, vitamins, and minerals. Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and water represent
virtually all the weight of food, with vitamins and mi nerals making up only a small percentage of the weigh t. In fact,
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins comprise ninety perc ent of the dry weight of foods. Organisms derive food ene rgy mainly from
carbohydrates and fats present in the diet, and to a smaller extent proteins and other organic molecules. Some diet components that
provide little or no food energy, such as water, min erals, vitamins, cholesterol, and fiber, may still b e necessary to health and
survival for other reasons. Water, minerals, vitamins, and cholesterol are not broken down; they are used b y the body in the form in
which they are taken in, so they cannot be used for e nergy. Fiber, a type of carbohydrate, cannot be compl etely digested by the
human body so energy is not released from fiber when it is digested. Instead, it moves mostly intact through the di gestive system.
After you put food into your mouth, you begin to brea k it down mechanically using your teeth. Enzymes in yo ur saliva begin
breaking the food molecules down as well. After you swa llow your food, it is further broken down by additiona l enzymes in the
stomach, followed by the small intestine. In the small i ntestine, the fully broken-down food is absorbed int o the blood. The
majority of the nutrients (about 95%) are absorbed in the small intestine. Water is reabsorbed from the remaining material in the
colon. Then the residual waste is eliminated during defe cation.
Figure: The human digestive system. (Credit: Leysi24, from Wikimedia. Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0
Unported)
Once in the bloodstream, nutrients enter individual ce lls. Glucose is too large to diffuse through the cell membrane and is typically
transported inside cells by proteins. After molecules enter a cell, the breakdown process to produce energy in the form of ATP can
be completed.

9.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69643References
Wikipedia. Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License.
9.2: From Mouth to Molecule - Digestion is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696449.3: Metabolism
An organism’s metabolism is the sum total of all the c hemical reactions that occur within the organism. The se chemical reactions
fall into two basic categories:
Anabolism: building polymers (large molecules that the ce ll needs).
Catabolism: breaking down polymers to release energy.
This means that metabolism is composed of synthesis (anabol ism) and degradation (catabolism) (Figure).
Figure: Catabolic pathways are those that generate energy by breaking down larger molecules. Anabolic pathways ar e those
that require energy to synthesize larger molecules. Bo th types of pathways are required for maintaining the cell’s energy balance.
It is important to know that the chemical reactions o f metabolic pathways do not take place on their own. Each reaction step is
facilitated, or catalyzed, by a protein called an enzyme. Enzymes are important for catalyzing all types of biological reactions—
those that require energy as well as those that relea se energy. Refer back to the chapter on enzymes if you need a reminder about
this topic.
Consider the metabolism of sugar (a carbohydrate). This is a classic example of one of the many cellul ar processes that use and
produce energy. Living things consume sugars as a majo r energy source, because sugar molecules have a grea t deal of energy
stored within their bonds. For the most part, photosynth esizing organisms like plants produce these sugars. During photosynthesis,
plants use energy (originally from sunlight) to con vert carbon dioxide gas (CO) into sugar molecules (li ke glucose: C H O).
They consume carbon dioxide and produce oxygen as a was te product. This reaction is summarized as:
Recall from chemistry that the abbreviation “CO ” me ans “one carbon atom covalently bonded to two oxygen atoms.” Water,
“H O” is two hydrogen atoms covalently bonded to one ox ygen atom. And “C H O ” has 6 carbon atoms, 12 hydrogen a toms,
and 6 oxygen atoms that are covalently bonded together.
Figure: Carbon dioxide (CO) contains one carbon atom covale ntly bonded to two oxygen atoms. Credit: Wikimedia.
Figure: Glucose contains 6 carbons, 6 oxygens, and 12 hydrogen atoms. Credit: Ben, 2006. Wikimedia. Public domain.
The process of producing glucose from carbon dioxide and water requires an energy input to proceed becau se glucose contains
more energy in its molecular bonds than carbon dioxide does.2 6 12 6
2 6 12 6

9.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69644In contrast, energy-storage molecules such as glucose are consumed to be broken down to use their energy. T he reaction that
harvests the energy of a sugar molecule in cells requi ring oxygen to survive can be summarized by the rev erse reaction to
photosynthesis. In this reaction, oxygen is consumed and carbon dioxide is released as a waste product. The react ion is summarized
as:
Both of these reactions involve many steps.
The processes of making and breaking down sugar molec ules illustrate two examples of metabolic pathways. A metabolic
pathway is a series of chemical reactions that takes a starti ng molecule and modifies it, step-by-step, through a se ries of metabolic
intermediates, eventually yielding a final product. In the example of sugar metabolism, the first metab olic pathway synthesized
sugar from smaller molecules, and the other pathway brok e sugar down into smaller molecules.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
9.3: Metabolism is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696459.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration
Glucose and other molecules from food are broken down to release energy in a complex series of chemical re actions that together
are called cellular respiration.
Cellular respiration is a set of metabolic reactions and processes that take place in the cells of organisms to convert bio chemical
energy from nutrients into ATP, and then release waste products. The reactions involved in respiration are c atabolic reactions,
which break large molecules into smaller ones, relea sing energy in the process. These processes require a la rge number of enzymes
which each perform one specific chemical reaction.
Aerobic Respiration
Aerobic respiration requires oxygen. This is the reason why we breathe oxy gen in from the air. This type of respiration relea ses a
large amount of energy from glucose that can be sto red as ATP. Aerobic respiration happens all the time in animals and plants,
where most of the reactions occur in the mitochondria. Even some prokaryotes can perform aerobic respirat ion (although since
prokaryotes don’t contain mitochondria, the reaction s are slightly different). The overall chemical formu la for aerobic respiration
can be written as:
Translating that formula into English: One molecule of glucose can be broken down in the presence of oxygen gas to produce waste
products of carbon dioxide (which we breathe out) and water. This process has an overall release of energy whic h is captured and
stored in 38 molecules of ATP.
Aerobic respiration is a complex process that can be d ivided into three basic stages: glycolysis, the cit ric acid cycle, and oxidative
phosphorylation. The next several sections in the te xtbook address the details of these stages.
Anaerobic Respiration
Anaerobic respiration occurs in the absence of oxygen. It releases a much smaller amount of energy than aerobic respiration.
Anaerobic respiration does not release enough energy to power human cells for long – think about how long a person can live if
they are not able to breathe. Anaerobic respiration o ccurs in muscle cells during hard exercise (after the oxygen has been used up).
It also occurs in yeast when brewing beer. Many prokaryotes perform anaerobic respiration.
There are several different types of anaerobic respi ration, which will be discussed in more detail later. All the types of anaerobic
respiration involve glycolysis, and none of them go through the citric acid cycle or oxidative phosphor ylation. Instead, various
other methods are used to regenerate the molecules n eeded for glycolysis, For now, we will summarize them a ll using this chemical
formula:
NAD and NADH are two states of a molecule that will carry ene rgy during this process. It will be addressed further in a later
section. For right now, just know that NADH carries energy (similar to ATP) and NAD is the form that carries less en ergy (similar
to ADP).
Aerobic vs anaerobic respiration
Aerobic Anaerobic
Requires oxygen? Yes No
Glucose breakdown Complete Incomplete
End products CO and H OAnimal cells: lactic acid
Plant cells and yeast: carbon dioxide and
ethanol
ATP produced About 38 2+
2 2

9.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69645Aerobic respiration is much more efficient than anae robic respiration. One molecule of glucose can generat e up to 38 molecules of
ATP if aerobic respiration is used. In contrast, only 2 m olecules of ATP are generated in anaerobic respiration.
To put it another way, a cellular process which requires 100 molecules of ATP:
Will require about 2.5 molecules of glucose to be broken d own using aerobic respiration (100 / 38 = 2.63)
Will require 50 molecules of glucose to be broken down using anaerobic respiration (100 / 2 = 50)
References
Wikipedia.
9.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696469.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
You have read that nearly all of the energy used by living things comes to them in the bonds of the sug ar, glucose. Glycolysis is the
first step in the breakdown of glucose to extract ene rgy for cell metabolism. Many living organisms carry o ut glycolysis as part of
their metabolism. Glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm of m ost prokaryotic and all eukaryotic cells.
Glycolysis begins with a molecule of glucose (C H O). Various enzymes are used to break glucose do wn into two molecules of
pyruvate (C H O, basically a glucose molecule broken in half) (Figure). This process releases a small amount of energy.
Figure: An overview of glycolysis. In glycolysis, a glucose mol ecule is converted into two pyruvate molecules.
Glycolysis consists of two distinct phases: energy-requirin g, and energy-producing.
Energy-Requiring Steps
The first part of the glycolysis pathway requires an input of energy to begin. The first step in glycoly sis is catalyzed by hexokinase,
an enzyme with broad specificity that catalyzes the phosphorylation of six-carbon sugars. Hexokinase phosphorylates (adds a
phosphate to) glucose using ATP as the source of the phosphate (Figure). This produces glucose-6-phosphate, a more
chemically reactive form of glucose. This phosphoryl ated glucose molecule can no longer leave the cell because the negatively
charged phosphate will not allow it to cross the hydrophob ic interior of the plasma membrane.
Several additional enzymatic reactions occur (Figure), one of which requires an additional ATP molecule. At the end of the
energy-requiring steps, the original glucose has been split into two three-carbon molecules, and two ATPs ha ve been used as
sources of energy for this process.
Figure: The first half of glycolysis uses two ATP molecules in t he phosphorylation of glucose, which is then split into two
three-carbon molecules.6 12 6
3 4 3

9.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69646Energy-Producing Steps
So far, glycolysis has cost the cell two ATP molecules and produced two small, three-carbon sugar molecules. Bo th of these
molecules will proceed through the second half of the pathway, and sufficient energy will be extracted to pa y back the two ATP
molecules used as an initial investment and produce a profit for the cell of two additional ATP molecul es and two even higherenergy NADH molecules (Figure).
During the energy-producing steps, additional enzymes continue to catalyze the breakdown of glucose (Figure). The end
result of these reactions is two 3-carbon molecules of pyruvate.
Figure: The second half of glycolysis involves phosphorylation without ATP investment (step 6) and produces two NADH
and four ATP molecules per glucose.
An important rate-limiting step occurs at step 6 in g lycolysis. If you look at Figure, you will notice th at during step 6, NAD
is converted into NADH. NADH contains more energy than NAD, and is therefore a desired product from this reaction. However,
the continuation of the reaction depends upon the av ailability of NAD. Thus, NADH must be continuously convert ed back into
NAD in order to keep this step going. If NAD is not availab le, the second half of glycolysis slows down or stops.
If oxygen is available in the system, the NADH will be co nverted readily back into NAD by the later processes i n aerobic cellular
respiration. However, if there is no oxygen available, NADH is not converted back into NAD. Without NAD, the react ion in step
6 cannot proceed and glycolysis slows or stops. In an en vironment without oxygen, an alternate pathway (ferme ntation) can
provide the oxidation of NADH to NAD.
Outcomes of Glycolysis
Glycolysis starts with glucose and ends with two pyruvate molecules, a total of four ATP molecules and two mole cules of NADH.
Two ATP molecules were used in the first half of the pa thway to prepare the six-carbon ring for cleavage, s o the cell has a net gain
of two ATP molecules and 2 NADH molecules for its use. If the cell cannot catabolize (break down) the pyruvat e molecules
further, it will harvest only two ATP molecules from o ne molecule of glucose. Mature mammalian red blood c ells are not capable
of aerobic respiration—the process in which organisms convert energy in the presence of oxygen—and glyco lysis is their sole
source of ATP. If glycolysis is interrupted, these cell s lose their ability to maintain their sodium-potassi um pumps, and eventually,
they die.
Section Summary
Glycolysis is the first pathway used in the breakdown of g lucose to extract energy. It was probably one of the earliest metabolic
pathways to evolve and is used by nearly all of the org anisms on earth. Glycolysis consists of two parts: The first part prepares the
six-carbon ring of glucose for cleavage into two three -carbon sugars. ATP is invested in the process during this half to energize the
separation. The second half of glycolysis extracts A TP and high-energy electrons from hydrogen atoms an d attaches them to NAD.
Two ATP molecules are invested in the first half and four ATP molecules are formed by substrate phosphory lation during the
second half. This produces a net gain of two ATP and two NADH molecules for the cell.+

9.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69646What was produced (per molecule of glucose)?
2 pyruvate (3 carbon molecules), 2 NADH, net gain of 2 ATP
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2-839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. September 16, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...X@6/Glycolysis
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696479.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
If oxygen is available, aerobic respiration will go f orward. In eukaryotic cells, the pyruvate molecules pro duced at the end of
glycolysis are transported into mitochondria (Figure), which are the sites of cellular respiration. In orde r for pyruvate, the
product of glycolysis, to enter the next pathway, it must undergo several changes. The conversion is a three-step process.
Figure: Diagram of a human mitochondrion. Recall that mito chondria have two membranes: an inner and an outer m embrane.
Between the two membranes is a region known as the int ermembrane space. The mitochondrial matrix is located inside the inner
membrane. Photo credit PsChemp, Wikimedia.
Oxidation of Pyruvate
In eukaryotic cells, the pyruvate molecules produced at the end of glycolysis are transported into the mitochondrial matrix (the
middle region of the mitochondria) (Figure). In the mitochondrial matrix, pyruvate will be tran sformed into a two-carbon
acetyl group by removing a molecule of carbon dioxi de. This also produces NADH. The acetyl group is picked u p by a carrier
compound called coenzyme A (CoA), which is made from vi tamin B5. The resulting compound is called acetyl CoA (Figure
). Acetyl CoA can be used in a variety of ways by the cell, but its major function is to deliver the acet yl group derived from
pyruvate to the next pathway in glucose catabolism.
Figure: Upon entering the mitochondrial matrix, a multi-en zyme complex converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA. In t he process,
carbon dioxide is released and one molecule of NADH i s formed.
Acetyl CoA to CO
In the presence of oxygen, acetyl CoA delivers its a cetyl group to a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate, to form citrate, a sixcarbon molecule with three carboxyl groups; this path way will harvest the remainder of the extractable ene rgy from what began as
a glucose molecule. This single pathway is called by different names: the citric acid cycle (for the first intermediate formed—citric
acid, or citrate—when acetate joins to the oxaloaceta te), the TCA cycle (since citric acid or citrate and isocitrate are tri carboxylic
acids), and the Krebs cycle, after Hans Krebs, who first identified the steps in the pathway i n the 1930s in pigeon flight muscles.2

9.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69647Like the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA, the citric acid cycle in eukaryotic cells also takes place in the matrix o f the
mitochondria (Figure). Unlike glycolysis, the citric acid cycle is a clos ed loop: the last part of the pathway regenerates th e
compound used in the first step. The eight steps of th e cycle are a series of chemical reactions that prod uces the following from
each of the two molecules of pyruvate produced per molecule o f glucose that originally went into glycolysis (Figure):
2 carbon dioxide molecules
1 ATP molecule (or an equivalent)
3 NADH and 1 FADH, which carry energy to the last part of the ae robic respiration pathway.
Part of this is considered an aerobic pathway (oxygen-requiring) because the NADH and FADH prod uced must transfer their
electrons to the next pathway in the system, which will u se oxygen. If oxygen is not present, this transfer doe s not occur. The citric
acid cycle does NOT occur in anaerobic respiration.
Two carbon atoms come into the citric acid cycle fro m each acetyl group. Two carbon dioxide molecules are released on each turn
of the cycle; however, these do not contain the same carbon atoms contributed by the acetyl group on tha t turn of the pathway. The
two acetyl-carbon atoms will eventually be released on later turns of the cycle; in this way, all six carbo n atoms from the original
glucose molecule will be eventually released as carbo n dioxide. Carbon dioxide is a waste product in most animal cells and will be
released outside the organism. It takes two turns of t he cycle to process the equivalent of one glucose mo lecule. Each turn of the
cycle forms three high-energy NADH molecules and one hi gh-energy FADH molecule. These high-energy carriers wi ll connect
with the last portion of aerobic respiration to prod uce ATP molecules. One ATP (or an equivalent) is also made in each cycle.
Several of the intermediate compounds in the citric acid cycle can be used in synthesizing non-essential amino acids; therefore, the
cycle is both anabolic and catabolic.2

9.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69647
Figure: In the citric acid cycle, the acetyl group from ac etyl CoA is attached to a four-carbon oxaloacetate m olecule to form a
six-carbon citrate molecule. Through a series of steps, citrate is oxidized, releasing two carbon dioxide mol ecules for each acetyl
group fed into the cycle. In the process, three NAD m olecules are reduced to NADH, one FAD molecule is red uced to FADH,
and one ATP or GTP (depending on the cell type) is p roduced (by substrate-level phosphorylation). Because t he final product of the
citric acid cycle is also the first reactant, the cycl e runs continuously in the presence of sufficient react ants. (credit: modification of
work by “Yikrazuul”/Wikimedia Commons)
Section Summary
In the presence of oxygen, 3-carbon pyruvate is con verted into a 2-carbon acetyl group, which is attache d to a carrier molecule of
coenzyme A. The resulting acetyl CoA can enter several pathways, but most often, the acetyl group is delivere d to the citric acid
cycle for further catabolism (breakdown). During the co nversion of pyruvate into the acetyl group, a molecu le of carbon dioxide
and two high-energy electrons are removed. Because two pyruvate were produced from each molecule of glucose during
glycolysis, the production of two carbon dioxide mol ecules (which are released as waste) accounts for two o f the six carbons of the
original glucose molecule. The other four carbons are released as carbon dioxide during two turns of the citr ic acid cycle. The
electrons are picked up by NAD, and the NADH carries the e lectrons to a later pathway for ATP production. At this point, the
glucose molecule that originally entered cellular re spiration has been completely broken down. Chemical po tential energy stored
within the glucose molecule has been transferred to electr on carriers or has been used to synthesize a few ATPs.
What was produced (per molecule of glucose)?
Oxidation of pyruvate: 2 CO, 2 NADH, 2 acetyl (2 carbon molecul e)
Products of the citric acid cycle: 4 CO, 6 NADH, 2 FADH, 2 ATP+
2 2

9.6.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69647References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2-839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. September 16, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.118:weAHBat1@7/Oxidati onof-Pyruvate-and-the9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of Pyruv ate and The Citric Acid Cycle is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696489.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative Phosphorylation
You have just read about two pathways in glucose cata bolism—glycolysis and the citric acid cycle—that ge nerate ATP. Most of the
ATP generated during the aerobic catabolism of gluco se, however, is not generated directly from these pat hways. Rather, it derives
from a process that begins with passing electrons thro ugh a series of chemical reactions to a final electr on acceptor, oxygen. This is
the only place in aerobic respiration where O is act ually required. These reactions take place in speci alized protein complexes
located in the inner membrane of the mitochondria o f eukaryotic organisms and on the inner part of the c ell membrane of
prokaryotic organisms. The energy of the electrons is used to generate ATP. The entirety of this process is called oxidative
phosphorylation.
During oxidative phosphorylation:
The energy from NADH and FADH is used up.
Oxygen gas is converted into water.
30-36 ATP are recharged from ADP.
Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain (Figure) is the last component of aerobic respiration and is the only part of metabolism that uses
atmospheric oxygen. Oxygen continuously diffuses into p lants for this purpose. In animals, oxygen enters th e body through the
respiratory system. Electron transport is a series o f chemical reactions that resembles a bucket brigade in that electrons are passed
rapidly from one component to the next, to the endpo int of the chain where oxygen is the final electron a cceptor and water is
produced. There are four complexes composed of prote ins, labeled I through IV in Figure, and the aggregation of these four
complexes, together with associated mobile, accessory el ectron carriers, is called the electron transport chain. The electron
transport chain is present in multiple copies in the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryotes and in the plasma membrane of
prokaryotes. In each transfer of an electron throug h the electron transport chain, the electron loses e nergy, but with some transfers,
the energy is stored as potential energy by using it to pump hydrogen ions (H, protons) across the inner m itochondrial membrane
into the intermembrane space, creating an electrochemical gradient. An electrochemical gradient consists of two parts: a
difference in solute concentration across the membra ne combined with a difference in charge across the me mbrane. Here, the
electrochemical gradient is made up of a higher con centration of H in the inner membrane space compare d to the mitochondrial
matrix.
Figure: The electron transport chain is a series of electron t ransporters embedded in the inner mitochondrial membr ane that
shuttles electrons from NADH and FADH to molecular oxy gen. In the process, protons are pumped from the mitoc hondrial matrix
to the intermembrane space, and oxygen is reduced to form water.
Electrons from NADH and FADH are passed to protein complexe s in the electron transport chain. As they are passed from one
complex to another (there are a total of four), the electrons lose energy, and some of that energy is u sed to pump hydrogen ions
from the mitochondrial matrix into the intermembran e space. In the fourth protein complex, the electrons are accepted by oxygen,
the terminal acceptor. The oxygen with its extra elec trons then combines with two hydrogen ions, further e nhancing the
electrochemical gradient, to form water. If there were no oxygen present in the mitochondrion, the electro ns could not be removed
from the system, and the entire electron transport ch ain would back up and stop. The mitochondria would be unable to generate
new ATP in this way, and the cell would ultimately die from lack of energy. This is the reason we must breathe to draw in new
oxygen. This is the only place where oxygen is required during the processes of aerobic respiration.2

9.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69648In the electron transport chain, the free energy fro m the series of reactions just described is used to p ump hydrogen ions across the
membrane. The uneven distribution of H ions across th e membrane establishes an electrochemical gradient, owin g to the H ions’
positive charge and their higher concentration on one si de of the membrane.
Hydrogen ions diffuse from the intermembrane space th rough the inner membrane into the mitochondrial mat rix through an
integral membrane protein called ATP synthase (Figure). This complex protein acts as a tiny generator, tu rned by the force of
the hydrogen ions diffusing through it, down their el ectrochemical gradient from the intermembrane space, where there are many
mutually repelling hydrogen ions to the matrix, where there are few. The turning of the parts of this molec ular machine regenerate
ATP from ADP. This flow of hydrogen ions across the membrane through ATP synthase is called chemiosmosis.
Figure: ATP synthase is a complex, molecular machine that uses a proton (H) gradient to form ATP from ADP and inor ganic
phosphate (Pi). (Credit: modification of work by Klau s Hoffmeier)
Chemiosmosis (Figure) is used to generate 90 percent of the ATP made du ring aerobic glucose catabolism. The result of the
reactions is the production of ATP from the energy o f the electrons removed from hydrogen atoms. These a toms were originally
part of a glucose molecule. At the end of the electr on transport system, the electrons are used to reduc e an oxygen molecule to
oxygen ions. The extra electrons on the oxygen ions attract hydrogen ions (protons) from the surrounding m edium, and water is
formed. The electron transport chain and the produc tion of ATP through chemiosmosis are collectively call ed oxidative
phosphorylation (Figure).
Figure: In oxidative phosphorylation, the pH gradient forme d by the electron transport chain is used by ATP syntha se to form
ATP.
ATP Yield
The number of ATP molecules generated from the cata bolism of glucose varies. For example, the number of hydrogen ions that the
electron transport chain complexes can pump through t he membrane varies between species. Another source of variance stems+ +

9.7.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69648from the shuttle of electrons across the membranes of the mitochondria because the NADH generated from glyco lysis cannot easily
enter mitochondria. Thus, electrons are picked up o n the inside of mitochondria by either NAD or FAD. As yo u have learned
earlier, these FAD molecules can transport fewer ions; consequently, fewer ATP molecules are generated when FAD acts as a
carrier. NAD is used as the electron transporter in the l iver and FAD acts in the brain.
Another factor that affects the yield of ATP molecul es generated from glucose is the fact that intermed iate compounds in these
pathways are used for other purposes. Glucose catabolism c onnects with the pathways that build or break down all other
biochemical compounds in cells, and the result is som ewhat messier than the ideal situations described thus far. For example,
sugars other than glucose are fed into the glycolyt ic pathway for energy extraction. Moreover, the five-ca rbon sugars that form
nucleic acids are made from intermediates in glycoly sis. Certain nonessential amino acids can be made fr om intermediates of both
glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. Lipids, such as cholesterol and triglycerides, are also made from i ntermediates in these
pathways, and both amino acids and triglycerides are b roken down for energy through these pathways. Overall, in living systems,
these pathways of glucose catabolism extract about 34 per cent of the energy contained in glucose.
Section Summary
The electron transport chain is the portion of aerob ic respiration that uses free oxygen as the final el ectron acceptor of the electrons
removed from the intermediate compounds in glucose catabolism. The electron transport chain is composed of four large,
multiprotein complexes embedded in the inner mitoch ondrial membrane and two small diffusible electron c arriers shuttling
electrons between them. The electrons are passed throug h a series of reactions, with a small amount of free energy used at three
points to transport hydrogen ions across a membrane. This process contributes to the gradient used in che miosmosis. The electrons
passing through the electron transport chain gradua lly lose energy until eventually they are donated t o oxygen gas which accepts
two protons (H) and is converted into water. The end p roducts of the electron transport chain are water an d roughly 30-34
molecules of ATP. A number of intermediate compounds of the citric acid cycle can be diverted into the anabolism of other
biochemical molecules, such as nonessential amino ac ids, sugars, and lipids. These same molecules can ser ve as energy sources for
the glucose pathways.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2-839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. September 16, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...hosphorylation
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative Phosphory lation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.+ +

9.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696499.8: Metabolism without Oxygen - Fermentation
In aerobic respiration, the final electron acceptor for the electron transport chain is an oxygen molecu le, O. If aerobic respiration
occurs, then approximately 30 molecules of ATP will be produced during the electron transport chain and c hemiosmosis using the
energy of the high-energy electrons carried by NADH or FADH to the electron transport chain. When NADH or FADH give their
high energy electrons to the electron transport cha in, NAD and FAD are regenerated. These low energy molecul es cycle back to
glycolysis and/or the citric acid cycle, where they pick up more high energy electrons and allow the process to continue.
Glycolysis and the citric acid cycle can not occur i f there is not NAD present to pick up electrons as t he reactions proceed. When
oxygen is present, this isn’t a problem – all of the NADH and FADH that were produced during glycolysis and th e citric acid cycle
are converted back into NAD and FAD after the electron transport chain. When no oxygen is present, the electro n transport chain
can’t run because there is no oxygen to act as the fin al electron acceptor. This means that the ETC will no t be accepting electrons
from NADH as its source of power, so NAD will not be regener ated. Both glycolysis and the citric acid cycle req uire NAD to
accept electrons during their chemical reactions. In order for the cell to continue to generate any ATP, NADH must be converted
back to NAD for use as an electron carrier. Anaerobic processes use different mechanisms, but all function t o convert NAD back
into NADH.
How is this done?
Processes that use an organic molecule to regenerate NAD fr om NADH are collectively referred to as fermentation.
In contrast, some living systems use an inorganic molecule (such as nitrate or sulfur) to regenerate NAD.
Both of these methods are called anaerobic cellular respiration. They do not require oxygen to achieve NAD regenerati on and
enable organisms to convert energy for their use in the ab sence of oxygen.
During anaerobic respiration, only glycolysis occurs. The 2 molecules of NADH that are generated during gly colysis are then
converted back into NAD during anaerobic respiration s o that glycolysis can continue. Since glycolysis only p roduces 2 ATP,
anaerobic respiration is much less efficient than aer obic respiration (2 ATP molecules compared to 36-ish ATP molecules).
However, 2 ATP molecules is much better for a cell tha n 0 ATP molecules. In anaerobic situations, the cell needs to continue
performing glycolysis to generate 2 ATP per glucose because if a cell is not generating any ATP, it will die.
Note that the only part of aerobic respiration that physically uses oxygen is the electron transport chai n. However, the citric acid
cycle can not occur in the absence of oxygen because ther e is no way to regenerate the NAD used during this process.
Lactic Acid Fermentation
The fermentation method used by animals and some bac teria like those in yogurt is lactic acid fermentati on (Figure). This
occurs routinely in mammalian red blood cells and in skeletal muscle that does not have enough oxygen to allow aerobic
respiration to continue (such as in muscles after hard exerc ise). The chemical reaction of lactic acid fermentation i s the following:
The build-up of lactic acid causes muscle stiffness a nd fatigue. In muscles, lactic acid produced by ferm entation must be removed
by the blood circulation and brought to the liver f or further metabolism. Once the lactic acid has been removed from the muscle
and is circulated to the liver, it can be converted back t o pyruvic acid and further catabolized (broken down) for energy.
Note that the purpose of this process is not to produ ce lactic acid (which is a waste product and is excrete d from the body). The
purpose is to convert NADH back into NAD so that glycolysis ca n continue so that the cell can produce 2 ATP per glucose.2
2 2

9.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69649
Figure: Lactic acid fermentation is common in muscles that ha ve become exhausted by use.
Alcohol Fermentation
Another familiar fermentation process is alcohol ferm entation (Figure), which produces ethanol, an alcohol. The alcohol
fermentation reaction is the following:
Figure: The reaction resulting in alcohol fermentation is sho wn.
The fermentation of pyruvic acid by yeast produces t he ethanol found in alcoholic beverages (Figure). If the carbon dioxide
produced by the reaction is not vented from the fer mentation chamber, for example in beer and sparkling wines, it remains
dissolved in the medium until the pressure is release d. Ethanol above 12 percent is toxic to yeast, so na tural levels of alcohol in
wine occur at a maximum of 12 percent.
Figure: Fermentation of grape juice to make wine produces CO as a byproduct. Fermentation tanks have valves so that
pressure inside the tanks can be released.
Again, the purpose of this process is not to produce et hanol, but rather to convert NADH back into NAD so that gl ycolysis can
continue.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
9.8: Metabolism without Oxygen - Fermentation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

9.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696509.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose
You have learned about the catabolism of glucose, whic h provides energy to living cells. But living thing s consume more than just
glucose for food. How does a turkey sandwich, which contai ns various carbohydrates, lipids, and protein, provid e energy to your
cells?
Basically, all of these molecules from food are conv erted into molecules that can enter the cellular res piration pathway somewhere.
Some molecules enter at glycolysis, while others enter a t the citric acid cycle. This means that all of the c atabolic pathways for
carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids eventually connect into glycolysis and the citric acid cycle pathways. Metabolic pathways
should be thought of as porous—that is, substances ent er from other pathways, and other substances leave fo r other pathways.
These pathways are not closed systems. Many of the product s in a particular pathway are reactants in other pathways.
Carbohydrates
So far, we have discussed the carbohydrate from which or ganisms derive the majority of their energy: glucose. Many carbohydrate
molecules can be broken down into glucose or otherwise processed into glucose by the body. Glycogen, a polymer of glucose, is a
short-term energy storage molecule in animals (Figure). When there is plenty of ATP present, the extra gluc ose is converted
into glycogen for storage. Glycogen is made and store d in the liver and muscle. Glycogen will be taken out of storage if blood
sugar levels drop. The presence of glycogen in muscle cells as a source of glucose allows ATP to be produc ed for a longer time
during exercise.
Figure: Glycogen is made of many molecules of glucose attache d together into branching chains. Each of the balls i n the
bottom diagram represents one molecule of glucose. (Cr edit: Glycogen by BorisTM. This work has been released into the public
domain)
Most other carbohydrates enter the cellular respirati on pathway during glycolysis. For example, sucrose is a disaccharide made
from glucose and fructose bonded together. Sucrose is broken down in the small intestine. The glucose enters the beginning of
glycolysis as previously discussed, while fructose can be slightly modified and enter glycolysis at the thi rd step. Lactose, the
disaccharide sugar found in milk, can be broken down by lactase enzyme into two smaller sugars: galactose a nd glucose. Like
fructose, galactose can be slightly modified to enter gl ycolysis.
Because these carbohydrates enter near the beginning of glycolysis, their catabolism (breakdown) produces t he same number of
ATP molecules as glucose.
Proteins
Proteins are broken down by a variety of enzymes in ce lls. Most of the time, amino acids are recycled int o new proteins and not
used as a source of energy. This is because it is mor e energy efficient to reuse amino acids rather than making new ones from

9.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69650scratch. The body will use protein as a source of energy if:
There are excess amino acids (you consume a lot of protei n)
The body is in a state of famine (you are starving and have no other source of energy available)
When proteins are used in the cellular respiration p athway, they are first broken down into individual ami no acids. The amino
group from each amino acid is removed (deaminated) and is converted into ammonia. In mammals, the live r synthesizes urea from
two ammonia molecules and a carbon dioxide molecule. Thus, urea is the principal waste product in mammal s from the nitrogen
originating in amino acids, and it leaves the body in urin e.
Once the amino acid has been deaminated, its chemical properties determine which intermediate of the cell ular respiration pathway
it will be converted into. These intermediates enter c ellular respiration at various places in the Citric Acid Cycle (Figure).
Figure: The carbon skeletons of certain amino acids (indicate d in boxes) derived from proteins can feed into the c itric acid
cycle. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Hägg ström)
Lipids
Triglycerides (fats) are a form of long-term energy storage in animals. Triglycerides store about twice as much energy as
carbohydrates. Triglycerides are made of glycerol and three fatty acids. Glycerol can enter glycolysis. Fatt y acids are broken into
two-carbon units that enter the citric acid cycle (Figure).
Figure: Glycogen from the liver and muscles, together with f ats, can feed into the catabolic pathways for carbohy drates.
Remember that if oxygen is not available, glycolysi s can occur but not the citric acid cycle or oxidat ive phosphorylation. Since
fatty acids enter the pathway at the citric acid cyc le, they can not be broken down in the absence of ox ygen. This means that if cells
are not performing aerobic cellular respiration, the body can not burn fat for energy. This is why posters about the “Fat Burning
Zone” in a gym specify that you need to have a lower heart rate / breathing rate to burn more fat – cell s that are not doing aerobic
respiration can’t burn fat for fuel!

9.9.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69650References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
9.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

9.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/696519.10: Anaerobic Cellular Respiration in Prokaryotes
Certain prokaryotes, including some species of bacteria and Archaea, use anaerobic respiration. For example, t he group of Archaea
called methanogens reduces carbon dioxide to methan e to oxidize NADH. These microorganisms are found in soil and in the
digestive tracts of ruminants, such as cows and sheep. Sim ilarly, sulfate-reducing bacteria and Archaea, most o f which are
anaerobic (Figure), reduce sulfate to hydrogen sulfide to regenerate NAD from NADH.
Figure: The green color seen in these coastal waters is from an eruption of hydrogen sulfide. Anaerobic, sulfate-red ucing
bacteria release hydrogen sulfide gas as they decompose algae in the water. (credit: NASA image courtesy Jeff Schmaltz, MODIS
Land Rapid Response Team at NASA GSFC)
Other fermentation methods occur in bacteria. Many prok aryotes are facultatively anaerobic. This means that they can switch
between aerobic respiration and fermentation, depend ing on the availability of oxygen. Certain prokaryo tes, like Clostridia
bacteria, are obligate anaerobes. Obligate anaerobes l ive and grow in the absence of molecular oxygen. Oxygen is a poison to these
microorganisms and kills them upon exposure. It should be noted that all forms of fermentation, except la ctic acid fermentation,
produce gas. The production of particular types of gas is used as an indicator of the fermentation of spec ific carbohydrates, which
plays a role in the laboratory identification of the bacteria. The various methods of fermentation are u sed by different organisms to
ensure an adequate supply of NAD for the sixth step in glycolysis. Without these pathways, that step would not occur, and no ATP
would be harvested from the breakdown of glucose.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
9.10: Anaerobic Cellular Respiration in Prokaryotes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.+

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
10: Photosynthesis
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Compare energy-generating processes within different ty pes of cells
All living organisms on earth consist of one or more c ells. Each cell runs on the chemical energy found ma inly in carbohydrate
molecules (food), and the majority of these molecules are produced by one process: photosynthesis. Through photosynthesis,
certain organisms convert solar energy (sunlight) i nto chemical energy, which is then used to build carb ohydrate molecules. The
energy used to hold these molecules together is relea sed when an organism breaks down food. Cells then use th is energy to perform
work, such as cellular respiration.
The energy that is harnessed from photosynthesis ente rs the ecosystems of our planet continuously and is t ransferred from one
organism to another. Therefore, directly or indirectly, the process of pho tosynthesis provides most of the energy required by living
things on earth.
Photosynthesis also results in the release of oxygen into the atmosphere. In short, to eat and breathe, humans depend almost
entirely on the organisms that carry out photosynthesis.
10.1: Putting photosynthesis into context
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
10.3: Light and Pigments
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the Calvin Cy cle)
10.6: Photosynthesis in Prokaryotes
Thumbnail: Plant cells filled with chloroplasts. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Kristian Peters via Wikimedia Commons).
10: Photosynthesis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

10.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6997610.1: Putting photosynthesis into context
All living things require energy. Carbohydrates are s torage molecules for energy. Living things access ene rgy by breaking down
carbohydrate molecules during the process of cellul ar respiration. Plants produce carbohydrates during p hotosynthesis. So if plants
make carbohydrate molecules during photosynthesis, d o they also perform cellular respiration? The answer is yes, they do.
Although energy can be stored in molecules like ATP, carbohydrates (and lipids, which can also enter cellu lar respiration as a
source of energy) are much more stable and efficien t reservoirs for chemical energy. Photosynthetic organ isms also carry out the
reactions of respiration to harvest the energy that t hey have stored in carbohydrates during photosynthes is. Plants have
mitochondria in addition to chloroplasts.
The overall reaction for photosynthesis:
is the reverse of the overall reaction for cellular respir ation:
Photosynthesis produces oxygen as a byproduct, and re spiration produces carbon dioxide as a byproduct. In nature, there is no such
thing as waste. Every single atom of matter is conserved, recycling indefinitely. Substances change form or mov e from one type of
molecule to another, but never disappear (Figure).
CO is no more a form of waste produced by respiration than oxygen is a waste product of photosynthesis. Both are byproducts of
reactions that move on to other reactions. Photosynthesi s absorbs energy from sunlight to build carbohydrates in the chloroplasts,
and aerobic cellular respiration releases that stor ed energy by using oxygen to break down carbohydrates. Both organelles use
electron transport chains to generate the energy ne cessary to drive other reactions. Photosynthesis and cel lular respiration function
in a biological cycle, allowing organisms to access lif e-sustaining energy that originates millions of miles a way in a star.
Figure: In the carbon cycle, the reactions of photosynthesis a nd cellular respiration share reciprocal reactants and products.
(credit: modification of work by Stuart Bassil)
There are two basic parts of photosynthesis: the light dependent reactions and the light independent reac tions (also known as the
Calvin cycle). During the light reactions, the energy f rom sunlight is stored in energy carrier molecules. T hese energy carrier
molecules are then used to power the reactions of th e Calvin cycle, where CO molecules are joined togeth er to produce
carbohydrates such as glucose.2

10.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69976
Figure: Overview of the process of photosynthesis. During the l ight-dependent reactions, the energy from sunlight is used by
the chloroplast to create energy molecules: ATP and N ADPH. These energy molecules power the Calvin cycle, which creates
carbohydrates (G3P) from CO.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. November 11,
2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...Photosynthesis
10.1: Putting photosynthesis into context is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

10.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6997710.2: The structure of the chloroplast
In plants, photosynthesis takes place primarily in le aves, which consist of many layers of cells and have d ifferentiated top and
bottom sides. The process of photosynthesis occurs not o n the surface layers of the leaf, but rather in a mid dle layer called the
mesophyll (Figure).
Figure: Not all cells of a leaf carry out photosynthesis. Cell s within the middle layer of a leaf have chloroplasts, which
contain the photosynthetic apparatus. (credit Zephyris; wikimedia)
The gas exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen occurs throu gh small, regulated openings called stomata.
Figure: Tomato leaf stomate (singular of stomata). Photo credi t: Photohound; Wikimedia; Public Domain.
In eukaryotes, photosynthesis takes place inside an organelle called a chloroplast. Some prokaryotes can perform photosynthesis,
but they do not contain chloroplasts (or other membr ane-bound organelles). In plants, chloroplast-containin g cells exist in the
mesophyll. Chloroplasts are surrounded by a double memb rane similar to the double membrane found within a mi tochondrion.
Within the chloroplast is a third membrane that form s stacked, disc-shaped structures called thylakoids. Embedded in the thylakoid
membrane are molecules of chlorophyll, a pigment (a molecule that absorbs light) through which the entire process of
photosynthesis begins. Chlorophyll is responsible for the green color of plants. The thylakoid membrane e ncloses an internal space
called the thylakoid lumen or space. Other types of pig ments are also involved in photosynthesis, but chlor ophyll is by far the most
important. As shown in Figure, a stack of thylakoids is called a granum, and the space surrounding the granum is called
stroma (not to be confused with stomata, the openings on the leaves).

10.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69977
Figure: Structure of the chloroplast. Note that the chloropl ast is surrounded by a double membrane, but also contai ns a third
set of membranes, which enclose the thylakoids.
Just like the structure of the mitochondria was impor tant to its ability to perform aerobic cellular res piration, the structure of the
chloroplast allows the process of photosynthesis to ta ke place. Both the light-dependent reactions and the Calvin cycle take place
inside of the chloroplast.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6997810.3: Light and Pigments
How can light be used to make food? It is easy to think of light as something that exists and allows living o rganisms, such as
humans, to see, but light is a form of energy. Like all energy, light can travel, change form, and be harne ssed to do work. In the case
of photosynthesis, light energy is transformed into chemical energy, which autotrophs use to build carbo hydrate molecules.
However, autotrophs only use a specific component of sunli ght (Figure).
Figure: Autotrophs can capture light energy from the sun, co nverting it into chemical energy used to build food molecules.
(credit: modification of work by Gerry Atwell, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
What Is Light Energy?
The sun emits an enormous amount of electromagnetic radiation (solar energy). Humans can see only a frac tion of this energy,
which is referred to as “visible light.” The manner i n which solar energy travels can be described and mea sured as waves. Scientists
can determine the amount of energy of a wave by measu ring its wavelength, the distance between two consecutive, similar point s
in a series of waves, such as from crest to crest or trough t o trough (Figure).
Figure: The wavelength of a single wave is the distance betwe en two consecutive points along the wave.
Visible light constitutes only one of many types of electromagnetic radiation emitted from the sun. The electromagnetic spectrum
is the range of all possible wavelengths of radiation (Figure). Each wavelength corresponds to a different amount of energy
carried.

10.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69978
Figure: The sun emits energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation. This radiation exists in different waveleng ths, each of
which has its own characteristic energy. Visible light is one type of energy emitted from the sun.
Each type of electromagnetic radiation has a charac teristic range of wavelengths. The longer the waveleng th (or the more stretched
out it appears), the less energy is carried. Short, ti ght waves carry the most energy. This may seem illogi cal, but think of it in terms
of a piece of moving rope. It takes little effort b y a person to move a rope in long, wide waves. To make a rope move in short, tight
waves, a person would need to apply significantly more en ergy.
The sun emits a broad range of electromagnetic radi ation, including X-rays and ultraviolet (UV) rays (Figure). The higherenergy waves are dangerous to living things; for example, X-r ays and UV rays can be harmful to humans.
Absorption of Light
Light energy enters the process of photosynthesis when pigments absorb the light. In plants, pigment molecul es absorb only visible
light for photosynthesis. The visible light seen by hum ans as white light actually exists in a rainbow of colo rs. Certain objects, such
as a prism or a drop of water, disperse white light to r eveal these colors to the human eye. The visible ligh t portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum is perceived by the human e ye as a rainbow of colors, with violet and blue having shorter wavelengths
and, therefore, higher energy. At the other end of the sp ectrum toward red, the wavelengths are longer and have lowe r energy.
The wavelengths of light that are reflected from an object and bounce off are detecte d by our eyes. The wavelengths of light that
are absorbed by an object do not make it to our eyes. This means that the color an object appears is due to the wavelengths that are
reflected and not those that are absorbed. For example, the apple in Figure appears red (assuming you are not color-blind).
This is because the red wavelengths of light are refle cted off the apple and the other wavelengths (yellow, green, blue, purple) are
absorbed by the apple.
Figure: This apple appears red because it is reflecting the re d wavelengths of light. Other wavelengths are absorbed by the
apple.

10.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69978Understanding Pigments
Different kinds of pigments exist, and each absorbs on ly certain wavelengths (colors) of visible light. Pigm ents reflect the color of
the wavelengths that they cannot absorb. All photosynth etic organisms contain a pigment called chlorophyll a, which humans see
as the common green color associated with plants. Chloro phyll a absorbs wavelengths from either end of the visible sp ectrum (blue
and red), but not from green. Because green is reflected, c hlorophyll appears green.
Other pigment types include chlorophyll b (which absorbs blue and red-orange light) and the caro tenoids. Each type of pigment
can be identified by the specific pattern of wavelengt hs it absorbs from visible light, which is its absorption s pectrum.
Many photosynthetic organisms have a mixture of pigme nts; between them, the organism can absorb energy from a wider range of
visible-light wavelengths. Not all photosynthetic org anisms have full access to sunlight. Some organisms grow und erwater where
light intensity decreases with depth, and certain wave lengths are absorbed by the water. Other organisms grow i n competition for
light. Plants on the rainforest floor must be able to a bsorb any bit of light that comes through, because t he taller trees block most of
the sunlight (Figure).
Figure: Plants that commonly grow in the shade benefit from h aving a variety of light-absorbing pigments. Each pig ment
can absorb different wavelengths of light, which allo ws the plant to absorb any light that passes through the taller trees. (credit:
Jason Hollinger)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
10.3: Light and Pigments is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6997910.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
Photosynthesis takes place in two stages: the light-d ependent reactions and the Calvin cycle. In the light-dependent reactions,
which take place at the thylakoid membrane, chlorophy ll absorbs energy from sunlight and then converts it into chemical energy
with the use of water. The light-dependent reactions r elease oxygen as a byproduct as water is broken apart. In the Calvin cycle,
which takes place in the stroma, the chemical energy derived from the light-dependent reactions drives bo th the capture of carbon
in carbon dioxide molecules and the subsequent assembly of su gar molecules.
The two reactions use carrier molecules to transport th e energy from one to the other. The carriers that mo ve energy from the lightdependent reactions to the Calvin cycle reactions c an be thought of as “full” because they bring energy. After the energy is released,
the “empty” energy carriers return to the light-dep endent reactions to obtain more energy. You should be familiar with the energy
carrier molecules used during cellular respiration: NADH and FADH. Photosynthesis uses a different energy carrie r, NADPH, but
it functions in a comparable way. The lower energy for m, NADP, picks up a high energy electron and a proton and is converted to
NADPH. When NADPH gives up its electron, it is converted back to NADP.
How the Light-Dependent Reactions Work
The overall purpose of the light-dependent reaction s is to convert solar energy into chemical energy in the form of NADPH and
ATP. This chemical energy will be used by the Calvin cycle t o fuel the assembly of sugar molecules.
The light-dependent reactions begin in a grouping o f pigment molecules and proteins called a photosystem. There are two
photosystems (Photosystem I and II), which exist in the m embranes of thylakoids. Both photosystems have the sa me basic
structure: a number of antenna proteins to which chlo rophyll molecules are bound surround the reaction cent er where the
photochemistry takes place. Each photosystem is serv iced by the light-harvesting complex, which passes en ergy from sunlight to
the reaction center. It consists of multiple antenna p roteins that contain a mixture of 300–400 chlorophyl l a and b molecules as well
as other pigments like carotenoids. A photon of light energy travels until it reaches a molecule of chlor ophyll pigment. The photon
causes an electron in the chlorophyll to become “exci ted.” The energy given to the electron allows it to break free from an atom of
the chlorophyll molecule. Chlorophyll is therefore s aid to “donate” an electron (Figure).The absorption of a single photon or
distinct quantity or “packet” of light by any of th e chlorophylls pushes that molecule into an excited s tate. In short, the light energy
has now been captured by biological molecules but is not stored in any useful form yet. The energy is tran sferred from chlorophyll
to chlorophyll until eventually (after about a mill ionth of a second), it is delivered to the reaction center. Up to this point, only
energy has been transferred between molecules, not electron s.
To replace the electron in the chlorophyll, a molecu le of water is split. This splitting releases two ele ctrons and results in the
formation of oxygen (O) and 2 hydrogen ions (H) in the thylakoid space. The replacement of the electron enables chlorophyll to
respond to another photon. The oxygen molecules prod uced as byproducts exit the leaf through the stomata and find their way to
the surrounding environment. The hydrogen ions play cri tical roles in the remainder of the light-dependent r eactions.2
2+

10.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69979
Figure: Light energy is absorbed by a chlorophyll molecule a nd is passed along a pathway to other chlorophyll mole cules.
The energy culminates in a molecule of chlorophyll f ound in the reaction center. The energy “excites” on e of its electrons enough
to leave the molecule and be transferred to a nearby primary electron acceptor. A molecule of water spli ts to release an electron,
which is needed to replace the one donated. Oxygen a nd hydrogen ions are also formed from the splitting of water.
Keep in mind that the purpose of the light-dependent reactions is to convert solar energy into chemical ca rriers (NADPH and ATP)
that will be used in the Calvin cycle. In eukaryotes and some prokaryotes, two photosystems exist. The first is called photosystem
II (PSII), which was named for the order of its discovery ra ther than for the order of the function. After a pho ton hits the
photosystem II (PSII) reaction center, energy from su nlight is used to extract electrons from water. The ele ctrons travel through the
chloroplast electron transport chain to photosystem I (PSI), which reduces NADP to NADPH (Figure). As the electron
passes along the electron transport chain, energy f rom the electron fuels proton pumps in the membrane that actively move
hydrogen ions against their concentration gradient f rom the stroma into the thylakoid space. The electron transport chain moves
protons across the thylakoid membrane into the lume n (the space inside the thylakoid disk). At the same t ime, splitting of water
adds additional protons into the lumen, and reduction of NADPH removes protons from the stroma (the space outsid e the
thylakoids). The net result is a high concentration of protons (H) in the thylakoid lumen, and a low con centration of protons in the
stroma. ATP synthase uses this electrochemical gradi ent to make ATP, just like it did in cellular respir ation. Note that a high
concentration of protons = an acidic pH, so the thylakoid lumen has a much more acidic (lower) pH than the stroma.
This whole process is quite analogous to the process tha t occurs during cellular respiration in the mitocho ndria. Recall that during
CR, the energy carried by NADH and FADH is used to pump p rotons across the inner mitochondrial membrane and in to the
intermembrane space, creating an electrochemical pro ton gradient. This gradient is used to power oxidative phosphorylation by
ATP synthase to create ATP.+

10.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69979
Figure: Energy from light is used by the chloroplast electron transport chain to pump protons across the thylakoid m embrane
into the lumen of the thylakoid. This creates a proto n gradient that is used as a source of energy by ATP syn thase.
Generating an Energy Molecule: ATP
In the light-dependent reactions, energy absorbed by sunlight is stored by two types of energy-carrier mol ecules: ATP and NADPH.
The energy that these molecules carry is stored in a bond that holds a single atom to the molecule. For A TP, it is a phosphate atom,
and for NADPH, it is a hydrogen atom. Recall that NADH was a sim ilar molecule that carried energy in the mitochondr ion from
the citric acid cycle to the electron transport cha in. When these molecules release energy into the Cal vin cycle, they each lose
atoms to become the lower-energy molecules ADP and NADP.
The buildup of hydrogen ions in the thylakoid space forms an electrochemical gradient because of the dif ference in the
concentration of protons (H) and the difference in t he charge across the membrane that they create. This potential energy is
harvested and stored as chemical energy in ATP throu gh chemiosmosis, the movement of hydrogen ions down their electrochemical
gradient through the transmembrane enzyme ATP synthase, jus t as in the mitochondrion.
The hydrogen ions are allowed to pass through the thy lakoid membrane through an embedded protein complex called ATP
synthase. This same protein generated ATP from ADP in the mitochondrion. The energy generated by the hydr ogen ion stream
allows ATP synthase to attach a third phosphate to ADP, which forms a molecule of ATP in a process called ph otophosphorylation.
The flow of hydrogen ions through ATP synthase is call ed chemiosmosis (just like in cellular respiration), b ecause the ions move
from an area of high to low concentration through a semi-perm eable structure.
Generating Another Energy Carrier: NADPH
The remaining function of the light-dependent react ion is to generate the other energy-carrier molecul e, NADPH. As the electron
from the electron transport chain arrives at photosy stem I, it is re-energized with another photon capture d by chlorophyll. The
energy from this electron drives the formation of NADPH from NADP and a hydrogen ion (H). Now that the solar ener gy is
stored in energy carriers, it can be used to make a sugar molecule.
Section Summary
The pigments of the first part of photosynthesis, th e light-dependent reactions, absorb energy from sunl ight. A photon strikes the
antenna pigments of photosystem II to initiate phot osynthesis. The energy travels to the reaction center that contains chlorophyll a+

10.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69979to the electron transport chain, which pumps hydrogen ions into the thylakoid interior (the lumen). This action builds up a high
concentration of hydrogen ions. The ions flow throug h ATP synthase via chemiosmosis to form molecules of ATP, which are used
for the formation of sugar molecules in the second stage of photosynthesis. Photosystem I absorbs a second photon, which results
in the formation of an NADPH molecule, another energy and red ucing power carrier for the light-independent reactions.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

10.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998010.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the Calvin Cycle)
After the energy from the sun is converted and packa ged into ATP and NADPH, the cell has the fuel needed to bu ild carbohydrate
molecules. The carbohydrate molecules made will have a backbone of carbon atoms. Where does the carbon com e from? The
carbon atoms used to build carbohydrate molecules co me from carbon dioxide, which diffuses into the leaves through the stomata.
The Calvin cycle is the term used for the reactions of photosynthesis that use the energy stored by the light-dependent r eactions to
form glucose and other carbohydrate molecules (Figure).
Figure: The light-dependent reactions harness energy from the sun to produce ATP and NADPH. These energy-carrying
molecules travel into the stroma where the Calvin cyc le reactions take place.
The Interworkings of the Calvin Cycle
In plants, carbon dioxide (CO) enters the chloroplast through the stomata and diffuses into the stroma of the chloroplast—the site
of the Calvin cycle reactions where sugar is synthesize d. The reactions are named after the scientist who di scovered them, and
reference the fact that the reactions function as a c ycle. Others call it the Calvin-Benson cycle to incl ude the name of another
scientist involved in its discovery.
Figure: Light reactions harness energy from the sun to produce chemical bonds, ATP, and NADPH. These energy-carrying
molecules are made in the stroma where carbon fixatio n takes place.
The Calvin cycle reactions (Figure) can be organized into three basic stages: fixation, reduction, and regeneration. In the
stroma, in addition to CO, two other molecules are pr esent to initiate the Calvin cycle: an enzyme abbrev iated RuBisCO (which2

10.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69980stands for ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxyg enase, in case you’re interested), and the molecule r ibulose bisphosphate
(RuBP). RuBP has five atoms of carbon and a phosphate grou p on each end.
Figure: The Calvin cycle has three stages. In stage 1, the enz yme RuBisCO incorporates carbon dioxide into an organ ic
molecule, 3-PGA. In stage 2, the organic molecule is reduced using electrons supplied by NADPH. In stage 3, R uBP, the molecule
that starts the cycle, is regenerated so that the cycle can continue. Only one carbon dioxide molecule is i ncorporated at a time, so
the cycle must be completed three times to produce a single three-carbon GA3P molecule, and six times to pr oduce a six-carbon
glucose molecule.
RuBisCO catalyzes a reaction between CO and RuBP, which forms a six-carbon compound that is immediately con verted into two
three-carbon compounds. This process is called carbon fixation, because CO is “fixed” from its inorganic form into organic
molecules. You can think this as the carbon being c onverted from the “broken” form in CO (which organism s are not able to
directly use) into a “fixed” form, which organisms are able to utilize. Because of this very important role in photosynthesis,
RuBisCO is probably the most abundant enzyme on earth.
ATP and NADPH use their stored energy to convert the thre e-carbon compound, 3-PGA, into another three-carbon com pound
called G3P. This type of reaction is called a reduction reactio n, because it involves the gain of electrons. A reducti on is the gain of
an electron by an atom or molecule. The molecules of ADP and NAD, resulting from the reduction reaction, ret urn to the lightdependent reactions to be re-energized.
One of the G3P molecules leaves the Calvin cycle to c ontribute to the formation of the carbohydrate molec ule, which is commonly
glucose (C H O). Because the carbohydrate molecule has six carbon atoms, it takes six turns of the Calvin cycl e to make one
carbohydrate molecule (one for each carbon dioxide molecule fixed). The remaining G3P molecules regenera te RuBP, which
enables the system to prepare for the carbon-fixation step. ATP is also used in the regeneration of RuBP.
In summary, it takes six turns of the Calvin cycle to f ix six carbon atoms from CO. These six turns require energy input from 12
ATP molecules and 12 NADPH molecules in the reduction step an d 6 ATP molecules in the regeneration step.
Photosynthesis in desert plants has evolved adaptation s that conserve water. In the harsh dry heat, every dr op of water must be
used to survive. Because stomata must open to allow for the uptake of CO, water escapes from the leaf dur ing active
photosynthesis. Desert plants have evolved processes to conserve water and deal with harsh conditions. A more e fficient use of
CO allows plants to adapt to living with less water. Some plants such as cacti can prepare materials for photosy nthesis during
the night by a temporary carbon fixation/storage pro cess, because opening the stomata at this time conserv es water due to
cooler temperatures. In addition, cacti have evolve d the ability to carry out low levels of photosynthes is without opening
stomata at all, an extreme mechanism to face extremely d ry periods.2
6 12 6
Evolution Connection

10.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69980Section Summary
Using the energy carriers formed in the first steps of photosynthesis, the light-independent reactions, or the Calvin cycle, take in
CO from the environment. An enzyme, RuBisCO, catalyzes a reaction with CO and another molecule, RuBP. After th ree cycles, a
three-carbon molecule of G3P leaves the cycle to beco me part of a carbohydrate molecule. The remaining G3 P molecules stay in
the cycle to be regenerated into RuBP, which is then r eady to react with more CO. Photosynthesis forms an e nergy cycle with the
process of cellular respiration. Plants need both phot osynthesis and respiration for their ability to func tion in both the light and
dark, and to be able to interconvert essential metaboli tes. Therefore, plants contain both chloroplasts and mit ochondria.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the Calvi n Cycle) is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.2 2

10.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998110.6: Photosynthesis in Prokaryotes
The two parts of photosynthesis—the light-dependent reactions and the Calvin cycle—have been described, as they take place in
chloroplasts. However, prokaryotes, such as cyanobacteria, lack membrane-bound organelles (including chloroplast s). Prokaryotic
photosynthetic organisms have infoldings of the pla sma membrane for chlorophyll attachment and photosy nthesis (Figure).
It is here that organisms like cyanobacteria can carry out photosynthesis.
Figure: A photosynthetic prokaryote has infolded regions of t he plasma membrane that function like thylakoids. Alt hough
these are not contained in an organelle, such as a chl oroplast, all of the necessary components are present to carry out
photosynthesis. (credit: scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
Text adapted from: OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenSt ax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
10.6: Photosynthesis in Prokaryotes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
11: Cell Division - Binary Fission and Mitosis
Describe the processes used for cell division. Compare t he process and consequences of binary fission, mitosis, an d meiosis.
Since all living things are made up of one or more ce lls, all living things have to undergo some type of c ell division. Cell division
serves several basic purposes: reproduction, repair, and growth. Typically during cell division, the DNA of the organism is copied,
then divided into the new cells using one or more divi sions. We will therefore start our discussion of cell d ivision with a brief
overview of the process of DNA replication (copying DNA), followed by the process by which various types of cell s divide that
DNA into new cells.
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
11.2: An Overview of DNA Replication
11.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
11.6: Cancer and the cell cycle
Thumbnail: Life cycle of the cell. (CC BY-SA 4.0; BruceBlaus v ia Wikimedia Commons).
11: Cell Division - Binary Fission and Mitosis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

11.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998311.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
DNA is a working molecule; it must be replicated (copie d) when a cell is ready to divide, and it must be “re ad” to produce the
molecules, such as proteins, to carry out the functio ns of the cell. For this reason, the DNA is protected and packaged in very
specific ways. Because they must carry so much informa tion, DNA molecules can be very long. Stretched end-to-e nd, the DNA
molecules in a single human cell would come to a len gth of about 2 meters (roughly 6 feet). Thus, the DNA f or a cell must be
packaged in a very ordered way to fit and function within a structure (the cell) that is not visible to the naked eye.
A cell’s complete complement of DNA is called its genome. In prokaryotes (bacteria), the genome is composed of a single, doublestranded DNA molecule in the form of a loop or circle. The region in the cell containing this genetic mat erial is called a nucleoid.
Some prokaryotes also have smaller loops of DNA called plasmids that are not essential for normal growth.
Figure: An average prokaryotic cell. Note that the DNA is n ot surrounded by a membrane to create a nucleus. Photo credit
Lady of Hats; Wikipedia.
The size of the genome in one of the most well-studied prokaryotes, Escherichia coli, is 4.6 million base pairs. This would extend a
distance of about 1.6 mm if stretched out. Compare th at to the length of an E. coli cell, which is approxim ately 1-2μm long. 1.6mm
= 1600μm: so how does all this DNA fit inside a tiny cel l? The DNA is twisted beyond the double helix in what is known as
supercoiling. Some proteins are known to be involved i n the supercoiling; other proteins and enzymes help in maintaining the
supercoiled structure.
Eukaryotes, such as animals and plants, have chromosomes that consist of linear DNA molecules. Chromosomes can b e seen as
thread-like structures located inside the nucleus o f eukaryotic cells. Each chromosome is made of protei n and a single linear
double-helix of DNA (Figure). The term chromosome comes from the Greek words for color (chroma) and body (soma).
Scientists gave this name to chromosomes because they are cell structures, or bodies, that are strongly sta ined by some colorful
dyes used in research.
Figure: Linear chromosomes from the salivary glands of nonbiti ng midge larvae. Photo credit Joseph Resichig; Wikimedia.
Eukaryotes typically have much more DNA than prokaryo tes: the human genome is roughly 3 billion base pairs while the E. coli
genome is roughly 4 million. For this reason, eukaryotes employ a different type of packing strategy to fit their DNA inside the
nucleus (Figure). At the most basic level, DNA is wrapped around protein s known as histones. The DNA wrapped around
histones wraps and stacks through several additional le vels of complexity. These thicker more compact stru ctures are what you
have seen before in pictures labeled “chromosomes”.

11.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69983
Figure: The basic structure of eukaryotic chromosomes inside th e nucleus of a cell (“ Chromosomes ” by National Human
Genome Research Institute is in the Public Domain)
To summarize:
Prokaryotes have relatively small amounts of DNA (millions of basepairs) found in one circular genome, which is located in the
cytoplasm in the nucleoid.
Eukaryotes have larger amounts of DNA (billions of basepai rs) found in several linear chromosomes, which are located inside
the nucleus.
Figure: A eukaryote contains a well-defined nucleus, whereas in prokaryotes, the chromosome lies in the cytoplasm in an
area called the nucleoid.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:8v2Xzdco@5/TheStructure-of-DNA
“Genetics Home Reference: Help Me Understand Genetics” by National Institutes of Health: U.S National Library of Me dicine is
in the Public Domain
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998411.2: An Overview of DNA Replication
When a cell divides, it is important that each daug hter cell receives an identical copy of the DNA. This i s accomplished by the
process of DNA replication. The replication of DNA occurs before the cell begins t o divide into two separate cells.
The discovery and characterization of the structure of the double helix provided a hint as to how DNA is cop ied. Recall that
adenine nucleotides pair with thymine nucleotides, a nd cytosine with guanine, and that DNA is double strand ed. This means that
the two strands are complementary to each other. For example, a strand of DNA with a nucl eotide sequence of AGTCATGA will
have a complementary strand with the sequence TCAGTACT (Figure).
Figure: The two strands of DNA are complementary, meaning th e sequence of bases in one strand can be used to create the
correct sequence of bases in the other strand.
Because of the complementarity of the two strands, ha ving one strand means that it is possible to recreate the other strand. This
model for replication suggests that the two strands o f the double helix separate during replication, and e ach strand serves as a
template from which the new complementary strand is copied (Figure).
Figure: The semiconservative model of DNA replication is shown. Gray indicates the original DNA strands, and blue
indicates newly synthesized DNA.
During DNA replication, each of the two strands that mak e up the double helix serves as a template from which new strands are
copied. The new strand will be complementary to the par ental or “old” strand. Each new double strand consis ts of one parental
strand and one new daughter strand. This is known as semiconservative replication. When two DNA copies are formed, they have
an identical sequence of nucleotide bases and are divided equally into two daughter cells.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:2ousESf0@5/DNAReplication

11.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998411.2: An Overview of DNA Replication is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998511.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division
The cell division process used by prokaryotes (such a s E. coli bacteria) and some unicellular eukaryotes is called binary fission.
For unicellular organisms, cell division is the only method to produce new individuals. The outcome of t his type of cell
reproduction is a pair of daughter cells that are genetically identical to the original parent cell. In unicellular organisms, daughter
cells are whole individual organisms. This is a less com plicated and much quicker process than cell divisio n in eukaryotes. Because
of the speed of bacterial cell division, populations of ba cteria can grow very rapidly.
Figure: An E. coli bacteria dividing into two identical daughter cell s.
To achieve the outcome of identical daughter cells, t here are some essential steps. The genomic DNA must be replicated (using
DNA replication) to produce two identical copies of the entire genome. Then, one copy must be moved into each of the daughter
cells. The cytoplasmic contents must also be divided to give both new cells the machinery to sustain life. Since bacterial cells have
a genome that consists of a single, circular DNA chromosome, the process of cell division is very simple.
Figure: Prokaryotic cell division occurs via a process called binary fission. (CC BY-SA 3.0; JWSchmidt & JTojnar via
Wikimedia Commons)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.1...The-Cell-Cycle
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.1...-Cell-Division
11.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

11.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998611.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
Eukaryotes have two major types of cell division: mit osis and meiosis. Mitosis is used to produce new body cell s for growth and
healing, while meiosis is used to produce sex cells (eggs and sperm). Meiosis will be discussed in a later chapter.
The cell cycle is an ordered series of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two new daughter cells via
mitosis. The length of the cell cycle is highly var iable even within the cells of an individual organis m. In humans, the frequency of
cell turnover ranges from a few hours in early embryo nic development to an average of two to five days fo r epithelial cells, or to an
entire human lifetime spent without dividing in specia lized cells such as cortical neurons or cardiac muscl e cells. There is also
variation in the time that a cell spends in each ph ase of the cell cycle. When fast-dividing mammalian cells are grown in culture
(outside the body under optimal growing conditions), t he length of the cycle is approximately 24 hours. The timing of events in the
cell cycle is controlled by mechanisms that are both inter nal and external to the cell.
Cells on the path to cell division proceed through a series of precisely timed and carefully regulated s tages of growth, DNA
replication, and division that produce two genetically identical cells. The cell cycle has two major phases: interphase and the
mitotic phase (Figure). During interphase, the cell grows and DNA is replicated. During the mitotic phase, the replicated
DNA and cytoplasmic contents are separated and the cell divide s.
Figure: A cell moves through a series of phases in an orderly m anner. During interphase, G involves cell growth and protein
synthesis, the S phase involves DNA replication and the replication of the centrosome, and G involves further growth and protein
synthesis. The mitotic phase follows interphase. Mitosis is nuclear division during which duplicated chromosomes a re segregated
and distributed into daughter nuclei. Usually the cel l will divide after mitosis in a process called cytokin esis in which the cytoplasm
is divided and two daughter cells are formed.
Interphase
During interphase, the cell undergoes normal processes while also preparing for cell division. For a cell to move from interphase to
the mitotic phase, many internal and external condition s must be met. The three stages of interphase are called G, S, and G.
G Phase (First Gap)
The first stage of interphase is called the G phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic aspect, little c hange is visible. However,
during the G stage, the cell is quite active at the biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the bui lding blocks of chromosomal
DNA and the associated proteins as well as accumulating sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of re plicating each
chromosome in the nucleus.
S Phase (Synthesis of DNA)
Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-con densed chromatin configuration. In the S phase, DNA rep lication can
proceed through the mechanisms that result in the f ormation of identical pairs of DNA molecules— sister chromatids —that are
firmly attached to the centromeric region (Figure).1
1 2

11.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69986
Figure: DNA replication during S phase copies each linear chr omosome. The chromosomes remain attached together at a
region called the centromere. Photo credit: Lisa Bar tee
The centrosome is also duplicated during the S phase. The two centros omes will give rise to the mitotic spindle, the appara tus that
orchestrates the movement of chromosomes during mitos is. At the center of each animal cell, the centrosome s of animal cells are
associated with a pair of rod-like objects, the centrioles, which are at right angles to each other. Centrioles h elp organize cell
division. Centrioles are not present in the centrosomes of o ther eukaryotic species, such as plants and most fungi.
Figure: (a) Structure of the centrioles making up the centr osome. (b) Centrioles give rise to the mitotic spindle (grey
threadlike structures). Photo credit: CNX OpenStax Microbiology.
G Phase (Second Gap)
In the G phase, the cell replenishes its energy stor es and synthesizes proteins necessary for chromosom e manipulation. Some cell
organelles are duplicated, and the cytoskeleton is di smantled to provide resources for the mitotic phase. There may be additional
cell growth during G. The final preparations for the m itotic phase must be completed before the cell is abl e to enter the first stage
of mitosis.
The Mitotic Phase
Figure: Mitosis in onion root cells. The cells in this image ar e in various stages of mitosis. (Credit: Spike Walker. Wellcome
Images images@wellcome.ac.uk)
To make two daughter cells, the contents of the nucle us and the cytoplasm must be divided. The mitotic pha se is a multistep
process during which the duplicated chromosomes are al igned, separated, and moved to opposite poles of the cell, and then the cell
is divided into two new identical daughter cells. The first portion of the mitotic phase, mitosis, is composed of five stages, which
accomplish nuclear division (Figure). The second portion of the mitotic phase, called cytokinesis, is the physical separation2

11.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69986of the cytoplasmic components into two daughter cells. Although the stages of mitosis are similar for most eukaryotes, the process
of cytokinesis is quite different for eukaryotes that have cell walls, such as plant cells.
Figure: Summary of the process of mitosis. Photo credit Oganesson007, Wikimedia.
Prophase
During prophase, the “first phase,” the nuclear envelop e starts to dissociate into small vesicles, and the m embranous organelles
(such as the Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum), fragment and disperse toward the edges of the cell. The nucleolus
disappears. The centrosomes begin to move to opposit e poles of the cell. Microtubules that will form the m itotic spindle extend
between the centrosomes, pushing them farther apart as the microtubule fibers lengthen. The sister chromat ids begin to coil more
tightly with the aid of condensin proteins and become visib le under a light microscope.
Figure: Prophase. Photo credit Kelvin13; Wikimedia.
Prometaphase
During prometaphase, the “first change phase,” many processes that were be gun in prophase continue to advance. The remnants
of the nuclear envelope fragment. The mitotic spind le continues to develop as more microtubules assemble a nd stretch across the
length of the former nuclear area. Chromosomes becom e more condensed and discrete. Each sister chromatid develops a protein
structure called a kinetochore in the centromeric region.
Figure: Prometaphase. Photo credit Kelvin13; Wikimedia.
The proteins of the kinetochore attract and bind mi totic spindle microtubules. As the spindle microtubul es extend from the
centrosomes, some of these microtubules come into co ntact with and firmly bind to the kinetochores. Once a mitotic fiber attaches
to a chromosome, the chromosome will be oriented unti l the kinetochores of sister chromatids face the oppo site poles. Eventually,
all the sister chromatids will be attached via their k inetochores to microtubules from opposing poles. Spin dle microtubules that do
not engage the chromosomes are called polar microtub ules. These microtubules overlap each other midway bet ween the two poles
and contribute to cell elongation. Astral microtubul es are located near the poles, aid in spindle orient ation, and are required for the
regulation of mitosis.
This illustration shows two sister chromatids. Each has a
kinetochore at the centromere, and mitotic spindle
microtubules radiate from the kinetochore.
Figure: During prometaphase, mitotic spindle microtubules fro m opposite poles attach to each sister chromatid at the
kinetochore. In anaphase, the connection between the sister chromatids breaks down, and the microtubules pul l the chromosomes
toward opposite poles.

11.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69986Metaphase
During metaphase, the “change phase,” all the chromosomes are aligned in a plane called the metaphase plate, or the equat orial
plane, midway between the two poles of the cell. The sist er chromatids are still tightly attached to each oth er by cohesin proteins.
At this time, the chromosomes are maximally condensed.
Figure: Metaphase. Photo credit Kelvin13; Wikimedia.
Anaphase
During anaphase, the “upward phase,” the cohesin protei ns degrade, and the sister chromatids separate at th e centromere. Each
chromatid, now called a chromosome, is pulled rapidly toward the centrosome to which its microtubule is att ached. The cell
becomes visibly elongated (oval shaped) as the polar microtubules slide against each other at the metap hase plate where they
overlap.
Figure: Anaphase. Photo credit Kelvin13; Wikimedia.
Telophase
During telophase, the “distance phase,” the chromosome s reach the opposite poles and begin to decondense (u nravel), relaxing into
a chromatin configuration. The mitotic spindles are depolymerized into tubulin monomers that will be used to assemble
cytoskeletal components for each daughter cell. Nucle ar envelopes form around the chromosomes, and nucleoso mes appear within
the nuclear area.
Figure: Telophase. Photo credit Kelvin13; Wikimedia.
Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis, or “cell motion,” is the second main stage of the m itotic phase during which cell division is completed v ia the
physical separation of the cytoplasmic components i nto two daughter cells. Division is not complete until the cell components have
been divided and completely separated into the two da ughter cells. Although the stages of mitosis are sim ilar for most eukaryotes,
the process of cytokinesis is quite different for eukaryot es that have cell walls, such as plant cells.
In cells such as animal cells that lack cell walls, cyto kinesis follows the onset of anaphase. A contractile ring composed of actin
filaments forms just inside the plasma membrane at t he former metaphase plate (Figure). The actin filaments pull the
equator of the cell inward, forming a fissure. This fi ssure, or “crack,” is called the cleavage furrow. The furrow deepens as the actin
ring contracts, and eventually the membrane is cleaved in two.

11.4.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69986In plant cells, a new cell wall must form between the d aughter cells. During interphase, the Golgi apparatus a ccumulates enzymes,
structural proteins, and glucose molecules prior to breaking into vesicles and dispersing throughout th e dividing cell (Figure
). During telophase, these Golgi vesicles are transporte d on microtubules to form a phragmoplast (a vesicula r structure) at
the metaphase plate. There, the vesicles fuse and coal esce from the center toward the cell walls; this struc ture is called a cell plate.
As more vesicles fuse, the cell plate enlarges until it merges with the cell walls at the periphery of the ce ll. Enzymes use the
glucose that has accumulated between the membrane lay ers to build a new cell wall. The Golgi membranes become parts of the
plasma membrane on either side of the new cell wall.
Figure: During cytokinesis in animal cells, a ring of actin f ilaments forms at the metaphase plate. The ring contra cts,
forming a cleavage furrow, which divides the cell in two. In plant cells, Golgi vesicles coalesce at the fo rmer metaphase plate,
forming a phragmoplast. A cell plate formed by the f usion of the vesicles of the phragmoplast grows from the center toward the cell
walls, and the membranes of the vesicles fuse to form a plasma membrane that divides the cell in two.

11.4.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69986Summary of Mitosis and Cytokinesis
Figure: Mitosis is divided into five stages—prophase, prometapha se, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. The pictures at
the bottom were taken by fluorescence microscopy of c ells artificially stained by fluorescent dyes: blue flu orescence indicates
DNA (chromosomes) and green fluorescence indicates micr otubules (spindle apparatus). (credit “mitosis drawings”: modification
of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal; credit “microgra phs”: modification of work by Roy van Heesbeen; credi t “cytokinesis
micrograph”: Wadsworth Center/New York State Departm ent of Health; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
G Phase
Not all cells adhere to the classic cell-cycle patter n in which a newly formed daughter cell immediately e nters interphase, closely
followed by the mitotic phase. Cells in the G phase are not actively preparing to divide. The cell is in a quiescent (inactive) stage,
having exited the cell cycle. Some cells enter G temp orarily until an external signal triggers the onset of G. Other cells that never
or rarely divide, such as mature cardiac muscle and nerve cells, remain in G permanently.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.1...The-Cell-Cycle
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.0
0 1

11.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998711.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
It is essential that daughter cells be exact duplicat es of the parent cell. Mistakes in the duplication or distribution of the
chromosomes lead to mutations that may be passed for ward to every new cell produced from the abnormal cel l. To prevent a
compromised cell from continuing to divide, there ar e internal control mechanisms that operate at three m ain cell cycle
checkpoints at which the cell cycle can be stopped until condition s are favorable.
Figure: The cell cycle is controlled at three checkpoints. I ntegrity of the DNA is assessed at the G checkpoint. Pro per
chromosome duplication is assessed at the G checkpoint. A ttachment of each kinetochore to a spindle fiber is a ssessed at the M
checkpoint.
The first checkpoint (G) determines whether all cond itions are favorable for cell division to proceed. Th is checkpoint is the point
at which the cell irreversibly commits to the cell-di vision process. In addition to adequate reserves and cell size, there is a check for
damage to the genomic DNA. A cell that does not meet all the re quirements will not be released into the S phase.
The second checkpoint (G) bars the entry to the mito tic phase if certain conditions are not met. The most important role of this
checkpoint is to ensure that all of the chromosomes have b een replicated and that the replicated DNA is not damaged.
The final checkpoint (M) occurs in the middle of mi tosis. This checkpoint determines if all of the copie d chromosomes are
arranged appropriately to be separated to opposite s ides of the cell. If this doesn’t happen correctly, i ncorrect numbers of
chromosomes can be partitioned into each of the daught er cells, which would likely cause them to die.
Regulator Molecules of the Cell Cycle
In addition to the internally controlled checkpoint s, there are two groups of intracellular molecules th at regulate the cell cycle.
These regulatory molecules either promote progress of the cell to the next phase (positive regulation) o r halt the cycle (negative
regulation). Regulator molecules may act individuall y, or they can influence the activity or production of other regulatory proteins.
Therefore, it is possible that the failure of a singl e regulator may have almost no effect on the cell c ycle, especially if more than one
mechanism controls the same event. It is also possibl e that the effect of a deficient or non-functioning regulator can be wideranging and possibly fatal to the cell if multiple proc esses are affected.
Positive Regulation of the Cell Cycle
Two groups of proteins, called cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), are responsible for the progress of the cell throu gh
the various checkpoints. The levels of the four cycli n proteins fluctuate throughout the cell cycle in a predictable pattern (Figure1

11.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69987). Increases in the concentration of cyclin proteins a re triggered by both external and internal signals. After the cell moves to
the next stage of the cell cycle, the cyclins that were a ctive in the previous stage are degraded.
Figure: The concentrations of cyclin proteins change through out the cell cycle. There is a direct correlation be tween cyclin
accumulation and the three major cell cycle checkpo ints. Also note the sharp decline of cyclin levels foll owing each checkpoint
(the transition between phases of the cell cycle), as c yclin is degraded by cytoplasmic enzymes. (credit: mod ification of work by
“WikiMiMa”/Wikimedia Commons)
Cyclins regulate the cell cycle only when they are t ightly bound to Cdks. To be fully active, the Cdk/cy clin complex must also be
phosphorylated in specific locations. Like all kina ses, Cdks are enzymes (kinases) that phosphorylate othe r proteins.
Phosphorylation activates the protein by changing its shape. The proteins phosphorylated by Cdks are involv ed in advancing the
cell to the next phase (Figure). The levels of Cdk proteins are relatively stable t hroughout the cell cycle; however, the
concentrations of cyclin fluctuate and determine whe n Cdk/cyclin complexes form. The different cyclins and Cdks bind at specific
points in the cell cycle and thus regulate different check points.
Figure: Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) are protein kinases tha t, when fully activated, can phosphorylate and thus a ctivate
other proteins that advance the cell cycle past a che ckpoint. To become fully activated, a Cdk must bind to a cyclin protein and then
be phosphorylated by another kinase.
Since the cyclic fluctuations of cyclin levels are b ased on the timing of the cell cycle and not on spec ific events, regulation of the
cell cycle usually occurs by either the Cdk molecules alone or the Cdk/cyclin complexes. Without a specifi c concentration of fully
activated cyclin/Cdk complexes, the cell cycle cannot pr oceed through the checkpoints.

11.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69987Negative Regulation of the Cell Cycle
The second group of cell cycle regulatory molecules are negative regulators. In positive regulation, act ive molecules such as
CDK/cyclin complexes cause the cell cycle to progress. In negat ive regulation, active molecules halt the cell cycle.
The best understood negative regulatory molecules are retinoblastoma protein (Rb), p53, and p21. Much of what is known about
cell cycle regulation comes from research conducted with cells that have lost regulatory control. All thre e of these regulatory
proteins were discovered to be damaged or non-functi onal in cells that had begun to replicate uncontroll ably (became cancerous).
In each case, the main cause of the unchecked progres s through the cell cycle was a faulty copy of the reg ulatory protein. For this
reason, Rb and other proteins that negatively regulate the cell cycle are sometimes called tumor suppressors.
Rb, p53, and p21 act primarily at the G checkpoint. p53 is a multi-functional protein that has a major imp act on the commitment
of a cell to division because it acts when there is d amaged DNA in cells that are undergoing the preparato ry processes during G. If
damaged DNA is detected, p53 halts the cell cycle and recruits enzymes to repair the DNA. If the DNA cannot be r epaired, p53 can
trigger apoptosis, or cell suicide, to prevent the dupl ication of damaged chromosomes. As p53 levels rise, the production of p21 is
triggered. p21 enforces the halt in the cycle dictate d by p53 by binding to and inhibiting the activity of the Cdk/cyclin complexes.
As a cell is exposed to more stress, higher levels of p53 and p21 accumulate, making it less likely that th e cell will move into the S
phase.
Rb exerts its regulatory influence on other positive r egulator proteins. Chiefly, Rb monitors cell size. In th e active,
dephosphorylated state, Rb binds to proteins called transcription factors (Figure). Transcription factors “turn on” specific
genes, allowing the production of proteins encoded by t hat gene. When Rb is bound to transcription factors, production of proteins
necessary for the G /S transition is blocked. As the cell increases in size, Rb is slowly phosphorylated until it becomes inactivated.
Rb releases the transcription factors, which can now tu rn on the gene that produces the transition protein, and this particular block
is removed. For the cell to move past each of the che ckpoints, all positive regulators must be “turned on,” and all negative
regulators must be “turned off.”
Figure: Rb halts the cell cycle and releases its hold in respon se to cell growth.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.1...The-Cell-Cycle
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.1...-Cell-Division
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.1

11.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998811.6: Cancer and the cell cycle
Cancer comprises many different diseases caused by a common me chanism: uncontrolled cell growth. Despite the redundan cy and
overlapping levels of cell cycle control, errors do occur. One of the critical processes monitored by th e cell cycle checkpoint
surveillance mechanism is the proper replication of DNA during the S phase. Even when all of the cell cycle controls are fully
functional, a small percentage of replication errors (mutations) will be passed on to the daughter cells. If changes to the DNA
nucleotide sequence of a gene are not corrected, a g ene mutation results. All cancers start when a gene mut ation causes a change in
the order of the amino acids that make up a protein that plays a key role in cell reproduction. Changes in the amino acid sequence
can change the shape of the protein. Since the shape of the protein is changed, its function may be chan ged as well. The change in
the cell that results from the misshaped protein ma y be minor: perhaps a slight delay in the binding of Cdk to cyclin or an Rb
protein that detaches from its target DNA while still p hosphorylated. Even minor mistakes, however, may allow subsequent
mistakes to occur more readily. Over and over, small u ncorrected errors are passed from the parent cell t o the daughter cells and
amplified as each generation produces more non-funct ional proteins from uncorrected DNA damage. Eventually, the pace of the
cell cycle speeds up as the effectiveness of the co ntrol and repair mechanisms decreases. Uncontrolled gro wth of the mutated cells
outpaces the growth of normal cells in the area, and a tumor (“ -oma”) can result.
Figure: Cancer cells in culture from human connective tissue, illuminated by darkfield amplified contrast, at a m agnification
of 500x.
Proto-oncogenes
The genes that code for the positive cell cycle regul ators are called proto-oncogenes. Proto-oncogenes are normal genes that, when
mutated in certain ways, become oncogenes, genes that cause a cell to become cancerous. Consid er what might happen to the cell
cycle in a cell with a recently acquired oncogene. In most instances, a mutation in the DNA sequence of a g ene will result in a less
functional or non-functional protein. This result is d etrimental to the cell and will likely prevent the c ell from completing the cell
cycle, which means that this cell cannot create daught er cells. In this case, the organism is not harmed be cause the mutation will
not be carried forward and the damage is minimal.
Occasionally, however, a gene mutation causes a change that increases the activity of a positive regulato r. For example, a mutation
that allows Cdk to be activated without being partner ed with cyclin could push the cell cycle past a check point before all of the
required conditions are met. If the resulting daught er cells are too damaged to undergo further cell di visions, the mutation would
not be propagated and no harm would come to the orga nism. However, if the atypical daughter cells are able to undergo further cell
divisions, subsequent generations of cells will probably accumulate even more mutations, some possibly in addi tional genes that
regulate the cell cycle.
The Cdk gene in the above example is only one of man y genes that are considered proto-oncogenes. In add ition to the cell cycle
regulatory proteins, any protein that influences the cycle can be altered in such a way as to override cell cycle checkpoints. An
oncogene is any gene that, when altered, leads to an increase in the rate of cell cycle progression.
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Like proto-oncogenes, many of the negative cell cyc le regulatory proteins were discovered in cells that h ad become cancerous.
Tumor suppressor genes are segments of DNA that code for negative regulator proteins. Activated negative regulator proteins
prevent the cell from undergoing uncontrolled divisi on. The collective function of the best-understood tumor suppressor gene
proteins, Rb, p53, and p21, is to put up a roadblock to cell cycle progression until certain events are completed. A cell that carries a
mutated form of a negative regulator might not be a ble to halt the cell cycle if there is a problem. T umor suppressors are similar to
brakes in a vehicle: Malfunctioning brakes can contribute to a car crash.

11.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69988Mutated p53 genes have been identified in more than o ne-half of all human tumor cells. This discovery is not surprising in light of
the multiple roles that the p53 protein plays at the G checkpoint. A cell with a faulty p53 may fail to d etect errors present in the
genomic DNA (Figure). Even if a partially functional p53 does identify t he mutations, it may no longer be able to signal the
necessary DNA repair enzymes. Either way, damaged DNA will remain uncorrected. At this point, a functional p53 wi ll deem the
cell unsalvageable and trigger programmed cell deat h (apoptosis). The damaged version of p53 found in c ancer cells, however,
cannot trigger apoptosis.
Figure: The role of normal p53 is to monitor DNA and the sup ply of oxygen (hypoxia is a condition of reduced oxy gen
supply). If damage is detected, p53 triggers repair me chanisms. If repairs are unsuccessful, p53 signals apoptosis. A cell with an
abnormal p53 protein cannot repair damaged DNA and thus cannot signal apoptosis. Cells with abnormal p53 ca n become
cancerous. (credit: modification of work by Thierry Soussi)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. November 11, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...the-Cell-Cycle
11.6: Cancer and the cell cycle is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.1

1SECTION OVERVIEW
BIOLOGY 212: Genetics
The Principles of Biology sequence (BI 211, 212, & 213) introduces biology as a scientific discipline for st udents planning to
major in biology and other science disciplines. Labor atories and classroom activities introduce technique s used to study biological
processes and provide opportunities for students to d evelop their ability to conduct research. BI212 uses genetics as a model system
to understand information flow in living organisms.
Upon successful completion of this course, students sho uld be able to
1. Apply the scientific method to biological questions by de signing experiments and using the resulting data to form and
communicate a conclusion.
Design a controlled experiment to answer a biological que stion.
Predict the outcome of an experiment.
Collect, manipulate, and analyze quantitative and qual itative data.
Answer a biological question using data.
Use an appropriate written format to present scientific in formation.
Use appropriate biological terminology to answer written and oral questions.
Orally present results from an experiment.
2. Assess the strengths and weaknesses of the design of and c onclusions drawn from scientific studies.
Differentiate between questions that can and cannot be a nswered using science.
Identify appropriate credible sources of information t o research a topic.
Evaluate sources of information for their strengths and weak nesses.
3. Select, evaluate and utilize discipline-specific infor mation and literature to research a biological topic.
Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of their own as well as pub lished experiments.
4. Use evidence to develop informed opinions on contempo rary biological issues while considering cultural and ethica l
implications.
Research current ethical issues in genetics and biotechnolog y.
Form opinions based on published scientific research.
5. Apply biological theories and concepts to solve problems related to classical and molecular genetics.
Describe the molecular basis of inheritance.
Determine the outcome in crosses involving various types o f inheritance (e.g. simple dominance, codominance,
incomplete dominance, sex-linkage).
Present and decipher information about trait information using a pedigree.
Discuss the possible evolutionary consequences of various types of inheritance.
6. Discuss the potential implications of mutations at the cellular, organismal, and evolutionary levels.
Describe the structure of DNA and the process of DNA replicat ion.
Summarize the processes involved in protein synthesis.
Describe how mutations affect the process of protein s ynthesis and its products.
Discuss the possible evolutionary consequences of mutation s.
7. Describe the purpose of the regulation of gene express ion and the mechanisms by which gene expression is regulate d.
Describe processes through which gene expression can be regula ted.
Differentiate between gene regulation processes used by prok aryotes and eukaryotes.
Discuss the possible evolutionary consequences of changes i n gene expression.Course Outcomes

212: DNA and Chromosome Structure
12.1: DNA Structure
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
12.3: Homologous Chromosomes and Sexual Reproduction
13: DNA Replication
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
13.3: DNA Repair
14: Mutations
14.1: How do genes direct the production of proteins?
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
14.3: Introduction to Genetic Disorders
14.4: Do all mutations affect health and development?
14.5: Types of Mutations
14.6: Multifactorial Disorders and Genetic Predispositions
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or Chromosomes
15: Protein Synthesis
15.1: The Genetic Code
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing
15.5: Translation
15.6: Optional Section - Micropigs
16: Gene Regulation
16.1: Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene Expression
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
16.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
16.5: Eukaryotic Translational and Post-Translational Regulation
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
17: Meiosis - Sexual Reproduction
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
17.2: Meiosis I
17.3: Meiosis II
17.4: Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
18: Patterns of Inheritance
18.1: Mendelian Genetics

318.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics o f Heredity
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
18.4: Monohybrid Cross and the Punnett Square
18.5: Laws of Inheritance
18.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance
18.7: Multiple Alleles
18.8: Sex-Linked Traits
18.9: Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent Assortme nt
18.10: Epistasis
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares
19.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait
19.4: Yellow fur color - a recessive trait
19.5: Epistasis - the relationship between black, brown, and yellow fur
19.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and epistasis
19.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend
19.8: White spotting - when there's more than two alleles
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder
19.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together
19.11: KIT - embryonic lethality
19.12: It's not all in the genes - the effect of environm ent
19.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one tr ait
20: Biotechnology
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR
20.2: Cloning
20.3: Genetic Engineering
20.4: Mapping Genomes
20.5: Applying Genomics
20.6: Proteomics
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
Thumbnail: DNA double helix. (Public Domain; NIH - Genome Resear ch Institute via Wikimedia Commons).
BIOLOGY 212: Genetics is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
12: DNA and Chromosome Structure
Discuss the potential implications of mutations at cellu lar, organismal, and evolutionary levels.
Describe the structure of DNA and the process of DNA replicat ion.
DNA is a nucleic acid, which is one of the four biologic al macromolecules that you began learning about in BI211. Recall that
nucleic acids are made up of monomers called nucleotid es joined together by strong covalent bonds.
All living things store genetic information using nucl eic acids: either DNA or a related molecule called RNA. Different organisms
have different ways of packaging and storing DNA inside the ir cells.
12.1: DNA Structure
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
12.3: Homologous Chromosomes and Sexual Reproduction
Thumbnail: The 46 chromosomes of a human male. (Public Domain; HYan Wong via Wikimedia Commons).
12: DNA and Chromosome Structure is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Outcomes

12.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6998912.1: DNA Structure
In the 1950s, Francis Crick and James Watson worked toget her to determine the structure of DNA at the Universit y of Cambridge,
England. Other scientists like Linus Pauling and Maurice Wilkins were also actively exploring this field. Paul ing had discovered
the secondary structure of proteins using X-ray crystal lography. In Wilkins’ lab, researcher Rosalind Franklin was using X-ray
diffraction methods to understand the structure of DNA. Watson and Crick were able to piece together the puz zle of the DNA
molecule on the basis of Franklin’s data because Crick ha d also studied X-ray diffraction (Figure).
Figure: The work of pioneering scientists (a) James Watson, Franc is Crick, and Maclyn McCarty led to our present day
understanding of DNA. Scientist Rosalind Franklin discov ered (b) the X-ray diffraction pattern of DNA, whic h helped to elucidate
its double helix structure. (credit a: modification o f work by Marjorie McCarty, Public Library of Scienc e)
Unfortunately, Watson and Crick gained access to Frankli n’s data without her knowledge or approval. In 1962, J ames Watson,
Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins were awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine. Unfortunately, by then Franklin had died (of
ovarian cancer, likely caused by exposure to X-rays), and Nobel prizes are not awarded posthumously (afte r death). This is actually
a really interesting story of “sexism in the sciences” – there’s a movie called “The Secret of Photo 51” th at you can find on
YouTube if you’re interested.
Based on Rosalind Franklin’s X-ray diffraction photog raph, and work by other scientists, Watson and Crick proposed that DNA is
made up of two strands of nucleotides that are twisted around each other to form a right-h anded helix. The nucleotides are joined
together in a chain by covalent bonds known as phosphodiester bonds. Scientists already knew that nucleotides contain the same
three important components: a nitrogenous base, a deoxyribose (5-carbon sugar), and a phosphate group (Figure). The
nucleotide is named depending on the nitrogenous bas e: adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), and guanine (G). Adenine and
guanine are both purines, while cytosine and thymine are pyrimidines. The purines have a double ring structure with a sixmembered ring fused to a five-membered ring. Pyrimidi nes are smaller in size; they have a single six-memb ered ring structure. One
good way to remember this is that cytosine, thymine, and py rimidine all contain the letter “y”.
Watson and Crick’s model proposed that the two strand s of nucleotides interact through base pairing betwee n the nucleotides: A
pairs with T and G pairs with C. Adenine and thymine are complementary base pairs, and cytosine and guanine are also
complementary base pairs. The base pairs are stabili zed by hydrogen bonds (a weak type of bond that forms between partially
positive and partially negative atoms). Adenine and t hymine form two hydrogen bonds and cytosine and guani ne form three
hydrogen bonds. Since a purine is “2 rings” across and a pyrimidine is “1 ring” across (Figure), the diameter of the DNA
double helix remains constant at “3 rings” (Figure).

12.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69989
Figure: Each nucleotide is made up of a sugar, a phosphate gr oup, and a nitrogenous base. The sugar is deoxyribose in DNA
and ribose in RNA.
The carbon atoms of the five-carbon sugar are number ed in order starting from the carbon connected to th e nitrogenous base: 1′, 2′,
3′, 4′, and 5′ (1′ is read as “one prime”). We don’t p articularly care about the 1′, 2′, or 4′ positions – you’ll never hear them
mentioned again. At the 3′ position, there is always a hydroxyl (OH) group that is a part of the sugar. The 5 ′ carbon is attached to a
phosphate group. When nucleotides are joined togeth er into a chain, the 5′ phosphate of one nucleotide is attached to the 3′
hydroxyl group of the next nucleotide, thereby form ing a 5′-3′ phosphodiester bond. What this means is that when nucleotides are
joined together in a chain, there will always be a fr ee 3′ OH group (from the sugar) at one end of the chai n and a free 5′ phosphate
at the other end (Figure).
Figure: Structure of DNA. Notice that adenine (a purine) an d thymine (a pyrimidine) are connected together wit h 2
hydrogen bonds, while guanine (a purine) and cytosine (a pyrimidine) are connected by three hydrogen bon ds. There is a 5′ and 3′
end to both chains of nucleotides, which are antipara llel to each other. Photo credit Madeline Price Ball; Wikimedia.
The two strands are anti-parallel in nature; that is, the 3′ end of one strand points in one direction, while the 5′ end of the other
strand points in that direction (Figure). The sugar and phosphate of the nucleotides form the backbone of the structure, while
the nitrogenous bases are stacked inside. Each base pair is separated from the other base pair by a distance of 0.34 nm (nanometer:

12.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/699891 x 10 meters), and each turn of the helix measures 3.4 nm. Therefore, ten base pairs are present per tur n of the helix. The
diameter of the DNA double helix is 2 nm, and it is uni form throughout. Only the pairing between a purine an d pyrimidine can
explain the uniform diameter (3 “rings” across). Th e twisting of the two strands around each other result s in the formation of
uniformly spaced major and minor grooves (Figure). Th e major and minor grooves are very important for pr otein binding to
DNA, but we will not be discussing this more specifically.
Figure: DNA has (a) a double helix structure and (b) phosphod iester bonds. The (c) major and minor grooves are bind ing
sites for DNA binding proteins during processes such as tra nscription (the copying of RNA from DNA) and replica tion.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. December 21, 2017 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:QhGQhr4x@6/Biologica lMolecules
12.1: DNA Structure is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.-9

12.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6999012.2: DNA organization inside a cell
DNA Organization in Prokaryotes
A cell’s DNA, packaged as a double-stranded DNA molecule, is called its genome. In prokaryotes, the genome is composed of a
single, double-stranded DNA molecule in the form of a loop or circle (Figure). The region in the cell co ntaining this genetic
material is called a nucleoid (remember that prokaryotes do not have a separate membrane-bound nucleus). Some prokaryotes also
have smaller loops of DNA called plasmids that are not essential for normal growth. Bacteria c an exchange these plasmids with
other bacteria, sometimes receiving beneficial new ge nes that the recipient can add to their chromosomal DNA. Antibiotic
resistance is one trait that often spreads through a ba cterial colony through plasmid exchange.
Figure: Bacterial DNA and plasmids are both circular. Photo credit Spaully; Wikipedia.
The size of the genome in one of the most well-studied prokaryotes, E.coli, is 4.6 million base pairs (which would be
approximately 1.1 mm in length, if cut and stretched out). So how does this fit inside a small bacterial ce ll? The DNA is twisted by
what is known as supercoiling. Supercoiled DNA is coiled m ore tightly than would be typically be found in a ce ll (more than 10
nucleotides per twist of the helix). If you visualize twisting a rope until it twists back on itself, you h ave a pretty good visual of
supercoiled DNA. This process allows the DNA to be compacted int o the small space inside a bacteria.
DNA Organization in Eukaryotes
Eukaryotes have much more DNA than prokaryotes. For example, a n E. coli bacteria contains roughly 3 million base pairs of DNA,
while a human contains roughly 3 billion. In eukaryotes such as humans and other animals, th e genome consists of several doublestranded linear DNA molecules (Figure), which are locat ed inside a membrane-bound nucleus. Each species of e ukaryotes
has a characteristic number of chromosomes in the nu clei (plural of nucleus) of its cells. A normal hum an gamete (sperm or egg)
contains 23 chromosomes. A normal human body cell, o r somatic cell, contains 46 chromosomes (one set of 23 from t he egg and
one set of 23 from the sperm; Figure). The letter n is used to represent a single set of chromosomes; t herefore, a gamete
(sperm or egg) is designated 1 n, and is called a haploid cell. Somatic cells (body cells) are designated 2 n and are called diploid
cells.
Figure: There are 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes in a fema le human somatic cell. The condensed chromosomes are
viewed within the nucleus (top), removed from a cell in mitosis and spread out on a slide (right), and arti ficially arranged according
to length (left); an arrangement like this is called a karyotype. In this image, the chromosomes were expose d to fluorescent stains
for differentiation of the different chromosomes. A m ethod of staining called “chromosome painting” employ s fluorescent dyes that
highlight chromosomes in different colors. (credit: Na tional Human Genome Project/NIH)
Matched pairs of chromosomes in a diploid organism are called homologous (“same knowledge”) chromosomes. Of a pair of
homologous chromosomes, one came from the egg and the second came from the sperm. Homologous chromosomes are the same
length and have specific nucleotide segments called genes in exactly the same location, or locus. Genes, the functional units of
chromosomes, determine specific characteristics by co ding for specific proteins. Traits are the variations o f those characteristics.
For example, hair color is a characteristic with traits tha t are blonde, brown, or black.

12.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69990Each copy of a homologous pair of chromosomes origi nates from a different parent; therefore, the sequen ce of DNA present in the
two genes on a pair of homologous chromosomes is not necessarily identical, despite the same genes being p resent in the same
locations on the chromosome. These different versions of a gene that contain different sequences of DNA are called alleles.
If you look at Figure, you can see a pair of homolog ous chromosomes. The chromosome shown in the figure is chromosome
15. The HERC2 gene is located on this chromosome. This gene is one of at least three genes that helps dete rmine eye color. Each
person inherits two copies of the HERC2 gene: one fro m the egg and one from the sperm. However, the alleles of the HERC2 gene
that they inherit can be different. In the figure, t he cell containing this homologous pair of chromosom es contains one blue allele
and one brown allele.
Figure: Homologous pair of chromosome 15s, showing the locatio n of HERC2 gene. Two different alleles of this gene a re
shown in either blue or brown.
The variation of individuals within a species is due t o the specific combination of the genes inherited fro m both parents. Even a
slightly altered sequence of nucleotides within a gen e can result in an alternative trait. For example, th ere are three possible gene
sequences (alleles) on the human chromosome that cod e for blood type: sequence A, sequence B, and sequenc e O. Because all
diploid human cells have two copies of the chromosome that determines blood type, the blood type (the tr ait) is determined by
which two versions of the marker gene are inherited. It is possible to have two copies of the same allele on bo th homologous
chromosomes, with one on each (for example, AA, BB, or OO), or two different alleles, such as AB.
Minor variations of traits, such as blood type, eye co lor, and handedness, contribute to the natural variati on found within a species.
However, if the entire DNA sequence from any pair of hum an homologous chromosomes is compared, the difference is less than
one percent. The sex chromosomes, X and Y, are the single exception to the rule of homologous chromosome unif ormity: Other
than a small amount of homology that is necessary to accurately produce gametes, the genes found on the X a nd Y chromosomes
are different.
Eukaryotic Chromosomal Structure and Compaction
If the DNA from all 46 chromosomes in a human cell nuc leus was laid out end to end, it would measure approxi mately two meters;
however, its diameter would be only 2 nm. Considering t hat the size of a typical human cell is about 10 µm (100,000 cells lined up
to equal one meter), DNA must be tightly packaged to f it in the cell’s nucleus. At the same time, it must al so be readily accessible
for the genes to be expressed. During some stages of th e cell cycle, the long strands of DNA are condensed in to compact
chromosomes.
Eukaryotes, whose chromosomes each consist of a linear DNA molecule, employ a complex type of packing strategy to fit their
DNA inside the nucleus (Figure). At the most basic lev el, DNA is wrapped around proteins known as histones to form
structures called nucleosomes. The histones are evolutionarily conserved proteins that form an octamer of eight histone proteins
attached together. DNA, which is negatively charged becau se of the phosphate groups, is wrapped tightly around the histone core,
which has an overall positive charge. This nucleosom e is linked to the next one with the help of a linke r DNA. This is also known
as the “beads on a string” structure. This is further compacted into a 30 nm fiber, which is the diameter of the structure. At the
metaphase stage, the chromosomes are at their most com pact, are approximately 700 nm in width, and are foun d in association with
scaffold proteins.

12.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/69990
Figure: Double-stranded DNA wraps around histone proteins to f orm nucleosomes that have the appearance of “beads on a
string.” The nucleosomes are coiled into a 30-nm chrom atin fiber. When a cell undergoes mitosis, the duplica ted chromosomes
condense even further.
DNA replicates in the S phase of interphase. After repl ication, the chromosomes are composed of two linked sister chromatids
(Figure). This means that the only time chromosomes look lik e an “X” is after DNA replication has taken place and the
chromosomes have condensed. During the majority of the cell’s life, chromosomes are composed of only one copy and they are not
tightly compacted into chromosomes. When fully compac t, the pairs of identically packed chromosomes are b ound to each other by
cohesin proteins. The connection between the sister chr omatids is closest in a region called the centromere. The conjoined sister
chromatids, with a diameter of about 1 µm, are visible under a light microscope. The centromeric region is highly condensed and
thus will appear as a constricted area. In Figure, it is shown as an oval because it is easier to draw that way.
Figure: Result of DNA replication in eukaryotes. In body cel ls, there are two copies of each chromosome (one from each
parent). After replication, two identical sister chro matids remain connected at the centromere (shown as an oval).
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. December 21, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...and-Sequencing
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

12.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/6999112.3: Homologous Chromosomes and Sexual Reproduction
It’s very important to keep chromosome number in co ntext as we discuss genetics and inheritance. As discussed in the last section,
the somatic cells of a human are diploid (2 n; contain two copies of each chromosome, creating hom ologous pairs). In Figure,
both the adult humans are diploid for chromosome 15, along with the other 22 pairs of chromosomes in huma ns, which are not
shown for simplicity. When gametes (eggs or sperm) are created, those cells are haploid (1 n) and contain only one copy of each
chromosome. During fertilization, the male and female gametes fuse together creating a fertilized egg, or zygote, which again
contains two copies of each chromosome and is therefo re diploid. The zygote goes through millions of cell divisions to eventually
become a baby and then an adult.
Figure: Sexual life cycle of humans.
12.3: Homologous Chromosomes and Sexual Reproduction is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
13: DNA Replication
Discuss the potential implications of mutations at cellu lar, organismal, and evolutionary levels.
Describe the structure of DNA and the process of DNA replicat ion.
When a cell divides, it is important that each daug hter cell receives an identical copy of the DNA. This i s accomplished by the
process of DNA replication. The replication of DNA occurs before the cell begins t o divide into two separate cells.
The discovery and characterization of the structure of the double helix provided a hint as to how DNA is cop ied. Recall that
adenine nucleotides pair with thymine nucleotides, and cytosine with guanine. This means that the two stran ds are complementary
to each other. For example, a strand of DNA with a nucleo tide sequence of 3′-AGTCATGA-5′ will have a complementar y strand
with the sequence 5′-TCAGTACT-3′ (Figure). Recall that the two strands of the double helix ar e anti-parallel as you look at
the order of bases in these two sequences.
Figure: The two strands of DNA are complementary, meaning th e sequence of bases in one strand can be used to create the
correct sequence of bases in the other strand.
Because of the complementarity of the two strands, ha ving one strand means that it is possible to recreate the other strand. During
DNA replication, the two strands are separated and the missing bases are filled in on each side (Figure). Each strand of DNA
serves as a template to produce the missing strand. The new strand will be complementary to the parental or “old” strand. Each new
double helix consists of one parental strand and on e new daughter strand. This is known as semiconservative replication. When
two DNA copies are formed, they have an identical sequenc e of nucleotide bases and are divided equally into two da ughter cells.
Figure: The semiconservative model of DNA replication is shown. Gray indicates the original DNA strands, and blue in dicates
newly synthesized DNA.Learning Outcomes

213.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
13.3: DNA Repair
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:2ousESf0@5/DNAReplication
Thumbnail: DNA replication fork. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Madeleine Price Ball via Wikimedia Commons).
13: DNA Replication is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7000913.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
The prokaryotic chromosome is a circular molecule wi th a less extensive coiling structure than eukaryotic chromosomes. The
eukaryotic chromosome is linear and highly coiled ar ound proteins. While there are many similarities in th e DNA replication
process, these structural differences necessitate some differences in the DNA replication process in these two life forms. DNA
replication in prokaryotes has been extensively stud ied, so we will learn the basic process of prokaryotic DNA replication, then
focus on the differences between prokaryotes and eukaryot es.
How does the replication machinery know where to start? It turns out that there are specific nucleotide sequ ences called origins of
replication where replication begins. E. coli has a single origin of replication on its one chromos ome, as do most prokaryotes
(Figure). The origin of replication is approximately 245 b ase pairs long and is rich in AT sequences. This sequ ence of base
pairs is recognized by certain proteins that bind to this site. An enzyme called helicase unwinds the DNA by breaking the hydrogen
bonds between the nitrogenous base pairs. ATP hydrolysi s is required for this process because it requires ene rgy. As the DNA opens
up, Y-shaped structures called replication forks are formed (Figure). Two replication forks are formed at the origin of
replication and these get extended bi-directionally as replication proceeds. Single-strand binding proteins (Figure) coat the
single strands of DNA near the replication fork to prevent the single-stranded DNA from winding back into a double heli x.
Figure: DNA replication in prokaryotes, which have one circ ular chromosome.
The next important enzyme is DNA polymerase III, also known as DNA pol III, which adds nucleotides one by one to the growing
DNA chain (Figure). The addition of nucleotides requi res energy; this energy is obtained from the nucleoti des that have three
phosphates attached to them. ATP structurally is an a denine nucleotide which has three phosphate groups att ached; breaking off the
third phosphate releases energy. In addition to ATP, t here are also TTP, CTP, and GTP. Each of these is ma de up of the
corresponding nucleotide with three phosphates attache d. When the bond between the phosphates is broken, th e energy released is
used to form the phosphodiester bond between the incoming nucleotide and the existing chain.
In prokaryotes, three main types of polymerases are k nown: DNA pol I, DNA pol II, and DNA pol III. DNA pol III is t he enzyme
required for DNA synthesis; DNA pol I is used later in the process and DNA pol II is used primarily for repair (this is another
irritating example of naming that was done based on the o rder of discovery rather than an order that makes sense).
DNA polymerase is able to add nucleotides only in the 5′ to 3′ direction (a new DNA strand can be only extend ed in this direction).
It requires a free 3′-OH group (located on the sugar) to which it can add the next nucleotide by forming a phosphodiester bond
between the 3′-OH end and the 5′ phosphate of the next nucleotide. This essentially means that it cannot ad d nucleotides if a free
3′-OH group is not available. Then how does it add the fi rst nucleotide? The problem is solved with the help o f a primer that
provides the free 3′-OH end. Another enzyme, RNA primase, synthesizes an RNA primer that is about five to ten nucleotides long
and complementary to the DNA. RNA primase does not requi re a free 3′-OH group. Because this sequence primes th e DNA
synthesis, it is appropriately called the primer. DNA polymerase can now extend this RNA primer, adding nucl eotides one by one
that are complementary to the template strand (Figure).

13.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70009
Figure: A replication fork is formed when helicase separates t he DNA strands at the origin of replication. The DNA tends to
become more highly coiled ahead of the replication fork. Topoisomerase breaks and reforms DNA’s phosphate ba ckbone ahead of
the replication fork, thereby relieving the pressure that results from this supercoiling. Single-strand bindi ng proteins bind to the
single-stranded DNA to prevent the helix from re-form ing. Primase synthesizes an RNA primer. DNA polymerase I II uses this
primer to synthesize the daughter DNA strand. On the l eading strand, DNA is synthesized continuously, whereas o n the lagging
strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches called Okaza ki fragments. DNA polymerase I replaces the RNA primer with DNA.
DNA ligase seals the gaps between the Okazaki fragments, joining the fragments into a single DNA molecule. (c redit: modification
of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
The replication fork moves at the rate of 1000 nucle otides per second. DNA polymerase can only extend in the 5′ to 3′ direction,
which poses a slight problem at the replication fork. As we know, the DNA double helix is anti-parallel; that is, one strand is in the
5′ to 3′ direction and the other is oriented in the 3′ to 5′ direction. One strand, which is complementa ry to the 3′ to 5′ parental DNA
strand, is synthesized continuously towards the replica tion fork because the polymerase can add nucleotides in this direction. This
continuously synthesized strand is known as the leading strand. The other strand, complementary to the 5′ to 3′ pa rental DNA, is
extended away from the replication fork, in small fr agments known as Okazaki fragments, each requiring a primer to start the
synthesis. Okazaki fragments are named after the Japa nese scientist who first discovered them. The strand wi th the Okazaki
fragments is known as the lagging strand.
The leading strand can be extended by one primer al one, whereas the lagging strand needs a new primer for ea ch of the short
Okazaki fragments. The overall direction of the lagg ing strand will be 3′ to 5′, and that of the leading strand 5′ to 3′. A protein
called the sliding clamp holds the DNA polymerase in place as it continues to a dd nucleotides. The sliding clamp is a ring-shaped
protein that binds to the DNA and holds the polymerase in place. Topoisomerase prevents the over-winding of the DNA double
helix ahead of the replication fork as the DNA is open ing up; it does so by causing temporary nicks in th e DNA helix and then
resealing it. As synthesis proceeds, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA pol I, which breaks down the RNA and fi lls the gaps
with DNA nucleotides. The nicks that remain between the newly synthesized DNA (that replaced the RNA primer) an d the
previously synthesized DNA are sealed by the enzyme DNA ligase that catalyzes the formation of phosphodiester lin kage between
the 3′-OH end of one nucleotide and the 5′ phosphate end of t he other fragment.
I think this process is almost impossible to visualiz e from reading text. I strongly recommend that you wa tch a couple of
animations / videos like the one available here. There are additional links in Blackboard.Lisa’s Note

13.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70009Once the chromosome has been completely replicated, the two DNA copies move into two different cells during cell division. The
process of DNA replication can be summarized as follows:
1. DNA unwinds at the origin of replication.
2. Helicase opens up the DNA-forming replication forks; the se are extended in both directions.
3. Single-strand binding proteins coat the DNA around the re plication fork to prevent rewinding of the DNA.
4. Topoisomerase binds at the region ahead of the replica tion fork to prevent supercoiling (over-winding).
5. Primase synthesizes RNA primers complementary to the DNA stran d.
6. DNA polymerase III starts adding nucleotides to the 3′- OH (sugar) end of the primer.
7. Elongation of both the lagging and the leading stran d continues.
8. RNA primers are removed and gaps are filled with DNA by DNA pol I.
9. The gaps between the DNA fragments are sealed by DNA ligase.
Table: The enzymes involved in prokaryotic DNA replication and the functi ons of each.
Prokaryotic DNA Replication: Enzymes and Their Function
Enzyme/protein Specific Function
DNA pol IExonuclease activity removes RNA primer and replaces wit h
newly synthesized DNA
DNA pol II Repair function
DNA pol III Main enzyme that adds nucleotides in the 5′-3′ direct ion
HelicaseOpens the DNA helix by breaking hydrogen bonds between the
nitrogenous bases
LigaseSeals the gaps between the Okazaki fragments to create on e
continuous DNA strand
Primase Synthesizes RNA primers needed to start replication
Sliding ClampHelps to hold the DNA polymerase in place when nucleoti des are
being added
TopoisomeraseHelps relieve the stress on DNA when unwinding by causing
breaks and then resealing the DNA
Single-strand binding proteins (SSB) Binds to single-strande d DNA to avoid DNA rewinding back.
DNA replication has been extremely well-studied in prok aryotes, primarily because of the small size of the gen ome and large
number of variants available. Escherichia coli has 4.6 million base pairs in a single circular chromo some, and all of it gets
DNA ReplicationDNA Replication

13.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70009replicated in approximately 42 minutes, starting from a single origin of replication and proceeding aroun d the chromosome in both
directions. This means that approximately 1000 nucleo tides are added per second. The process is much more rapid than in
eukaryotes.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:2ousESf0@5/DNAReplication
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001013.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
The essential steps of replication are the same as in prokaryotes. Starting replication is more complex i n eukaryotes. At the origin
of replication, a pre-replication complex is made wi th other initiator proteins. Other proteins are then r ecruited to start the
replication process. The overall process is the same, although differently named enzymes fulfill the same function. For example,
DNA pol III is used for the majority of replication i n prokaryotes, while in eukaryotes the leading strand is continuously
synthesized by the enzyme pol δ, and the lagging strand is synthesized by pol ε. We are focusing on the enzymes used in
prokaryotic replication, so don’t worry about these name di fferences.
Here are the important differences between prokaryotic a nd eukaryotic replication:
Table: Differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic replicat ion
Property Prokaryotes Eukaryotes
Origin of replication Single Multiple
Rate of replication 1000 nucleotides/s 50 to 100 nucle otides/s
DNA polymerase types 5 14
DNA packaging supercoiling wound around histones
Telomerase Not present Present
Origins and rate of replication
Eukaryotic genomes are much more complex and larger in size than prokaryotic genomes. The human genome h as three billion
base pairs per haploid set of chromosomes, and 6 bil lion base pairs are replicated during the S phase of the cell cycle. This means
that there must be multiple origins of replication on the eukaryotic chromosome in order for all the DNA to be replicated in a
timely manner; humans can have up to 100,000 origin s of replication. The rate of replication is approxi mately 100 nucleotides per
second, much slower than prokaryotic replication.
DNA polymerase types
The number of DNA polymerases in eukaryotes is much mo re than prokaryotes: 14 are known, of which five are k nown to have
major roles during replication and have been well stu died. They are known as pol α, pol β, pol γ, pol δ, and pol ε. I won’t ever ask
you the names of these polymerases – learn the names of the prokaryotic polymerases.
DNA packaging
Eukaryotic DNA is wound around proteins known as histones to form structures called nucleosomes. The DNA must b e made
accessible in order for DNA replication to proceed. T he chromatin (the complex between DNA and proteins) may undergo some
chemical modifications, so that the DNA may be able t o slide off the histones or otherwise be accessible to the enzymes of the
DNA replication machinery. Prokaryotes do not package the ir DNA by wrapping it around histones.
Telomere replication
Unlike prokaryotic chromosomes, eukaryotic chromosom es are linear. As you’ve learned, the enzyme DNA pol can add nucleotides
only in the 5′ to 3′ direction. In the leading stra nd, synthesis continues until the end of the chromos ome is reached. On the lagging
strand, DNA is synthesized in short stretches, each of whi ch is initiated by a separate primer. When the replic ation fork reaches the
end of the linear chromosome, there is no place for a primer to be made for the DNA fragment to be copied a t the end of the
chromosome. These ends thus remain unpaired, and over tim e these ends may get progressively shorter as cells continu e to divide.
The ends of the linear chromosomes are known as telomeres, which have repetitive sequences that do not code for a particular
gene. These telomeres protect the genes that are lo cated on the chromosome from getting deleted as cell s continue to divide. In
humans, a six base pair sequence, TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times. The discovery of the enzyme telomerase (Figure
) helped in the understanding of how chromosome ends are maintained. The telomerase enzyme contains a cat alytic part and a

13.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70010built-in RNA template. It attaches to the end of the chromosome, and complementary bases to the RNA templat e are added on the
3′ end of the DNA strand. Once the 3′ end of the laggi ng strand template is sufficiently elongated, DNA poly merase can add the
nucleotides complementary to the ends of the chromosomes. Thus, the ends of the chromosomes are replicated.
Figure: The ends of linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomerase enzyme.
Telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adul t stem cells. It is not active in adult somatic cell s. For her discovery of
telomerase and its action, Elizabeth Blackburn (Figure) received the Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology in 20 09.
Figure: Elizabeth Blackburn, 2009 Nobel Laureate, is the sci entist who discovered how telomerase works. (credit: US
Embassy Sweden)
Telomerase and Aging
Cells that undergo cell division continue to have t heir telomeres shortened because most somatic cells do not make telomerase.
This essentially means that telomere shortening is assoc iated with aging. With the advent of modern medicine, preventative health
care, and healthier lifestyles, the human life span ha s increased, and there is an increasing demand for peo ple to look younger and
have a better quality of life as they grow older.
In 2010, scientists found that telomerase can reverse some age-related conditions in mice. This may have potential in regenerative
medicine (Jaskelioff, 2011). Telomerase-deficient mice were used in these studies; these mice have tissue at rophy, stem cell
depletion, organ system failure, and impaired tissue i njury responses. Telomerase reactivation in these mi ce caused extension of
telomeres, reduced DNA damage, reversed neurodegenerat ion, and improved the function of the testes, spleen, a nd intestines. Thus,
telomere reactivation may have potential for treating a ge-related diseases in humans.
Cancer is characterized by uncontrolled cell divisi on of abnormal cells. The cells accumulate mutations, p roliferate uncontrollably,
and can migrate to different parts of the body thro ugh a process called metastasis. Scientists have observed that cancerous cells
have considerably shortened telomeres and that telom erase is active in these cells. Interestingly, only after the telomeres were
shortened in the cancer cells did the telomerase be come active. If the action of telomerase in these ce lls can be inhibited by drugs
during cancer therapy, then the cancerous cells could pote ntially be stopped from further division.
References

13.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70010Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:2ousESf0@5/DNAReplication
Jaskelioff et al., 2011 Telomerase reactivation revers es tissue degeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice. Nature 469: 102-7.
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

13.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001113.3: DNA Repair
DNA replication is a highly accurate process, but mista kes can occasionally occur, such as a DNA polymerase i nserting a wrong
base. Uncorrected mistakes may sometimes lead to serio us consequences, such as cancer. Repair mechanisms correc t the mistakes.
In rare cases, mistakes are not corrected, leading to mutati ons; in other cases, repair enzymes are themselves muta ted or defective.
Most of the mistakes during DNA replication are promptly corrected by DNA polymerase by proofreading the base that has been
just added (Figure). In proofreading, the DNA pol read s the newly added base before adding the next one, s o a correction can
be made. The polymerase checks whether the newly added base has paired correctly with the base in the templat e strand. If it is the
right base, the next nucleotide is added. If an incorr ect base has been added, the enzyme makes a cut at the phosphodiester bond
and releases the wrong nucleotide. This is performed by the exonuclease action of DNA pol III. Once the inco rrect nucleotide has
been removed, a new one will be added again (Figure).
Figure: Proofreading by DNA polymerase corrects errors during replication. Photo credit Madeline Price Ball; Wikimedia.
Some errors are not corrected during replication, bu t are instead corrected after replication is complet ed; this type of repair is
known as mismatch repair (Figure). The enzymes recognize the incorrectly added nucl eotide and excise it; this is then

13.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70011replaced by the correct base. If this remains uncorr ected, it may lead to more permanent damage. How do mi smatch repair enzymes
recognize which of the two bases is the incorrect one? In E. coli, after replication, the nitrogenous base adenine acq uires a methyl
group (CH); the parental DNA strand will have methyl g roups, whereas the newly synthesized strand lacks them. Thus, DNA
polymerase is able to remove the wrongly incorporated bases from the newly synthesized, non-methylated stra nd. In eukaryotes,
the mechanism is not very well understood, but it is be lieved to involve recognition of unsealed nicks in th e new strand, as well as
a short-term continuing association of some of the r eplication proteins with the new daughter strand afte r replication has
completed.
Figure: In mismatch repair, the incorrectly added base is det ected after replication. The mismatch repair protein s detect this
base and remove it from the newly synthesized strand by nuclease action. The gap is now filled with the corr ectly paired base.
In another type of repair mechanism, nucleotide excision repair, enzymes replace incorrect bases by making a cut o n both the 3′
and 5′ ends of the incorrect base (Figure). The segment of DNA is removed and replaced with the c orrectly paired
nucleotides by the action of DNA pol. Once the bases ar e filled in, the remaining gap is sealed with a phosph odiester linkage
catalyzed by DNA ligase. This repair mechanism is often e mployed when UV exposure causes the formation of thymin e-thymine
dimers (the small – connecting the two Ts in Figure).
Figure: Nucleotide excision repairs thymine dimers. When expo sed to UV, thymines lying adjacent to each other can form
thymine dimers. In normal cells, they are excised and replaced.
A well-studied example of mistakes not being correcte d is seen in people suffering from xeroderma pigment osa (Figure).
Affected individuals have skin that is highly sensitiv e to UV rays from the sun. When individuals are expo sed to UV, pyrimidine
dimers, especially those of thymine, are formed; peo ple with xeroderma pigmentosa are not able to repair the damage. These are
not repaired because of a defect in the nucleotide excision repair enzymes, whereas in normal individua ls, the thymine dimers are
excised and the defect is corrected. The thymine dime rs distort the structure of the DNA double helix, and this may cause problems
during DNA replication. People with xeroderma pigmentosa have a higher risk of contracting skin cancer than those who don’t
have the condition.3

13.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70011
Figure: Xeroderma pigmentosa is a condition in which thymine dimerization from exposure to UV is not repaired. Ex posure
to sunlight results in skin lesions. (credit: James Halpern et al.)
Errors during DNA replication are not the only reason why mutations arise in DNA. Mutations, variations in the nucleotide
sequence of a genome, can also occur because of dama ge to DNA. Such mutations may be of two types: induced o r spontaneous.
Induced mutations are those that result from an exposure to a mutagen: chemicals, UV rays, x-rays, or some other environment al
agent. Spontaneous mutations occur without any exposure to any environmental age nt; they are a result of natural reactions taking
place within the body.
Mutations may have a wide range of effects. Some mutati ons are not expressed; these are known as silent mutations. Other
mutations can have serious effects on the organism (such as the mutation that causes xeroderma pigmentosa).
Mutations in repair genes have been known to cause can cer. Many mutated repair genes have been implicated i n certain forms of
pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and colorectal cance r. Mutations can affect either somatic cells or game tes. If many mutations
accumulate in a somatic cell, they may lead to probl ems such as the uncontrolled cell division observed in cancer. If a mutation
takes place in a gamete, the mutation can be passed on t o the next generation.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. December 21, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...m@7/DNA-Repair
13.3: DNA Repair is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
14: Mutations
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe how mutations affect protein synthesis and it s products.
In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the major purpo se of DNA is to provide the information needed to cons truct the proteins
necessary for the cell to perform all of its functio ns. Proteins are large, complex molecules that play many critical roles in the body.
They do most of the work in cells and are required for the structure, function, and regulation of the body’s tissue s and organs.
The information to make proteins is stored in an orga nism’s DNA. Each protein is coded for by a specific sectio n of DNA called a
gene. A gene is the section of DNA required to produce one protein. Genes are typically hundreds or thousands of base pairs in
length because they code for proteins made of hundreds or thousands of amino acids.
A gene mutation is a permanent alteration in the DNA sequence that mak es up a gene, such that the sequence differs from what is
found in most people. Mutations range in size; they can affect anywhere from a single DNA building block (base pair) to a large
segment of a chromosome that includes multiple genes.
Since the DNA sequence found within a gene controls pro tein synthesis, if the DNA sequence is altered, this can alter the amino
acid sequence within a protein. This can have a variety of potential effects, which will be discussed in this chapter.
Figure: The process of protein synthesis first creates an mRNA co py of a DNA sequence during the process of transcriptio n.
This mRNA is translated into a sequence of amino acids b y the ribosome. In this way, the information encoded in the sequence of
bases in the DNA making up a gene is used to produce a protein.
14.1: How do genes direct the production of proteins?
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
14.3: Introduction to Genetic Disorders
14.4: Do all mutations affect health and development?
14.5: Types of Mutations
14.6: Multifactorial Disorders and Genetic Predispositions
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or Chromosomes
Thumbnail: Blue lobster. (CC BY-SA 3.0 / cropped from origina l; Steven G. Johnson via Wikimedia Commons).
14: Mutations is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

14.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001214.1: How do genes direct the production of proteins?
In order to understand the potential effect of mutat ions, we must first have a background in how the info rmation in DNA is used to
produce a protein. Each protein is coded for by a gen e, which is typically hundreds or thousands of base pai rs in length. The
information in the gene specifies the order in which the amino acids will be assembled into the protein.
Figure: Genes, which are carried on (a) chromosomes, are line arly organized instructions for making the RNA and pr otein
molecules that are necessary for all of the processes of life. The (b) interleukin-2 protein and (c) alpha-2 u-globulin protein are just
two examples of the array of different molecular stru ctures that are encoded by genes. (credit “chromosome: National Human
Genome Research Institute; credit “interleukin-2”: Ra min Herati/Created from PDB 1M47 and rendered with Pymol; credit “alpha2u-globulin”: Darren Logan/rendered with AISMIG)
The journey from gene to protein is complex and tig htly controlled within each cell. It consists of two ma jor steps: transcription
and translation. Together, transcription and translation are known as gene expression.
Transcription
During the process of transcription, the information stored in a gene’s DNA is used as a b lueprint to produce a similar molecule
called RNA (ribonucleic acid) in the cell nucleus. B oth RNA and DNA are made up of a chain of nucleotide b ases, but they have
slightly different chemical properties (Figure).
Both RNA and DNA contain a 5-carbon sugar, but the sugar diffe rs: it is deoxyribose in DNA and ribose in RNA (DNA stands
for deoxyribonucleic acid; RNA stands for ribonucleic a cid).
DNA and RNA also differ in the nitrogenous bases they co ntain. DNA contains A, T, C, and G. RNA contains A, C, and G, but
no thymine. Instead it contains a base called uracil (U).
DNA is almost always double-stranded (a double helix), while RNA is typically single stranded.

14.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70012
Figure: DNA vs RNA. Photo credit Zappys Technology Solution; Flickr.
The type of RNA that contains the information for mak ing a protein is called messenger RNA (mRNA) because it carries the
information, or message, from the DNA out of the nucleu s into the cytoplasm. During transcription, this mRNA copy is made from
a DNA molecule. This is possible because of the base-pa iring rules: A with T (or U) and C with G. The hydrogen bonds connecting
the base pairs in a DNA molecule are broken, and an en zyme creates a chain of RNA nucleotides that correspo nd to the DNA
sequence.
In eukaryotes, transcription occurs in the nucleus (b ecause that’s where the DNA is). In prokaryotes, transcrip tion occurs in the
cytoplasm because there is no nucleus.
RNA Processing
After prokaryotes produce an mRNA, it can be immediatel y translated since both processes occur in the cytopl asm. In fact,
transcription and translation can occur at the same ti me – as an mRNA is being transcribed, it can also begin to be translated.
Eukaryotes require a more complex process since the mRNA must move from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. Addi tionally,
eukaryotic mRNAs are typically modified in several dif ferent ways: portions of the mRNA that do not code fo r amino acids are
removed (“spliced” out), and the 5′ and 3′ ends are m odified to help with recognition and mRNA stability. Af ter these modifications
are made, the mature mRNA is transported to the cytoplasm.
Translation
Translation, the second step in getting from a gene to a protein, takes place in the cytoplasm. The mRNA interacts with a
specialized complex called a ribosome, which “reads” the sequence of mRNA bases. In conjunctio n with a type of RNA called
transfer RNA (tRNA), the protein is assembled according to the instructions in the mRNA molecule. Each seque nce of three bases
in the mRNA, called a codon, usually codes for one particular amino acid. Remembe r that amino acids are the building blocks of
proteins. Protein assembly continues until the riboso me encounters a “stop” codon (a sequence of three ba ses that does not code for
an amino acid).
Recall that ribosomes are located in two different p laces in eukaryotic cells: free-floating in the cyt oplasm and attached to the
rough endoplasmic reticulum. The final destination of t he protein determines where it will be synthesized.

14.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70012
Figure: The Central Dogma – DNA is used to make RNA is used to make protein.
The flow of information from DNA to RNA to proteins is o ne of the fundamental principles of molecular biolog y. It is so important
that it is sometimes called the “central dogma” (Figures and).
Figure: More detail on the central dogma. (“ Overview of Protein Synthesis ” by Becky Boone is licensed under CC BY-SA
2.0)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
“What are proteins and what do they do?” by U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
14.1: How do genes direct the production of proteins? is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001314.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
Gene mutations can be classified in two major ways:
Hereditary mutations are inherited from a parent and are present throughout a p erson’s life in virtually every cell in the body.
These mutations are also called germline mutations beca use they are present in the parent’s egg or sperm cells, whic h are also
called germ cells. When an egg and a sperm cell unite, the resulting fertilized egg cell receives DNA from both par ents. If this
DNA has a mutation, the child that grows from the fertilized egg will have the mutation in each of his or her cells.
Acquired (or somatic) mutations occur at some time during a person’s life and are present o nly in certain cells, not in every
cell in the body. These changes can be caused by environm ental factors such as ultraviolet radiation from the sun, or can occur
if a mistake is made as DNA copies itself during cell division. Acquired mutations in somatic cells (cells other than sperm and
egg cells) cannot be passed on to the next generation.
Figure: The red individual has inherited two mutated allele s of a gene from their parents. This is an example of a hereditary
mutation. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Cburnett via Wikimedia Commons)
Figure: The color variation seen in this tulip is caused by a somatic mutation – one which occurred early in the d evelopment
of this individual flower. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Dmccabe via Wikimedia Commons)
Genetic changes that are described as de novo (new) mutations can be either hereditary or somatic. In some cases, the mutation
occurs in a person’s egg or sperm cell but is not pre sent in any of the person’s other cells. In other cases, t he mutation occurs in the
fertilized egg shortly after the egg and sperm cells unite. It is often impossible to tell exactly when a de novo mutation happened.
As the fertilized egg divides, each resulting cell in the growing embryo will have the mutation. De novo mutations may explain
genetic disorders in which an affected child has a mu tation in every cell in the body but the parents do not, and there is no family
history of the disorder.
Somatic mutations that happen in a single cell early in embryonic development can lead to a situation c alled mosaicism. These
genetic changes are not present in a parent’s egg or sperm cells, or in the fertilized egg, but happen a b it later when the embryo

14.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70013includes several cells. As all the cells divide duri ng growth and development, cells that arise from the c ell with the altered gene will
have the mutation, while other cells will not. Dependi ng on the mutation and how many cells are affected, mosaicism may or may
not cause health problems.
Most disease-causing gene mutations are uncommon in the general population. However, other genetic changes oc cur more
frequently. Genetic alterations that occur in more tha n 1 percent of the population are called polymorphisms. They are common
enough to be considered a normal variation in the DNA. Polymorphisms are responsible for many of the normal differences
between people such as eye color, hair color, and bloo d type. Although many polymorphisms have no negative e ffects on a person’s
health, some of these variations may influence the risk of developing certain disorders.
References
“Mutations and Health” by U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001414.3: Introduction to Genetic Disorders
To function correctly, each cell depends on thousands of proteins to do their jobs in the right places at t he right times. Sometimes,
gene mutations prevent one or more of these proteins from working properly. By changing a gene’s instruct ions for making a
protein, a mutation can cause the protein to malfunc tion or to be missing entirely. When a mutation alte rs a protein that plays a
critical role in the body, it can disrupt normal dev elopment or cause a medical condition. A condition ca used by mutations in one or
more genes is called a genetic disorder.
In some cases, gene mutations are so severe that they p revent an embryo from surviving until birth. These cha nges occur in genes
that are essential for development, and often disrupt the development of an embryo in its earliest stages. Because these mutations
have very serious effects, they are incompatible with l ife.
It is important to note that genes themselves do no t cause disease—genetic disorders are caused by mut ations that make a gene
function improperly. For example, when people say tha t someone has “the cystic fibrosis gene,” they are us ually referring to a
mutated version of the CFTR gene, which causes the disease. All people, including t hose without cystic fibrosis, have a version of
the CFTR gene.
References
“Mutations and Health” by U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
14.3: Introduction to Genetic Disorders is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001514.4: Do all mutations affect health and development?
No; only a small percentage of mutations cause geneti c disorders—most have no impact on health or developme nt. For example,
some mutations alter a gene’s DNA sequence but do not change t he function of the protein made by the gene.
Often, gene mutations that could cause a genetic diso rder are repaired by certain enzymes before the gen e is expressed and an
altered protein is produced. Each cell has a number of pathways through which enzymes recognize and repair mistakes in DNA.
Because DNA can be damaged or mutated in many ways, DNA repair is an important process by which the body prot ects itself
from disease.
A very small percentage of all mutations actually hav e a positive effect. These mutations lead to new vers ions of proteins that help
an individual better adapt to changes in his or her environment. For example, a beneficial mutation coul d result in a protein that
protects an individual and future generations from a new st rain of bacteria.
Because a person’s genetic code can have a large num ber of mutations with no effect on health, diagnosing genetic conditions can
be difficult. Sometimes, genes thought to be related to a particular genetic condition have mutations, b ut whether these changes are
involved in development of the condition has not be en determined; these genetic changes are known as var iants of unknown
significance (VOUS). Sometimes, no mutations are found in suspected disease-related genes, but mutations are found in other
genes whose relationship to a particular genetic condi tion is unknown. It is difficult to know whether these v ariants are involved in
the disease.
Figure: This lobster contains a mutation that causes it to be b lue. This is estimated to occur in roughly one in two million
lobsters. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Steven G. Johnson via Wikimedia Commons)
References
“Mutations and Health” by U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
14.4: Do all mutations affect health and development? is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001614.5: Types of Mutations
The DNA sequence of a gene can be altered in a number of ways. Gene mutations have varying effects on health, depending on
where they occur and whether they alter the function of e ssential proteins. The types of mutations include:
Silent mutation: Silent mutations cause a change in the sequence of bases i n a DNA molecule, but do not result in a change in
the amino acid sequence of a protein (Figure).
Missense mutation: This type of mutation is a change in one DNA base pair that results in the substitution of one amino acid
for another in the protein made by a gene (Figure).
Nonsense mutation: A nonsense mutation is also a change in one DNA base pair. Instead of substituting one amino acid for
another, however, the altered DNA sequence prematurely signa ls the cell to stop building a protein (Figure). This type o f
mutation results in a shortened protein that may functi on improperly or not at all.
Figure: Some mutations do not change the sequence of amino a cids in a protein. Some swap one amino acid for anothe r.
Others introduce an early stop codon into the sequence causing the protein to be truncated. (CC BY-SA 4.0; Jonsta247 via
Wikimedia Commons)
Insertion or Deletion: An insertion changes the number of DNA bases in a gene by a dding a piece of DNA. A deletion removes
a piece of DNA. Insertions or deletions may be small (one or a few base pairs within a gene) or large (an entire gene, sever al
genes, or a large section of a chromosome). In any of these cases, the protein made by the gene may not function pro perly.
Duplication: A duplication consists of a piece of DNA that is abnormally copied one or more times. This type of mutation may
alter the function of the resulting protein.
Frameshift mutation: This type of mutation occurs when the addition or loss of DNA bases changes a gene’s reading frame. A
reading frame consists of groups of 3 bases that each code for one amino acid. A frameshift mutation shifts the grouping of
these bases and changes the code for amino acids. The resulti ng protein is usually nonfunctional. Insertions, deletions, and
duplications can all be frameshift mutations.
Figure: A frameshift mutation adds or deletes 1 or 2 bases. Thi s results in a shift of the “reading frame” for the rib osome
causing a drastic change in amino acid sequence. Photo Credit: OpenStax Biology.
Repeat expansion: Nucleotide repeats are short DNA sequences that are repeated a number of times in a row. For example, a
trinucleotide repeat is made up of 3-base-pair sequences, and a tetranucleotide repeat is made up of 4-base-pair sequences. A
repeat expansion is a mutation that increases the number of times that the short DNA sequence is repeated. This type of
mutation can cause the resulting protein to function in a completely different way than it would have originally.
References
“Mutations and Health” by U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
14.5: Types of Mutations is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

14.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001714.6: Multifactorial Disorders and Genetic Predispositions
Multifactorial Disorders
Researchers are learning that nearly all conditions and diseases have a genetic component. Some disorders, such as sickle cell
disease and cystic fibrosis, are caused by mutations in a single gene. The causes of many other disorders, however, are much more
complex. Common medical problems such as heart disease, diabetes, and obesity do not have a single genetic cause—they are
likely associated with the effects of multiple genes i n combination with lifestyle and environmental facto rs. Conditions caused by
many contributing factors are called complex or multifactorial disorders.
Figure: The main symptoms of diabetes, a multifactorial disord er.
Although complex disorders often cluster in families, they do not have a clear-cut pattern of inheritan ce. This makes it difficult to
determine a person’s risk of inheriting or passing on these disorders. Complex disorders are also difficult to study and treat because
the specific factors that cause most of these disorde rs have not yet been identified. Researchers continue to look for major
contributing genes for many common complex disorders.
Genetic Predispositions
A genetic predisposition (sometimes also called genetic susceptibility) is an increased likelihood of developing a particular di sease
based on a person’s genetic makeup. A genetic predis position results from specific genetic variations tha t are often inherited from a
parent. These genetic changes contribute to the deve lopment of a disease but do not directly cause it. So me people with a
predisposing genetic variation will never get the disease while others will, even within the same family.
Genetic variations can have large or small effects on the likelihood of developing a particular disease. Fo r example, certain
mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes greatly increase a person’s risk of developing b reast cancer and ovarian cancer. Variations
in other genes, such as BARD1 and BRIP1, also increase breast cancer risk, but the contributi on of these genetic changes to a
person’s overall risk appears to be much smaller.
Current research is focused on identifying genetic ch anges that have a small effect on disease risk but a re common in the general
population. Although each of these variations only sl ightly increases a person’s risk, having changes in se veral different genes may
combine to increase disease risk significantly. Cha nges in many genes, each with a small effect, may un derlie susceptibility to
many common diseases, including cancer, obesity, diabete s, heart disease, and mental illness.
In people with a genetic predisposition, the risk of di sease can depend on multiple factors in addition to an identified genetic
change. These include other genetic factors (sometimes called modifiers) as well as lifestyle and environmen tal factors. Although a
person’s genetic makeup cannot be altered, some lif estyle and environmental modifications (such as hav ing more frequent disease
screenings and maintaining a healthy weight) may be ab le to reduce disease risk in people with a genetic predispo sition.

14.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70017References
“Mutations and Health” by U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
14.6: Multifactorial Disorders and Genetic Predispositio ns is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

14.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7001814.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or Chromosomes
Changes in numbers of genes
People have two copies of most genes, one copy inherite d from each parent. In some cases, however, the number of copies varies—
meaning that a person can be born with one, three, or more copies of particular genes. Less commonly, one or more genes may be
entirely missing. This type of genetic difference is kn own as copy number variation (CNV).
Copy number variation results from insertions, deletions, and duplications of large segments of DNA. These segments are big
enough to include whole genes. Variation in gene cop y number can influence the activity of genes and ul timately affect many body
functions.
Researchers were surprised to learn that copy number variation accounts for a significant amount of gene tic difference between
people. More than 10 percent of human DNA appears to c ontain these differences in gene copy number. While m uch of this
variation does not affect health or development, som e differences likely influence a person’s risk of dis ease and response to certain
drugs. Future research will focus on the consequences of copy number variation in different parts of the genome and study the
contribution of these variations to many types of disease.
Changes in Numbers of Chromosomes
Human cells normally contain 23 pairs of chromosomes, for a total of 46 chromosomes in each cell. A change in the number of
chromosomes can cause problems with growth, development, and function of the body’s systems. These changes ca n occur during
the formation of reproductive cells (eggs and sperm), in early fetal development, or in any cell after birth. A gain or loss of
chromosomes from the normal 46 is called aneuploidy.
A common form of aneuploidy is trisomy, or the presence of an extra chromosome in cells. “T ri-” is Greek for “three”; people with
trisomy have three copies of a particular chromosome in cells instead of the normal two copies. Down syndrome is an example of a
condition caused by trisomy. People with Down syndrome t ypically have three copies of chromosome 21 in each cell, for a total of
47 chromosomes per cell.
Figure: This karyotype, which is a picture of all the chromo somes from one individual, is from a person who has Triso my
13. (CC BY-SA 3.0; CarloDiDio via Wikimedia Commons)
Monosomy, or the loss of one chromosome in cells, is another kin d of aneuploidy. “Mono-” is Greek for “one”; people wi th
monosomy have one copy of a particular chromosome i n cells instead of the normal two copies. Turner synd rome is a condition
caused by monosomy. Women with Turner syndrome usually have only one copy of the X chromosome in every cell, for a total of
45 chromosomes per cell.
Rarely, some cells end up with complete extra sets of chromosomes. Cells with one additional set of chromos omes, for a total of 69
chromosomes, are called triploid. Cells with two additional sets of chromosomes, for a total of 92 chromosomes, are called
tetraploid. A condition in which every cell in the body ha s an extra set of chromosomes is not compatible with life.

14.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70018
Figure: “Ploid” refers to the number of copies of each chrom osome found in a somatic cell. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Ehamberg via
Wikimedia Commons)
Figure: Human and other animal cells do not develop if they have an entire extra set of chromosomes. In contrast, plants
often have entire copied sets of chromosomes. This strawb erry is an example of a plant that is tetraploid. (CC BY-SA 3.0; David
Monniaux via Wikimedia Commons)
In some cases, a change in the number of chromosomes occurs only in certain cells. When an individual has two or more cell
populations with a different chromosomal makeup, thi s situation is called chromosomal mosaicism. Chromosomal mosaicism
occurs from an error in cell division in cells other than eggs and sperm. Most commonly, some cells end u p with one extra or
missing chromosome (for a total of 45 or 47 chromoso mes per cell), while other cells have the usual 46 ch romosomes. Mosaic
Turner syndrome is one example of chromosomal mosaici sm. In females with this condition, some cells have 45 c hromosomes
because they are missing one copy of the X chromosome, while o ther cells have the usual number of chromosomes.
Many cancer cells also have changes in their number o f chromosomes. These changes are not inherited; they o ccur in somatic cells
(cells other than eggs or sperm) during the formation or pr ogression of a cancerous tumor.
References
“Mutations and Health” by U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or Chromosomes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
15: Protein Synthesis
Discuss the potential implications of mutations at cellu lar, organismal, and evolutionary levels.
Summarize the processes involved in protein synthesis.
Describe how mutations affect the process of protein s ynthesis and its products.
In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the major purpo se of DNA is to provide the information needed to cons truct the proteins
necessary for the cell to perform all of its functio ns. Proteins are large, complex molecules that play many critical roles in the body.
They do most of the work in cells and are required for the structure, function, and regulation of the body’s tissue s and organs.
Recall that proteins are made up of hundreds or thous ands of smaller units called amino acids, which are attached to one another in
long chains. There are 20 different types of amino a cids that can be combined to make a protein. The seq uence of amino acids
determines each protein’s unique 3-dimensional structu re and its specific function.
Table: Some of the functions of proteins in cells, listed in alphabeti cal order:
Function Description
Antibody Antibodies bind to specific foreign particles, s uch as viruses and bacteria, to help protect the body.
EnzymeEnzymes carry out almost all of the thousands of chemical re actions that take place in cells. They also assist
with the formation of new molecules by reading the geneti c information stored in DNA.
MessengerMessenger proteins, such as some types of hormones, transmit signals to coordinate biological processes
between different cells, tissues, and organs.
Structural
componentThese proteins provide structure and support for cells. On a larger scale, they also allow the body to move.
Transport/
storageThese proteins bind and carry atoms and small molecule s within cells and throughout the body.
The information to make proteins is stored in an orga nism’s DNA. Each protein is coded for by a specific sectio n of DNA called a
gene. A gene is the section of DNA required to produce one protein. Genes are typically hundreds or thousands of base pairs in
length because they code for proteins made of hundreds or thousands of amino acids.
Remember that DNA in eukaryotes is found as long linear molecules called chromosomes (Figure). Chromosomes ar e millions
of base pairs in length and each contain many, many genes (Table). An organism's complete set of DNA (includ ing all its
genes) is referred to as its genome.
Table: Size and number of genes of several human chromosomes.
Chromosome Size (in base pairs) # of genes
1 248,956,422 2058
10 133,797,422 733
22 50,818,468 488Learning Outcomes

Figure: A karyotype showing the sizes of all the human chromo somes. Notice that they decrease in size.
To summarize: many base pairs make up one gene, many genes are found on one chromosome, and many chromoso mes can be
found in one genome.
Figure: The arrangement of DNA into chromosomes. Photo credi t: Thomas Splettstoesser (www.scistyle.com)
15.1: The Genetic Code
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing
15.5: Translation
15.6: Optional Section - Micropigs
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
“What are proteins and what do they do?” by U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
Thumbnail: Ribosomes creating polypeptides on mRNA. (CC BY-SA 4.0 / cropped from original; Christinelmiller vi a Wikimedia
Commons).
15: Protein Synthesis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7007515.1: The Genetic Code
The Central Dogma: DNA Encodes RNA; RNA Encodes Protein
To summarize what we know to this point, the cellular p rocess of transcription generates messenger RNA (mRNA), a mobile
molecular copy of one or more genes with an alphabet of A, C, G, and uracil (U). Translation of the mRNA templ ate converts
nucleotide-based genetic information into a protein product. This flow of genetic information in cells fr om DNA to mRNA to
protein is described by the Central Dogma (Figure), wh ich states that genes specify the sequence of mRNAs, wh ich in turn
specify the sequence of proteins. The decoding of on e molecule to another is performed by specific prote ins and RNAs. Because
the information stored in DNA is so central to cellula r function, it makes intuitive sense that the cell wou ld make mRNA copies of
this information for protein synthesis, while keeping the DNA itself intact and protected.
It turns out that the central dogma is not always true. We will not discuss the exceptions here, however.
Figure: Instructions on DNA are transcribed onto messenger RNA. Ribosomes are able to read the genetic information
inscribed on a strand of messenger RNA and use this infor mation to string amino acids together into a protein.

15.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70075Amino Acid Structure
Protein sequences consist of 20 commonly occurring am ino acids (Figure); therefore, it can be said that t he protein alphabet
consists of 20 letters. Different amino acids have d ifferent chemistries (such as acidic versus basic, or polar and non-polar) and
different structural constraints. Variation in amino ac id sequence gives rise to enormous variation in protein structure and function.
Figure: Structures of the 20 amino acids found in proteins are shown. Each amino acid is composed of an amino group
(NH), a carboxyl group (COO), and a side chain (blue). The side chain may be nonpolar, polar, or charged, as well as large or
small. It is the variety of amino acid side chains that gives rise to the incredible variation of protein str ucture and function.
Genetic Code
Each amino acid is defined by a three-nucleotide se quence called the triplet codon. The relationship between a nucleotide codon
and its corresponding amino acid is called the genetic code. Given the different numbers of “letters” in the mRNA (4 – A, U, C, G)
and protein “alphabets” (20 different amino acids) o ne nucleotide could not correspond to one amino aci d. Nucleotide doublets
would also not be sufficient to specify every amino a cid because there are only 16 possible two-nucleotide combinations (4). In
contrast, there are 64 possible nucleotide triplets (4), which is far more than the number of amino acids. Scientists theorized that
amino acids were encoded by nucleotide triplets and t hat the genetic code was degenerate. In other words, a given amino acid could
be encoded by more than one nucleotide triplet (Figure). These nucleotide triplets are called codons.3+ 2

15.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70075The same codon will always specify the insertion of on e specific amino acid. The chart seen in Figure can be used to
translate an mRNA sequence into an amino acid sequenc e. For example, the codon UUU will always cause the insertion of the
amino acid phenylalanine (Phe), while the codon UUA will cau se the insertion of leucine (Leu).
Figure: This figure shows the genetic code for translating eac h nucleotide triplet in mRNA into an amino acid or a
termination signal in a nascent protein. (credit: mod ification of work by NIH)
Each set of three bases (one codon) causes the inse rtion of one specific amino acid into the growing pr otein. This means that the
insertion of one or two nucleotides can completely ch ange the triplet “reading frame”, thereby altering the message for every
subsequent amino acid (Figure). Though insertion of three nucleotides causes an extra amino acid to be i nserted during
translation, the integrity of the rest of the protein is m aintained.
Figure: The deletion of two nucleotides shifts the reading fr ame of an mRNA and changes the entire protein message,
creating a nonfunctional protein or terminating pro tein synthesis altogether.
Three of the 64 codons terminate protein synthesis a nd release the polypeptide from the translation machi nery. These triplets are
called stop codons. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In additi on to specifying the amino acid methionine, it also
serves as the start codon to initiate translation. The reading frame for tran slation is set by the AUG start codon near the 5′ end of
the mRNA. The genetic code is universal. With a few excep tions, virtually all species use the same genetic cod e for protein
synthesis, which is powerful evidence that all life on Ear th shares a common origin.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. January 2, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...fig-ch15_01_05
15.1: The Genetic Code is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7007615.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with the important difference of the
membrane-bound nucleus in eukaryotes. With the genes bound in the nucleus, transcription occurs in the nuc leus of the cell and the
mRNA transcript must be transported to the cytoplasm. I n prokaryotes, which lack membrane-bound nuclei and other organelles,
transcription occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell.
RNA Polymerase
RNA Polymerase is the enzyme that produces the mRNA molecule (just like DNA polymerase produced a new DNA molecule
during DNA replication). Prokaryotes use the same RNA pol ymerase to transcribe all of their genes. In E. coli, the polymerase is
composed of five polypeptide subunits. These subunits assemble every time a gene is transcribed, and they disassemble once
transcription is complete. Each subunit has a unique role (which you do not need to memorize). The polym erase comprised of all
five subunits is called the holoenzyme.
Initiation
Transcription in prokaryotes (and in eukaryotes) requir es the DNA double helix to partially unwind in the regi on of mRNA
synthesis. The region of unwinding is called a transcr iption bubble. The DNA sequence onto which the proteins and enzymes
involved in transcription bind to initiate the proc ess is called a promoter. In most cases, promoters exist upstream of the genes they
regulate. The specific sequence of a promoter is ve ry important because it determines whether the corres ponding gene is
transcribed all of the time, some of the time, or hardl y at all. The structure and function of a prokaryot ic promoter is relatively
simple (Figure). One important sequence in the prokar yotic promoter is located 10 bases before the transcri ption start site
(-10) and is commonly called the TATA box.
Figure: The general structure of a prokaryotic promoter.
To begin transcription, the RNA polymerase holoenzyme assembles at the promoter. The dissociation of σ allows the core enzyme
to proceed along the DNA template, synthesizing mRNA by adding RNA nucleotides according to the base pairing rules, similar to
the way a new DNA molecule is produced during DNA replicat ion. Only one of the two DNA strands is transcribed. The
transcribed strand of DNA is called the template strand because it is the template for mRNA production. The mRNA product is
complementary to the template strand and is almost i dentical to the other DNA strand, called the non-template strand, with the
exception that RNA contains a uracil (U) in place of the thymine (T) found in DNA. Like DNA polymerase, RNA pol ymerase adds
new nucleotides onto the 3′-OH group of the previous nu cleotide. This means that the growing mRNA strand is bei ng synthesized
in the 5′ to 3′ direction. Because DNA is anti-paralle l, this means that the RNA polymerase is moving in th e 3′ to 5′ direction down
the template strand (Figure).
Elongation
As elongation proceeds, the DNA is continuously unwound ahead of the core enzyme as the hydrogen bonds that connect the
complementary base pairs in the DNA double helix are br oken (Figure). The DNA is rewound behind the core enzyme as the
hydrogen bonds are reformed. The base pairing between DNA and RNA is not stable enough to maintain the stabi lity of the mRNA
synthesis components. Instead, the RNA polymerase acts as a stable linker between the DNA template and the ne wly forming RNA
strand to ensure that elongation is not interrupted prema turely.

15.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70076
Figure: During elongation, RNA polymerase tracks along the D NA template, synthesizes mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ directio n, and
unwinds then rewinds the DNA as it is read.
Termination
Once a gene is transcribed, the RNA polymerase needs to be instructed to dissociate from the DNA template and liberate the newly
made mRNA. Depending on the gene being transcribed, th ere are two kinds of termination signals. One is prote in-based and the
other is RNA-based. Both termination signals rely on sp ecific sequences of DNA near the end of the gene that cause the
polymerase to release the mRNA.
In a prokaryotic cell, by the time transcription end s, the transcript would already have been used to be gin making copies of the
encoded protein because the processes of transcriptio n and translation can occur at the same time since bo th occur in the cytoplasm
(Figure). In contrast, transcription and translation cannot occur simultaneously in eukaryotic cells since transc ription occurs
inside the nucleus and translation occurs outside in the c ytoplasm.
Figure: Multiple polymerases can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerous ribosomes concurrently translate t he
mRNA transcripts into polypeptides. In this way, a speci fic protein can rapidly reach a high concentration in the bacterial cell.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. December 21, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...-Transcription
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7007715.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
Prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with a few key differenc es. The most
important difference between prokaryotes and eukaryo tes is the latter’s membrane-bound nucleus and organe lles. With the genes
enclosed in a nucleus, the eukaryotic cell must be able to transport its mRNA to the cytoplasm and must p rotect its mRNA from
degrading before it is translated. Eukaryotes also em ploy three different polymerases that each transcrib e a different subset of
genes.
Initiation
The eukaryotic promoters that we are most interested in are similar to prokaryotic promoters in that they contain a TATA box
(Figure). However, initiation of transcription is much more complex in eukaryotes compared to prokaryotes. Unlike the
prokaryotic RNA polymerase that can bind to a DNA temp late on its own, eukaryotes require several other prot eins, called
transcription factors, to first bind to the promoter region and then help recr uit the appropriate polymerase.

Figure: The generalized structure of a eukaryotic promoter and transcription factors.
In addition, there are three different RNA polymerase s in eukaryotes, each of which is made up of 10 subu nits or more. Each
eukaryotic RNA polymerase also requires a distinct set of transcription factors to bring it to the DNA template.
RNA polymerase I is located in the nucleolus, a specialized nuclear s ubstructure in which ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is transcribed,
processed, and assembled into ribosomes. The rRNA mole cules are considered structural RNAs because they have a cellular role
but are not translated into protein. The rRNAs are co mponents of the ribosome and are essential to the pr ocess of translation. RNA
polymerase I synthesizes most of the rRNAs.
RNA polymerase II is located in the nucleus and synthesizes all prote in-coding nuclear pre-mRNAs. Eukaryotic pre-mRNAs
undergo extensive processing after transcription but b efore translation. For clarity, the term “mRNA” will onl y be used to describe
the mature, processed molecules that are ready to be translated. RNA polymerase II is responsible for transcri bing the
overwhelming majority of eukaryotic genes.
RNA polymerase III is also located in the nucleus. This polymerase tran scribes a variety of structural RNAs including transfer
pre-RNAs (pre-tRNAs), and small nuclear pre-RNAs. The tRNAs hav e a critical role in translation; they serve as the adaptor
molecules between the mRNA template and the growing po lypeptide chain. Small nuclear RNAs have a variety of f unctions,
including “splicing” pre-mRNAs and regulating transcrip tion factors.
Each of the types of RNA polymerase recognizes a diffe rent promoter sequence and requires different transcr iption factors.
Elongation
Following the formation of the preinitiation complex, the polymerase is released from the other transcrip tion factors, and
elongation is allowed to proceed as it does in prokar yotes with the RNA polymerase synthesizing pre-mRNA in the 5′ to 3′

15.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70077direction. As discussed previously, RNA polymerase II t ranscribes the major share of eukaryotic genes, so this section will focus on
how this polymerase accomplishes elongation and termin ation.
Although the enzymatic process of elongation is essent ially the same in eukaryotes and prokaryotes, the DNA te mplate is more
complex. When eukaryotic cells are not dividing, the ir genes exist as a diffuse mass of DNA and proteins ca lled chromatin. The
DNA is tightly packaged around charged histone protein s at repeated intervals. These DNA–histone complexes, c ollectively called
nucleosomes, are regularly spaced and include 146 nuc leotides of DNA wound around eight histones like thread arou nd a spool.
For RNA synthesis to occur, the transcription machiner y needs to move histones out of the way every time it encounters a
nucleosome. This is accomplished by a special protein complex called FACT, which stands for “facilitates chro matin transcription.”
This complex pulls histones away from the DNA template as the polymerase moves along it. Once the pre-mRNA is sy nthesized,
the FACT complex replaces the histones to recreate the nucleosomes.
Termination
The termination of transcription is different for t he different polymerases. Unlike in prokaryotes, elongati on by RNA polymerase II
in eukaryotes takes place 1,000–2,000 nucleotides beyo nd the end of the gene being transcribed. This pre-mR NA tail is removed
during mRNA processing. RNA polymerases I and III requ ire termination signals. Genes transcribed by RNA poly merase I contain
a specific 18-nucleotide sequence that is recognized by a termination protein. The process of termination in RNA polymerase III
involves an mRNA hairpin that causes the mRNA to be rele ased.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. December 21, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...-Transcription
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7007815.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing
Eukaryotic mRNAs must undergo several processing step s before they can be transferred from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and
translated into a protein. The additional steps involv ed in eukaryotic mRNA maturation create a molecule t hat is much more stable
than a prokaryotic mRNA. Eukaryotic mRNAs typically last f or several hours, whereas the typical prokaryotic mRNA lasts no
more than five seconds.
The mRNA transcript is coated in RNA-stabilizing prote ins to prevent it from degrading while it is processe d and exported out of
the nucleus. The three most important steps of pre-m RNA processing are the addition of stabilizing and si gnaling factors at the 5′
and 3′ ends of the molecule, and the removal of inte rvening sequences that do not specify the appropria te amino acids. In rare
cases, the mRNA transcript can be “edited” after it is transcri bed.
5′ Capping
While the pre-mRNA is still being synthesized, a 7-m ethylguanosine cap is added to the 5′ end of the gr owing transcript by a
phosphate linkage. This 5′ cap protects the nascent mRNA from degradation. In additi on, factors involved in protein synthesis
recognize the cap to help initiate translation by r ibosomes. Structurally, 7-methylguanosine looks like a guanine nucleotide, but
with an added methyl group (Figure).
Figure: The structure of the 5′ cap. Notice that the 7-meth ylguanosine is shaped like a purine nucleotide, but ha s an extra
methyl group (CH). It is attached to the mRNA upside- down compared to the other nucleotides. Photo credit Zephyris; Wikipedia.
3′ Poly-A Tail
Once elongation is complete, the pre-mRNA is cleaved b y an endonuclease between an AAUAAA consensus sequence and a GUrich sequence, leaving the AAUAAA sequence on the pre-mRNA. An enzyme called poly-A polymerase then adds a string of
approximately 200 adenine nucleotides, called the poly-A tail. This modification further protects the pre-mRNA fro m degradation
and signals the export of the cellular factors that the tra nscript needs to the cytoplasm.
Pre-mRNA Splicing
Eukaryotic genes are composed of exons, which correspond to protein-coding sequences (ex-on signifies that they are expressed),
and intervening sequences called introns (int-ron denotes their intervening role), which may be involved in gene regula tion but are
removed from the pre-mRNA during processing (Figure). Intr on sequences in mRNA do not encode functional proteins.3

15.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70078
Figure: Eukaryotic mRNA contains introns that must be spliced out. A 5′ cap and 3′ tail are also added. Photo
credit Kazulanth; Wikimedia. This work has been released into the public domain.
The discovery of introns came as a surprise to resear chers in the 1970s who expected that pre-mRNAs would spe cify protein
sequences without further processing, as they had obse rved in prokaryotes. The genes of higher eukaryotes ve ry often contain one
or more introns. These regions may correspond to regula tory sequences; however, the biological significance of having many
introns or having very long introns in a gene is unc lear. It is possible that introns slow down gene express ion because it takes
longer to transcribe pre-mRNAs with lots of introns. Al ternatively, introns may be nonfunctional sequence r emnants left over from
the fusion of ancient genes throughout evolution. Thi s is supported by the fact that separate exons ofte n encode separate protein
subunits or domains. For the most part, the sequences of i ntrons can be mutated without ultimately affecting the pro tein product.
All of a pre-mRNA’s introns must be completely and pre cisely removed before protein synthesis. If the proc ess errs by even a
single nucleotide, the reading frame of the rejoine d exons would shift, and the resulting protein would be dysfunctional. The
process of removing introns and reconnecting exons i s called splicing (Figure and). Introns are removed and degraded
while the pre-mRNA is still in the nucleus. Splicing occu rs by a sequence-specific mechanism that ensures intr ons will be removed
and exons rejoined with the accuracy and precision of a single nucleotide. The splicing of pre-mRNAs is cond ucted by complexes
of proteins and RNA molecules called spliceosomes (Figure).
Note that more than 70 individual introns can be pre sent, and each has to undergo the process of splicin g—in addition to 5′ capping
and the addition of a poly-A tail—just to generate a sin gle, translatable mRNA molecule.
Figure: Pre-mRNA splicing involves the precise removal of intr ons from the primary RNA transcript. The splicing proc ess is
catalyzed by protein complexes called spliceosomes that are composed of proteins and RNA molecules called snRN As.
Spliceosomes recognize sequences at the 5′ and 3′ end of the intron.

15.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70078References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:TkuNUJis@3/Transcrip tion
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7007915.5: Translation
The synthesis of proteins consumes more of a cell’s e nergy than any other metabolic process. In turn, prote ins account for more
mass than any other component of living organisms (wi th the exception of water), and proteins perform virtu ally every function of
a cell. The process of translation, or protein synthesis, involves the decoding of an mRNA message into a poly peptide (protein)
product. Amino acids are covalently strung together by peptide bonds in lengths ranging from approximate ly 50 amino acid
residues to more than 1,000. Each individual amino ac id has an amino group (NH) and a carboxyl (COOH) group. Po lypeptides
are formed when the amino group of one amino acid fo rms an amide (i.e., peptide) bond with the carboxyl g roup of another amino
acid (Figure). This reaction is catalyzed by ribosomes a nd generates one water molecule.
Remember that there are 20 different amino acids th at are commonly used. In Figure, R’ represents the pa rt of the amino acid
which is different between these 20 structures.
Figure: A peptide bond links the carboxyl end of one amino acid with the amino end of another, expelling one w ater
molecule. For simplicity in this image, only the funct ional groups involved in the peptide bond are shown. The R and R’
designations refer to the rest of each amino acid struc ture.
The Protein Synthesis Machinery
In addition to the mRNA template, many other molecul es contribute to the process of translation and the general structures and
functions of the protein synthesis machinery are co mparable from bacteria to human cells. Translation requires the input of an
mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors (Figure).
Ribosomes
Even before an mRNA is translated, a cell must invest e nergy to build each of its ribosomes. Ribosomes are the part of the cell
which reads the information in the mRNA molecule and j oins amino acids together in the correct order. A r ibosome is a very large,
complex macromolecule composed of structural and ca talytic rRNAs, and many distinct polypeptides. In eukar yotes, the nucleolus
is completely specialized for the synthesis and assembly of rRNAs (the RNA component that makes up ribosomes).
Ribosomes are made up of two subunits that come togeth er for translation, rather like a hamburger bun come s together around the
meat (the mRNA). The small subunit is responsible for bi nding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit se quentially binds
tRNAs, a type of RNA molecule that brings amino acids to the growing chain of the polypeptide. Each mRNA molecu le can be
simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synt hesizing protein in the same direction: reading the mRNA from 5′ to 3′ and
synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus (refer to Figure – the N terminus is t he end of the amino
acid with the Nitrogen; the C terminus is the end with the Carbon).
Ribosomes exist in the cytoplasm in prokaryotes and in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum in e ukaryotes.
Mitochondria and chloroplasts also have their own ribos omes in the matrix and stroma, which look more similar to prokaryotic
ribosomes (and have similar drug sensitivities) than the ri bosomes just outside their outer membranes in the cytoplasm.2

15.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70079
Figure: The protein synthesis machinery includes the large and small subunits of the ribosome, mRNA, and tRNA.
tRNA
Depending on the species, 40 to 60 types of tRNA exist in the cytoplasm. Serving as adaptors, specific tRNAs bind to sequences
on the mRNA template and add the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide chain. Therefore, tRNAs are t he molecules that
actually “translate” the language of RNA into the languag e of proteins.
Each tRNA is made up of a linear RNA molecule that is folded into a complex shape (Figure). At one end of t he tRNA is an
anticodon, which recognizes and base pairs with one of the mRNA codons. At the other end, a specific amino aci d is attached. Of
the 64 possible mRNA codons—or triplet combinations o f A, U, G, and C—three specify the termination of prote in synthesis and
61 specify the addition of amino acids to the polype ptide chain. Of these 61, one codon (AUG) also encodes th e initiation of
translation. Each tRNA anticodon can base pair with on e of the mRNA codons and add an amino acid or termina te translation,
according to the genetic code. For instance, if the sequence CUA occurred on an mRNA template in the prope r reading frame, it
would bind a tRNA expressing the complementary sequence, GAU, wh ich would be linked to the amino acid leucine.
Figure: The RNA molecule that makes up a tRNA folds into the complex 3-D structure seen here. In this figure, the
anticodon is the grey section at the bottom of the str ucture. The amino acid would be attached to the yel low part at the top right.
Photo credit Yikrazuul; Wikimedia.
Aminoacyl tRNA Synthetases
For each tRNA to function, it must have its specific amino acid bonded to it. In the process of tRNA “char ging,” each tRNA
molecule is bonded to its correct amino acid by a g roup of enzymes called aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. At least one type of
aminoacyl tRNA synthetase exists for each of the 20 am ino acids; the exact number of aminoacyl tRNA synthe tases varies by
species. These enzymes utilize the energy from ATP t o energize a specific amino acid, which is then trans ferred to the tRNA. In this
way, tRNA molecules can be used over and over again, bu t each tRNA always carries the same amino acid because of the
specificity of the aminoacyl tRNA synthetase enzymes.

15.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70079The Mechanism of Protein Synthesis
As with mRNA synthesis, protein synthesis can be divide d into three phases: initiation, elongation, and ter mination. The process of
translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we’ll explore how translation occurs in E. coli, a representative
prokaryote, and specify any differences between prokaryoti c and eukaryotic translation.
Initiation of Translation
Protein synthesis begins with the formation of an init iation complex. In E. coli, this complex involves the small ribosomal subunit,
the mRNA template, three initiation factors (IF-1, IF-2, and IF-3), and a special initiator tRNA, called tRNA. T he initiator
tRNA interacts with the start codon AUG, links to a formyla ted methionine amino acid called fMet, and can also bi nd IF-2.
Formylated methionine is inserted by fMet-tRNA at the beginning of every polypeptide chain synthesized by E. coli, but it is
usually clipped off after translation is complete. W hen an in-frame AUG is encountered during translation e longation, a nonformylated methionine is inserted by a regular Met-tRNA.
In E. coli mRNA, a sequence upstream of the first AUG codon, called the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (AGGAGG), interacts with the
rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome. This interac tion anchors the small ribosomal subunit at the corr ect location on the
mRNA template. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), which is a p urine nucleotide triphosphate, acts as an energy source during
translation—both at the start of elongation and during the ribosome’s translocation.
In eukaryotes, a similar initiation complex forms, co mprising mRNA, the small ribosomal subunit, IFs, and nuc leoside
triphosphates (GTP and ATP). The charged initiator tRNA, called Met-tRNA, does not bind fMet in eukaryotes, but is distinct from
other Met-tRNAs in that it can bind IFs. Like in E. coli, a “normal” methionine amino acid is inserted when t he ribosome
encounters in-frame AUG codons.
Instead of depositing at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizes the 7-m ethylguanosine cap at
the 5′ end of the mRNA. A cap-binding protein (CBP) an d several other IFs assist the movement of the ribosom e to the 5′ cap.
Once at the cap, the initiation complex tracks along the mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction, searching for th e AUG start codon. Many
eukaryotic mRNAs are translated from the first AUG, but th is is not always the case. The sequence of bases arou nd each AUG
helps determine if that AUG will be used as the start codon.
Once the appropriate AUG is identified, the large ribosoma l subunit binds to the complex of Met-tRNA, mRNA, and the small
ribosomal subunit. This step completes the initiation of tr anslation in eukaryotes.
Summary: In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the small ribos omal subunit binds to the special initiator methioni ne tRNA. With
the help of several other factors, this complex ide ntifies the start codon (AUG) based on the sequence of nucleotides nearby (Figure
, top diagram). Then, the large ribosomal subunit binds (Fi gure, middle diagram).FMet
FMet
Met
i
i

15.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70079
Figure: Translation begins when a tRNA anticodon recognizes a codon on the mRNA. The large ribosomal subunit joins the
small subunit, and a second tRNA is recruited. As the mR NA moves relative to the ribosome, the polypeptide ch ain is formed.
Entry of a release factor into the A site terminates t ranslation and the components dissociate.
Translation, Elongation, and Termination
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongat ion are the same. The large ribosomal subunit of con sists of three
compartments: the A (aminoacyl) site binds incoming charged aminoacyl tRNAs. The P (peptidyl) site binds charged tRNAs
carrying amino acids that have formed peptide bonds with the growing polypeptide chain but have not yet dissociated from their
corresponding tRNA. The E (exit) site releases dissociated tRNAs so that they can be recha rged with free amino acids. There is
one exception to this assembly line of tRNAs: in E. coli, fMet-tRNA is capable of entering the P site directly without first
entering the A site. Similarly, the eukaryotic Met-tRNA, with help from other proteins of the initiation comp lex, binds directly to
the P site. In both cases, this creates an initiation co mplex with a free A site ready to accept the tRNA cor responding to the first
codon after the AUG.
During translation elongation, the mRNA template prov ides specificity. As the ribosome moves along the mRNA, ea ch mRNA
codon comes into register, and specific binding with the corresponding charged tRNA anticodon is ensured. I f mRNA were not
present in the elongation complex, the ribosome would b ind tRNAs nonspecifically and a nonsense protein would be produ ced.
Elongation proceeds with charged tRNAs entering the A si te and then shifting to the P site followed by the E site with each singlecodon “step” of the ribosome (Figure, bottom diagra m). Ribosomal steps are induced by conformational c hanges that
advance the ribosome by three bases in the 3′ direct ion. The energy for each step of the ribosome is don ated by an elongation factor
that hydrolyzes GTP. Peptide bonds form between the am ino group of the amino acid attached to the A-site tR NA and the carboxyl
group of the amino acid attached to the P-site tRNA. Th e formation of each peptide bond is catalyzed by pep tidyl transferase, an
RNA-based enzyme that is integrated into the large rib osomal subunit. The energy for each peptide bond form ation is derived fromFMet
i

15.5.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70079GTP hydrolysis, which is catalyzed by a separate elon gation factor. The amino acid bound to the P-site tRNA is also linked to the
growing polypeptide chain. As the ribosome steps acros s the mRNA, the former P-site tRNA enters the E site, de taches from the
amino acid, and is expelled (Figure). Amazingly, the E. coli translation apparatus takes only 0.05 seconds to add each amino
acid, meaning that a 200-amino acid protein can be tran slated in just 10 seconds.
Figure: The movement of the tRNA molecules through the ribo some during protein synthesis. Note that the ribosome is
moving from 5′ to 3′ along the mRNA, and the tRNAs a re coming in from the front (the 3′ direction) and exiting at the back (the 5′
direction). Photo credit Boumphreyfr; Wikimedia.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. January 2, 2017 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:FUH9XUkW@6/Translation
15.5: Translation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

15.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7008015.6: Optional Section - Micropigs
Micropigs are tiny, genetically-edited pigs that have r ecently been developed by a Chinese genomics institute (Li, 2014). The
Chinese scientists used a technique called TALENs to edi t the genome of pig cells (Figure). Each cell inside a pig contains
two copies of the growth hormone receptor gene: one f rom each of its parents. The TALENs technique was used to delete one of
the two copies of this gene.
Figure: General overview of the TALEN process. The left and right TALEN bind to a specific sequence of genomic DN A
inside the nucleus of a cell. When they are correctly bound, nuclease enzymes (represented by scissors) cut the genomic DNA. The
TALEN sequences can be edited by scientists to target di fferent DNA sequences in the genome. (Photo credit: O gletreerd,
Wikimedia).
Growth hormone (GH) stimulates the growth of essentially a ll tissues within the body. GH is a 191 amino acid pepti de (protein)
hormone which is produced from the GH gene. Cells sense t he presence of GH protein hormone with the growth hormone receptor
(GHR) protein on the outside of the cell. GHR protein i s produced from the GHR gene and is found on the cell m embrane on the
outside of cells.
The GHR protein has three major parts:
An extracellular region that sticks out from the outside surface of the cell
A transmembrane region that goes through the cell membr ane and anchors the receptor to the membrane
An intracellular region on the inside of the cell membrane that transmits signals to the interior of the cell.
The extracellular region binds (attaches) to GH, fittin g together like a lock and its key. The binding of g rowth hormone transmits
signals through the cell membrane to the intracellul ar region of the receptor (Figure). These signals “ turn on” genes involved
in growth and metabolism so that those genes are made into proteins. These proteins stimulate the growth and division of other
cells in the organism.
If growth hormone is not present, the organism will n ot grow to full size. In humans, severe GH deficiency can lead to an adult
height of only 4 feet tall. If growth hormone recept or is not present, the “grow” signal from the GH will no t be transmitted inside of
cells, so growth will not be stimulated (Figure).
Figure: Growth hormone signaling pathway. When GH (growth h ormone) binds to GHR (growth hormone receptor), a
signal is sent through the cell membrane and into the nucleus of the cell. This signal turns on genes involved in cell metabolism and
growth. (Photo credit: Lisa Bartee, 2017)

15.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70080
Figure: Micro pigs next to a tea cup. Image from: https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/art...brity-pet.html
References
Li F, Li Y, Liu H, Zhang H, Liu C, Zhang X, Dou H, Yang W, Du Y. 2014 Sep. Production of GHR double-allelic knocko ut Bama
pig by TALENs and handmade cloning. Yi Chuan: 36(9):903-11.
15.6: Optional Section - Micropigs is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
16: Gene Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe processes through which gene expression can be regula ted.
Differentiate between gene regulation processes used by prok aryotes and eukaryotes.
Discuss the possible evolutionary consequences of changes i n gene expression.
Each cell expresses, or turns on, only a fraction of i ts genes. “Expresses” or “turns on” means that protein is being produced from
that gene. The rest of the genes are repressed, or t urned off (no protein is being produced from those genes). The process of turning
genes on and off is known as gene regulation. Gene regulation is an important part of normal dev elopment. Genes are turned on
and off in different patterns during development to make a brain cell look and act different from a liv er cell or a muscle cell, for
example. Gene regulation also allows cells to react qu ickly to changes in their environments. Although we kn ow that the regulation
of genes is critical for life, this complex process is no t yet fully understood.
For a cell to function properly, necessary proteins mu st be synthesized at the proper time. All organisms a nd cells control or
regulate the transcription and translation of their DNA into protein. The process of turning on a gene to p roduce RNA and protein is
called gene expression. Whether in a simple unicellular organism or in a complex multicellular organism, each cell controls whe n
and how its genes are expressed. For this to occur, ther e must be a mechanism to control when a gene is expr essed to make RNA
and protein, how much of the protein is made, and when it is t ime to stop making that protein because it is no longer needed.
Cells in multicellular organisms are specialized; ce lls in different tissues look very different and perf orm different functions. For
example, a muscle cell is very different from a live r cell, which is very different from a skin cell. The se differences are a
consequence of the expression of different sets of genes in each of these cells. All cells have certain ba sic functions they must
perform for themselves, such as converting the energy in sugar molecules into energy in ATP. Therefore, t here is a set of
“housekeeping” genes that are expressed in all cells. Each type of cell also has many genes that are not e xpressed because the cell
does not need to perform those functions. Specific cel ls also express many genes that are not expressed by other cells so that they
can carry out their specialized functions. In addit ion, cells will turn on or off certain genes at diffe rent times in response to changes
in the environment or at different times during the development of the organism. Unicellular organisms, both eukaryotic and
prokaryotic, also turn on and off genes in response to the demands of their environment so that they can r espond to special
conditions.
Figure: The unique color pattern of this cat’s fur is caused b y either the orange or the black allele of a gene b eing randomly
silenced (turned off).
The control of gene expression is extremely complex. Malfunctions in this process are detrimental to the cell and can lead to the
development of many diseases, including cancer.
16.1: Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene Expression
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulationLearning Objectives

216.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
16.5: Eukaryotic Translational and Post-Translational Regulation
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2-839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
Thumbnail: Cat with orange and black fur. (CC BY-SA 2.5 / cro pped from original; DrL via Wikimedia Commons).
16: Gene Regulation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7009116.1: Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene Expression
To understand how gene expression is regulated, we must first understand how a gene becomes a functional prote in in a cell. The
process occurs in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell s, just in slightly different fashions.
Because prokaryotic organisms lack a cell nucleus, th e processes of transcription and translation occur al most simultaneously.
When the protein is no longer needed, transcription stops. When there is no mRNA present, no protein can be made. As a result, the
primary method to control what type and how much prot ein is expressed in a prokaryotic cell is through the regulation of DNA
transcription into RNA. All the subsequent steps happen automatically. When more protein is required, more tr anscription occurs.
Therefore, in prokaryotic cells, the control of gene exp ression is almost entirely at the transcriptional leve l.
Eukaryotic cells, in contrast, have intracellular or ganelles and are much more complex. Recall that in eu karyotic cells, the DNA is
contained inside the cell’s nucleus and that is where i t is transcribed to produce mRNA. The newly synthesized mRNA is
transported out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm, wh ere ribosomes translate the mRNA to produce protein. The processes of
transcription and translation are physically separat ed by the nuclear membrane; transcription occurs onl y within the nucleus, and
translation only occurs outside the nucleus in the c ytoplasm. The regulation of gene expression can occu r at any stage of the
process (Figure):
Epigenetic level: regulates how tightly the DNA is wound around histone protei ns to package it into chromosomes
Transcriptional level: regulates how much transcription takes place
Post-transcriptional level: regulates aspects of RNA processing (such as splicing) an d transport out of the nucleus
Translational level: regulates how much of the RNA is translated into protein
Post-translational level: regulates how long the protein lasts after it has been made and whether the protein is processed into
an active form
Figure: Eukaryotic gene expression is regulated during transcr iption and RNA processing, which take place in the nu cleus,
as well as during protein translation, which takes plac e in the cytoplasm. Further regulation may occur thro ugh post-translational
modifications of proteins.
The differences in the regulation of gene expression b etween prokaryotes and eukaryotes are summarized in Table.
Table: Differences in the Regulation of Gene Expression of Prokaryo tic and Eukaryotic Organisms

16.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70091Prokaryotic organisms Eukaryotic organisms
Lack nucleus Contain nucleus
RNA transcription and protein translation
occur almost simultaneouslyRNA transcription occurs prior to protein translation, an d it takes place in the
nucleus. RNA translation to protein occurs in the cytopl asm.
RNA post-processing includes addition of a 5′ cap, poly-A t ail, and excision of
introns and splicing of exons.
Gene expression is regulated primarily at the
transcriptional levelGene expression is regulated at many levels (epigenetic, tr anscriptional, posttranscriptional, translational, and post-translational)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2-839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
16.1: Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene Expression is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7009216.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
DNA modifications that do not change the DNA sequence c an affect gene activity. Chemical compounds that ar e added to single
genes can regulate their activity; these modificatio ns are known as epigenetic changes. The epigenome comprises all of the
chemical compounds that have been added to the enti rety of one’s DNA (genome) as a way to regulate the act ivity (expression) of
all the genes within the genome. The chemical compoun ds of the epigenome are not part of the DNA sequence, but are on or
attached to DNA (“epi-” means above in Greek). Epigeno mic modifications remain as cells divide and in some cases can be
inherited through the generations. Environmental in fluences, such as a person’s diet and exposure to poll utants, can also impact the
epigenome.
Epigenetic changes can help determine whether genes are turned on or off and can influence the producti on of proteins in certain
cells, ensuring that only necessary proteins are produ ced. For example, proteins that promote bone growth ar e not produced in
muscle cells. Patterns of epigenome modification vary among individuals, different tissues within an indivi dual, and even different
cells.
Regulating Access to Genes
The human genome encodes over 20,000 genes, which mea ns that each of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes co ntains thousands
of genes. The DNA in the nucleus of each cell is prec isely wound, folded, and compacted into chromosomes so t hat it will fit inside
the nuclear membrane. It is also organized so that spec ific segments can be accessed as needed by a specific cell ty pe.
The first level of organization, or packing, is the winding of DNA strands around histone proteins. Histones package and order
DNA into structural units called nucleosome complexes, which can control the access of proteins to the DNA regions (Figure
a). Under the electron microscope, this winding of DNA aro und histone proteins to form nucleosomes looks like s mall beads on a
string (Figure b). These beads (histone proteins) can move along the s tring (DNA) and change the structure of the molecule.
Figure: DNA is folded around histone proteins to create (a) n ucleosome complexes. These nucleosomes control the access of
proteins to the underlying DNA. When viewed through an electron microscope (b), the nucleosomes look like beads on a string.
(credit “micrograph”: modification of work by Chris Woodcock)
If DNA encoding a specific gene is to be transcribed into RNA, the nucleosomes surrounding that region of DNA can slide down
the DNA to open that specific chromosomal region and allow for the transcriptional machinery (RNA polymera se) to initiate
transcription. Nucleosomes can move to open the chrom osome structure to expose a segment of DNA, but do so in a very
controlled manner.
Active open regions of chromatin are called euchromatin (Figure). Regions of the genome that are transcriptionally a ctive
are typically euchromatic. Tightly wound regions of chromatin are called heterochromatin. Heterochromatic regions of the
genome are typically silenced and transcriptionally in active.

16.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70092
Figure: The difference in chromatin packaging between an a ctive (euchromatic) and inactive (heterochromatic) region of
DNA. (CC BY 3.0; Sha, K. and Boyer, L. A. via Wikimedia Commons)
Modifications to DNA and histones
How the histone proteins move, and whether the DNA is wrap ped loosely or tightly around them, is dependent on si gnals found on
both the histone proteins and on the DNA. These signals are chemical tags added to histone proteins and DNA tha t tell the histones
if a chromosomal region should be open or closed. Th ese tags are not permanent, but may be added or remove d as needed. They
are chemical modifications (phosphate, methyl, or ace tyl groups) that are attached to specific amino aci ds in the protein or to the
nucleotides of the DNA. The tags do not alter the DNA base sequence, but they do alter how tightly wound the DNA is around the
histone proteins.
This type of gene regulation is called epigenetic regulation. Epigenetic means “around or above genetics.” The c hanges that occur
to the histone proteins and DNA do not alter the nucl eotide sequence and are not permanent. Instead, thes e changes are temporary,
although they can and often do persist through mult iple rounds of cell division. They alter the chromos omal structure (open
euchromatin or closed heterochromatin) as needed, but d o not change the sequence of bases within the DNA.
A gene can be turned on or off depending upon the l ocation and modifications to the histone proteins and DNA. If a gene is to be
transcribed, the histone proteins and DNA are modified surrounding the chromosomal region encoding that gene. This opens the
chromosomal region (it becomes euchromatic) to allow access for RNA polymerase and other proteins, called transcription factors,
to bind to the promoter region, located just upstrea m of the gene, and initiate transcription. If a gene is to remain turned off, or
silenced, the histone proteins and DNA have different modifications that signal a closed chromosomal conf iguration. In this closed
configuration (heterochromatin), the RNA polymerase a nd transcription factors do not have access to the DNA and transcription
cannot occur (Figure).
DNA Methylation
A common type of epigenomic modification is called methylation. Methylation involves attaching small molecules call ed methyl
groups, each consisting of one carbon atom and thre e hydrogen atoms, to DNA nucleotides or the amino aci ds that make up the
histone proteins.
When DNA is methylated, the methyl group is typically added to cytosine nucleotides. This occurs within ve ry specific regions
called CpG islands. These are stretches with a high fre quency of cytosine and guanine dinucleotide DNA pairs (CG) found in the
promoter regions of genes. When this configuration ex ists, the cytosine member of the pair can be methyl ated (a methyl group is
added). This modification changes how the DNA interacts with proteins, including the histone proteins that c ontrol access to the
region. When methyl groups are added to a particula r gene, that gene is turned off or silenced, and no protein is produced from that
gene (Figure).
“Histone Code” Hypothesis
The histone code hypothesis is the hypothesis that transcription of a gene is i n part regulated by modifications made to histone
proteins, primarily on their somewhat floppy ends (t heir “tails”). Many of the histone tail modifications correlate very well to
chromatin structure and both histone modification s tate and chromatin structure correlates well to gene expression levels. The most

16.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70092important concept in the histone code hypothesis is that the histone modifications serve to recruit othe r proteins by specific
recognition of the modified histone, rather than thr ough simply stabilizing or destabilizing the interact ion between histone and the
underlying DNA. These recruited proteins then act to alter chromatin structure actively or to promote transcripti on.
The histone code has the potential to be massively co mplex. There are at least 20 modifications that are m ade to histone tails that
have been relatively well characterized, and there is the potential for many more that we have not discover ed. Each histone can be
modified on multiple amino acids, with multiple diff erent chemical modifications. The information that can be stored in the histone
code dwarfs the amount that is stored in the order of the bases in the human genome.
Histone Methlyation
A portion of the histone protein known as the histon e tail can have methyl groups (CH) added to it. This is the same modification
that is made to cytosine nucleotides in DNA. The specif ic amino acid in the histone tail that gets methylat ed is very important for
determining whether it will tighten or loosen chromat in structure. Modification to several amino acids in t he tail is correlated with
euchromatin and active transcription, while modificat ion to other amino acids is correlated with heterochr omatin and gene
silencing. You should know that histones can be methyl ated, but we can’t use histone methylation as a predictor for euchromatin
or heterochromatin.
Histone Acetylation
Histone tails can also be modified by the addition o f an acetyl group (this process is known as histone acetylation). If you
remember from cellular respiration, an acetyl group (such as that found in acetyl-CoA) is a 2-carbon molec ule. When histone tails
are acetylated, this typically causes the tails to loos en from around the DNA, allowing the chromatin to loosen (Figure).
Figure: Nucleosomes can slide along DNA. When nucleosomes are sp aced closely together (top), transcription factors
cannot bind and gene expression is turned off. When th e nucleosomes are spaced far apart (bottom), the DNA i s exposed.
Transcription factors can bind, allowing gene expressio n to occur. Modifications to the histones and DNA affe ct nucleosome
spacing.
Other modifications
There are many other modifications that can be made to histone proteins in addition to methylation and acetylation. Histone tails
can be phosphorylated or ubiquitinated (where a small protein called ubiquitin is attached). Histone phospho rylation seems to be
related to DNA repair. Ubiquitination has been shown to be associated with both transcriptional activation or inactivation,
depending on the specific location.3

16.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70092Epigenetic Changes
Because errors in the epigenetic process, such as m odifying the wrong gene or failing to add a compound to a gene, can lead to
abnormal gene activity or inactivity, they can cause genetic disorders. Conditions including cancers, meta bolic disorders, and
degenerative disorders have all been found to be related t o epigenetic errors.
Cancerous cells often have regions of DNA that show di fferent levels of methylation compared to normal cel ls. Some genes are
methylated and silenced in cancerous cells, while they a re unmethylated and active in normal cells. Other gene s are active in
cancerous cells, but inactive in normal cells. Each specific cancer in each specific individual can sho w different patterns of
methylation, although there are similarities between many di fferent types of cancer.
Scientists continue to explore the relationship betwee n the genome and the chemical compounds that modify it. In particular, they
are studying what effect the modifications have on gene fu nction, protein production, and human health.
Figure: Histone proteins and DNA nucleotides can be modified chemically. Modifications affect nucleosome spacing an d
gene expression. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2-839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7009316.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
Like prokaryotic cells, the transcription of genes in eukaryotes requires the actions of an RNA polymerase to bind to a sequence
upstream of a gene to initiate transcription. However, unlike prokaryotic cells, the eukaryotic RNA polyme rase requires other
proteins, or transcription factors, to facilitate tra nscription initiation. Transcription factors are proteins that bind to the promoter
sequence and other regulatory sequences to control the transcription of the target gene. RNA polymerase b y itself cannot initiate
transcription in eukaryotic cells. Transcription facto rs must bind to the promoter region first and recruit RNA polymerase to the site
for transcription to be established.
The Promoter and the Transcription Machinery
Genes are organized to make the control of gene expr ession easier. The promoter region is immediately upstream of the coding
sequence. This region can be short (only a few nucleoti des in length) or quite long (hundreds of nucleotid es long). The longer the
promoter, the more available space for proteins to b ind. This also adds more control to the transcription process. The length of the
promoter is gene-specific and can differ dramatical ly between genes. Consequently, the level of control of gene expression can also
differ quite dramatically between genes. The purpose of the promoter is to bind transcription factors tha t control the initiation of
transcription.
The interaction between parts of the promoter and tr anscription factors is quite complex (Figure) and d iffers between specific
genes. In addition to the general transcription facto rs, there are gene-specific transcription factors. Th ere are hundreds of
transcription factors in a cell that each bind speci fically to a particular DNA sequence motif. Transcriptio n factors respond to
environmental stimuli that cause the proteins to find the ir binding sites and initiate transcription of the g ene that is needed.
Figure: An enhancer is a DNA sequence that promotes transcript ion. Each enhancer is made up of short DNA sequences
called distal control elements. Activators bound to th e distal control elements interact with mediator prot eins and transcription
factors. Two different genes may have the same promote r but different distal control elements, enabling dif ferential gene
expression.
Enhancers and Transcription
In some eukaryotic genes, there are regions that hel p increase or enhance transcription. These regions, ca lled enhancers, are not
necessarily close to the genes they enhance. They can be located upstream of a gene, within the coding re gion of the gene,
downstream of a gene, or may be thousands of nucleotides awa y.
Enhancer regions are binding sequences, or sites, fo r transcription factors. When a DNA-bending protein bind s, the shape of the
DNA changes (Figure). This shape change allows for the i nteraction of the activators bound to the enhancers with the
transcription factors bound to the promoter region a nd the RNA polymerase. Whereas DNA is generally depicte d as a straight line
in two dimensions, it is actually a three-dimensional ob ject. Therefore, a nucleotide sequence thousands of nucl eotides away can
fold over and interact with a specific promoter.

16.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70093Turning Genes Off: Transcriptional Repressors
Like prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells also have mechanisms to prevent transcription. Transcriptional repressors can bind to
promoter or enhancer regions and block transcription. Like the transcriptional activators, repressors respo nd to external stimuli to
prevent the binding of activating transcription factors.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. January 3, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...cription-Gene16.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7009416.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
After RNA is transcribed, it must be processed into a mature form before translation can begin. This proce ssing after an RNA
molecule has been transcribed, but before it is tran slated into a protein, is called post-transcriptiona l modification. As with the
epigenetic and transcriptional stages of processing, this post-transcriptional step can also be regulated to control gene expression in
the cell. If the RNA is not processed, shuttled, or transl ated, then no protein will be synthesized.
Alternative RNA Splicing
In the 1970s, genes were first observed that exhibited alternative RNA splicing. Alternative RNA splicing is a mechanism that
allows different protein products to be produced from one gene when different combinations of introns (and sometimes exons) are
removed from the transcript (Figure). This alternative splicing can be haphazard, but mor e often it is controlled and acts as a
mechanism of gene regulation, with the frequency of d ifferent splicing alternatives controlled by the cel l as a way to control the
production of different protein products in differe nt cells, or at different stages of development. Alte rnative splicing is now
understood to be a common mechanism of gene regulati on in eukaryotes; according to one estimate, 70% of genes in humans are
expressed as multiple proteins through alternative sp licing.
Figure: Pre-mRNA can be alternatively spliced to create diff erent proteins.
How could alternative splicing evolve? Introns have a beginning and ending recognition sequence, and it i s easy to imagine the
failure of the splicing mechanism to identify the en d of an intron and find the end of the next intron, thus removing two introns and
the intervening exon. In fact, there are mechanisms in place to prevent such exon skipping, but mutati ons are likely to lead to their
failure. Such “mistakes” would more than likely produce a nonfunctional protein. Indeed, the cause of many genetic diseases is
alternative splicing rather than mutations in a sequ ence. However, alternative splicing would create a prot ein variant without the
loss of the original protein, opening up possibiliti es for adaptation of the new variant to new functions. Gene duplication has played
an important role in the evolution of new functions in a similar way—by providing genes that may evolve wi thout eliminating the
original functional protein.

16.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70094
Figure: There are five basic modes of alternative splicing.
Control of RNA Stability
Before the mRNA leaves the nucleus, it is given two pr otective “caps” that prevent the end of the strand from degrading during its
journey. The 5′ cap, which is placed on the 5′ end of the mRNA, is usually composed of a methylated guanosine triphosphate
molecule (GTP). The poly-A tail, which is attached to th e 3′ end, is usually composed of a series of adenine n ucleotides. Once the
RNA is transported to the cytoplasm, the length of time that the RNA remains there can be controlled. Each R NA molecule has a
defined lifespan and decays at a specific rate. This rate of decay can influence how much protein is in th e cell. If the RNA decays
more rapidly, translation has less time to occur, so less protein will be produced. Conversely, if RNA decay s less rapidly, more
protein will be produced. This rate of decay is refer red to as the RNA stability. If the RNA is stable, it will be detected for longer
periods of time in the cytoplasm. Binding of proteins to the RNA can influence its stability (Figure).
Figure: The protein-coding region of mRNA is flanked by 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs). The presence of RNA binding proteins at the 5′ or 3′ UTR influences the st ability of the RNA molecule.
RNA Stability and microRNAs
In addition to proteins that bind to and control (in crease or decrease) RNA stability, other elements ca lled microRNAs can bind to
the RNA molecule. These microRNAs, or miRNAs, are short R NA molecules that are only 21–24 nucleotides in leng th. The
miRNAs are made in the nucleus as longer pre-miRNAs. Th ese pre-miRNAs are chopped into mature miRNAs by a prote in called
dicer. Together, miRNAs and a large protein complex called R ISC rapidly destroy the RNA molecule.

16.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70094References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. January 3, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...transcriptiona
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

16.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7009516.5: Eukaryotic Translational and Post-Translational Regulation
After the RNA has been transported to the cytoplasm, i t is translated into protein. Control of this process is largely dependent on
the RNA molecule. As previously discussed, the stability of the RNA will have a large impact on its translation in to a protein. As
the stability changes, the amount of time that it is ava ilable for translation also changes.
The Initiation Complex and Translation Rate
Like transcription, translation is controlled by prot eins that bind and initiate the process. In translat ion, the complex that assembles
to start the process is referred to as the initiation complex. Regulation of the formation of this complex can i ncrease or decrease
rates of translation (Figure).
Figure: Gene expression can be controlled by factors that bin d the translation initiation complex.
Chemical Modifications, Protein Activity, and Longevity
Proteins can be chemically modified with the addition of groups including methyl, phosphate, acetyl, and ub iquitin groups. The
addition or removal of these groups from proteins re gulates their activity or the length of time they ex ist in the cell. Sometimes
these modifications can regulate where a protein is f ound in the cell—for example, in the nucleus, the cyt oplasm, or attached to the
plasma membrane.
Chemical modifications occur in response to external stimuli such as stress, the lack of nutrients, heat, or ultraviolet light exposure.
These changes can alter epigenetic accessibility, trans cription, mRNA stability, or translation—all resulting in changes in
expression of various genes. This is an efficient way f or the cell to rapidly change the levels of specifi c proteins in response to the
environment. Because proteins are involved in every stage of gene regulation, the phosphorylation of a p rotein (depending on the
protein that is modified) can alter accessibility to the chromosome, can alter translation (by altering t ranscription factor binding or
function), can change nuclear shuttling (by influenc ing modifications to the nuclear pore complex), can alter RNA stability (by
binding or not binding to the RNA to regulate its sta bility), can modify translation (increase or decrease), or can change posttranslational modifications (add or remove phosphates or other chemical modifications).
The addition of an ubiquitin group to a protein marks that protein for degradation. Ubi quitin acts like a flag indicating that the
protein lifespan is complete. These proteins are mov ed to the proteasome, an organelle that functions to remove proteins, to be
degraded (Figure). One way to control gene expression, ther efore, is to alter the longevity of the protein.
Figure: Proteins with ubiquitin tags are marked for degradati on within the proteasome.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/b3c1e1d2-839...9a8aafbdd@9.10
16.5: Eukaryotic Translational and Post-Translational R egulation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

16.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7009616.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
Cancer is not a single disease but includes many dif ferent diseases. In cancer cells, mutations modify cell -cycle control and cells
don’t stop growing as they normally would. Mutations can also alter the growth rate or the progression of the cell through the cell
cycle. As a result, cells can progress through the cel l cycle unimpeded, even if mutations exist in the ce ll and its growth should be
terminated.
Cancer: Disease of Altered Gene Expression
Cancer can be described as a disease of altered gene expre ssion. There are many proteins that are turned on or off (gene activation
or gene silencing) that dramatically alter the overa ll activity of the cell. A gene that is not normally expressed in that cell can be
switched on and expressed at high levels. This can be t he result of gene mutation or changes in any level o f gene regulation
(epigenetic, transcription, post-transcription, transla tion, or post-translation).
Changes in epigenetic regulation, transcription, RNA st ability, protein translation, and post-translational control can be detected in
cancer. While these changes don’t occur simultaneousl y in one cancer, changes at each of these levels can be detected when
observing cancer at different sites in different ind ividuals. Therefore, changes in histone acetylation (epigenetic modification that
leads to gene silencing), activation of transcriptio n factors by phosphorylation, increased RNA stability, increased translational
control, and protein modification can all be detecte d at some point in various cancer cells. Scientists are working to understand the
common changes that give rise to certain types of cancer o r how a modification might be exploited to destroy a tumor cell.
Tumor Suppressor Genes, Oncogenes, and Cancer
In normal cells, some genes function to prevent exces s, inappropriate cell growth. These are tumor suppressor genes, which are
active in normal cells to prevent uncontrolled cell growth. There are many tumor suppressor genes in cell s. The most studied tumor
suppressor gene is p53, which is mutated in over 50 percent of all cancer t ypes. The p53 protein itself functions as a transcript ion
factor. It can bind to sites in the promoters of gen es to initiate transcription. Therefore, the mutation of p53 in cancer will
dramatically alter the transcriptional activity of its tar get genes.
Proto-oncogenes are positive cell-cycle regulators (their normal f unction is to allow the cell cycle to progress throu gh
checkpoints). When mutated, proto-oncogenes can become oncogenes and cause cancer. Overexpression of the onc ogene can lead
to uncontrolled cell growth. This is because oncogene s can alter transcriptional activity, stability, or pr otein translation of another
gene that directly or indirectly controls cell growth.
Cancer and Epigenetic Alterations
Silencing genes through epigenetic mechanisms is also very common in cancer cells. There are characteristi c modifications to
histone proteins and DNA that are associated with silenc ed genes. In cancer cells, the DNA in the promoter region of silenced
genes is methylated on cytosine DNA residues in CpG islan ds. Histone proteins that surround that region lack the acetylation
modification that is present when the genes are expre ssed in normal cells. This combination of DNA methylatio n and histone
deacetylation (epigenetic modifications that lead to gene silencing) is commonly found in cancer. When t hese modifications occur,
the gene present in that chromosomal region is silen ced. Increasingly, scientists understand how epigeneti c changes are altered in
cancer. Because these changes are temporary and can b e reversed—for example, by preventing the action of the histone deacetylase
protein that removes acetyl groups, or by DNA methyl transferase enzymes that add methyl groups to cytosin es in DNA—it is
possible to design new drugs and new therapies to take advantage of the reversible nature of these processe s. Indeed, many
researchers are testing how a silenced gene can be switched ba ck on in a cancer cell to help re-establish normal growt h patterns.
Genes involved in the development of many other illn esses, ranging from allergies to inflammation to autis m, are thought to be
regulated by epigenetic mechanisms. As our knowledge o f how genes are controlled deepens, new ways to treat diseases like
cancer will emerge.
Cancer and Transcriptional Control
Alterations in cells that give rise to cancer can aff ect the transcriptional control of gene expression. Mutations that activate
transcription factors, such as increased phosphorylation, can increase the binding of a transcription factor t o its binding site in a
promoter. This could lead to increased transcription al activation of that gene that results in modified cell growth. Alternatively, a

16.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70096mutation in the DNA of a promoter or enhancer region can increase the binding ability of a transcription factor. This could also lead
to the increased transcription and aberrant gene expre ssion that is seen in cancer cells.
Researchers have been investigating how to control t he transcriptional activation of gene expression in c ancer. Identifying how a
transcription factor binds, or a pathway that activates where a gene can be turned off, has led to new drugs a nd new ways to treat
cancer. In breast cancer, for example, many proteins are overexpressed. This can lead to increased phosphoryl ation of key
transcription factors that increase transcription. One such example is the overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) in a subset of breast cancers. The EGFR pathway activa tes many protein kinases that, in turn, activate ma ny transcription
factors that control genes involved in cell growth. Ne w drugs that prevent the activation of EGFR have been d eveloped and are
used to treat these cancers.
Cancer and Post-transcriptional Control
Changes in the post-transcriptional control of a gen e can also result in cancer. Recently, several groups o f researchers have shown
that specific cancers have altered expression of miR NAs. Because miRNAs bind to the 3′ UTR of RNA molecules to degrade them,
overexpression of these miRNAs could be detrimental to normal cellular activity. Too many miRNAs could dramat ically decrease
the RNA population leading to a decrease in protein expression. Several studies have demonstrated a change in the miRNA
population in specific cancer types. It appears that the subset of miRNAs expressed in breast cancer cells is quite different from the
subset expressed in lung cancer cells or even from n ormal breast cells. This suggests that alterations in miRNA activity can
contribute to the growth of breast cancer cells. The se types of studies also suggest that if some miRNAs are specifically expressed
only in cancer cells, they could be potential drug t argets. It would, therefore, be conceivable that new dru gs that turn off miRNA
expression in cancer could be an effective method to treat ca ncer.
Cancer and Translational/Post-translational Control
There are many examples of how translational or post- translational modifications of proteins arise in can cer. A variety of
modifications can be found in cancer cells that cause effects that range from the increased translation of a protein to changes in
protein phosphorylation to alternative splice varian ts of a protein. Keep in mind that translational cont rol will result in the amount
of protein that is translated, while post-translational control will result in the amount of active or modified protein found in the cell.
An example of how the expression of an alternative for m of a protein can have dramatically different outc omes is seen in colon
cancer cells. The c-Flip protein, a protein involved in mediating the cell death pathway, comes in two forms: long (c-FLIPL) and
short (c-FLIPS). Both forms appear to be involved in in itiating controlled cell death mechanisms in normal c ells. However, in
colon cancer cells, expression of the long form resu lts in increased cell growth instead of cell death. Cl early, the expression of the
wrong protein dramatically alters cell function and cont ributes to the development of cancer.
New Drugs to Combat Cancer: Targeted Therapies
Scientists are using what is known about the regulation of gene expression in disease states, including cance r, to develop new ways
to treat and prevent disease development. Many scientis ts are designing drugs on the basis of the gene express ion patterns within
individual tumors. This idea, that therapy and medic ines can be tailored to an individual, has given ris e to the field of personalized
medicine. With an increased understanding of gene reg ulation and gene function, medicines can be designed to specifically target
diseased cells without harming healthy cells. Some new me dicines, called targeted therapies, have exploited t he overexpression of a
specific protein or the mutation of a gene to devel op a new medication to treat disease. One such example is the use of anti-EGF
receptor medications to treat the subset of breast cancer tumors that have very high levels of the EGF p rotein. Undoubtedly, more
targeted therapies will be developed as scientists lear n more about how gene expression changes can cause cancer.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. January 3, 2017. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...ene-Regulation
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
17: Meiosis - Sexual Reproduction
Course Outcomes for this section:
Apply biological theories and concepts to solve problems r elated to classical and molecular genetics
1. Describe the molecular basis of inheritance.
The ability to reproduce in kind is a basic characteristic of all living things. In kind means that the offspring of any organism
closely resembles its parent or parents. Hippopotamuses g ive birth to hippopotamus calves; Monterey pine tree s produce seeds
from which Monterey pine seedlings emerge; and adult flamingos lay eggs that hatch into flamingo chicks. In kind does not
generally mean exactly the same. While many single-celled organisms and a few multi cellular organisms can produce genetically
identical clones of themselves through mitotic cell division, many single-celled organisms and most multi cellular organisms
reproduce regularly using another method.
Figure: Each of us, like these other large multicellular org anisms, begins life as a fertilized egg. After trillion s of cell
divisions, each of us develops into a complex, multicel lular organism. (credit a: modification of work by F rank Wouters; credit b:
modification of work by Ken Cole, USGS; credit c: mo dification of work by Martin Pettitt)
Sexual reproduction is the production by parents of se x cells and the fusion of two sex cells to form a sing le, unique cell. In
multicellular organisms, this new cell will then undergo mitotic cell divisions to develop into an adult or ganism. A type of cell
division called meiosis leads to the cells that are p art of the sexual reproductive cycle. Sexual reprodu ction, specifically meiosis
and fertilization, introduces variation into offspr ing that may account for the evolutionary success of sexual reproduction. The vast
majority of eukaryotic organisms can or must employ some f orm of meiosis and fertilization to reproduce.
Sexual reproduction was an early evolutionary innovat ion after the appearance of eukaryotic cells. The fac t that most eukaryotes
reproduce sexually is evidence of its evolutionary su ccess. In many animals, it is the only mode of repr oduction. And yet, scientists
recognize some real disadvantages to sexual reprodu ction. On the surface, offspring that are genetically identical to the parent may
appear to be more advantageous. If the parent organ ism is successfully occupying a habitat, offspring wi th the same traits would be
similarly successful. There is also the obvious benef it to an organism that can produce offspring by asex ual budding, fragmentation,
or asexual eggs. These methods of reproduction do not require another organism of the opposite sex. There i s no need to expend
energy finding or attracting a mate. That energy can be spent on producing more offspring. Indeed, some o rganisms that lead a
solitary lifestyle have retained the ability to rep roduce asexually. In addition, asexual populations on ly have female individuals, so
every individual is capable of reproduction. In contr ast, the males in sexual populations (half the popul ation) are not producing
offspring themselves. Because of this, an asexual popula tion can grow twice as fast as a sexual population in t heory. This means
that in competition, the asexual population would have the advantage. All of these advantages to asexual re production, which are
also disadvantages to sexual reproduction, should mean that the number of species with asexual reproduction should be more
common.
However, multicellular organisms that exclusively depe nd on asexual reproduction are exceedingly rare. Wh y is sexual
reproduction so common? This is one of the importan t questions in biology and has been the focus of muc h research from the latterLearning Objectives

2half of the twentieth century until now. A likely ex planation is that the variation that sexual reprodu ction creates among offspring is
very important to the survival and reproduction of those offspring. The only source of variation in asex ual organisms is mutation.
This is the ultimate source of variation in sexual org anisms. In addition, those different mutations are c ontinually reshuffled from
one generation to the next when different parents com bine their unique genomes, and the genes are mixed in to different
combinations by the process of meiosis. Meiosis is the division of the contents of the nuc leus that divides the chromosomes among
gametes. Variation is introduced during meiosis, as well as when the gametes combine in fertilization.
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
17.2: Meiosis I
17.3: Meiosis II
17.4: Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:qOUtHXNY@3/Sexual-Reprod uction
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:1Q8z96mT@4/Meiosis
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:6-3MVU-j@4/Errors-in -Meiosis
Thumbnail: Pollen mother cells dividing during meiosis. (C C BY-SA 3.0; Josef Reischig via Wikimedia Commons).
17: Meiosis - Sexual Reproduction is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

17.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7012717.1: Overview of Meiosis
Sexual reproduction requires fertilization, a union of two cells from two individual organisms. If those two cells each contain one
set of chromosomes, then the resulting cell contains two sets of chromosomes. The number of sets of chro mosomes in a cell is
called its ploidy level (Figure). Haploid cells contain one set of chromosomes. Cells contain ing two sets of chromosomes are
called diploid. If the reproductive cycle is to continue, the dip loid cell must somehow reduce its number of chromosome sets
before fertilization can occur again, or there will b e a continual doubling in the number of chromosome sets in every generation.
So, in addition to fertilization, sexual reproduction includes a nuclear division, known as meiosis, that r educes the number of
chromosome sets.
Figure: Number of chromosomes in a haploid and diploid cell. Note that triploid and tetraploid are not normal n umbers of
chromosomes in humans. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Ehamberg via Wikimedia Commons)
Most animals and plants are diploid, containing two set s of chromosomes; in each somatic cell (the non-reproductive cells of a
multicellular organism), the nucleus contains two cop ies of each chromosome that are referred to as homol ogous chromosomes.
Somatic cells are sometimes referred to as “body” cel ls. Homologous chromosomes are matched pairs containing genes for the
same traits in identical locations along their lengt h (Figure). Diploid organisms inherit one copy of each homologous
chromosome from each parent; all together, they are considered a full set of chromosomes. In animals, ha ploid cells containing a
single copy of each homologous chromosome are found only within gametes. Gametes fuse with another haploi d gamete to
produce a diploid cell.
Figure: A karyotype displaying all of the chromosomes in the human genome. Note that there are two copies of each
chromosome. These are the homologous chromosomes (one fr om each parent).
Nearly all animals employ a diploid-dominant life-cy cle strategy in which the only haploid cells produced by the organism are the
gametes. Early in the development of the embryo, speci alized diploid cells, called germ cells, are produced wi thin the gonads, such
as the testes and ovaries. Germ cells are capable of mitosis to perpetuate the cell line and meiosis to pr oduce gametes. Once the
haploid gametes are formed, they lose the ability to divide again. There is no multicellular haploid lif e stage. Fertilization occurs
with the fusion of two gametes, usually from different ind ividuals, restoring the diploid state (Figure).

17.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70127
Figure: In animals, sexually reproducing adults form haploid gametes from diploid germ cells. Fusion of the gametes gives
rise to a fertilized egg cell, or zygote. The zygote will undergo multiple rounds of mitosis to produce a multicellular offspring. The
germ cells are generated early in the development of the zygote.
The nuclear division that forms haploid cells, which is called meiosis, is related to mitosis. As you have le arned, mitosis is part of a
cell reproduction cycle that results in identical da ughter nuclei that are also genetically identical t o the original parent nucleus. In
mitosis, both the parent and the daughter nuclei co ntain the same number of chromosome sets—diploid for most plants and
animals. Meiosis employs many of the same mechanisms as mit osis. However, the starting nucleus is always diploid an d the nuclei
that result at the end of a meiotic cell division ar e haploid. To achieve the reduction in chromosome nu mber, meiosis consists of
one round of chromosome duplication and two rounds of nuc lear division.
Figure: An overview of meiosis. Two sets of homologous chromosom es are shown. One set is comprised of a long red and a
long blue chromosome. The second set is the two shorter chromosomes. During interphase, the chromosomes are dupl icated so that
in the second cell they look like X’s. These two conne cted copies are called sister chromatids. Photo credit Rdbickel; Wikimedia.
Because the events that occur during each of the di vision stages are analogous to the events of mitosis, the same stage names are
assigned. However, because there are two rounds of divisio n, the stages are designated with a “I” or “II.” Thus, meiosis I is the first
round of meiotic division and reduces the number of chromosome sets from two to one (Figure). The genetic i nformation is
also mixed during this division to create unique reco mbinant chromosomes. Meiosis II, in which the second round of meiotic
division takes place in a way that is similar to mitosi s, separates the sister chromatids (the identical copie s of each chromosome
produced during DNA replication that are attached at the centromere).

17.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70127References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:1Q8z96mT@4/Meiosis
17.1: Overview of Meiosis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

17.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7012817.2: Meiosis I
Interphase
Meiosis is preceded by an interphase which is nearly id entical to the interphase preceding mitosis. During interphase, the DNA of
the chromosomes is replicated (during S phase). After DNA replication, each chromosome becomes composed of t wo identical
copies (called sister chromatids) that are held tog ether at the centromere until they are pulled apart during meiosis II (Figure
Figure: Sister chromatids are identical copies of a chromosome that are held together at the centromere. They are produced
during DNA replication. (Credit: User: SyntaxError55, from Wikimedia)
Meiosis I
Meiosis is preceded by an interphase consisting of th e G, S, and G phases, which are nearly identical to the p hases preceding
mitosis. The G phase, which is also called the first gap phase, is the first phase of the interphase and is focused on cell growth. The
S phase is the second phase of interphase, during which the DNA of the chromosomes is replicated. Finally, the G phase, also
called the second gap phase, is the third and final ph ase of interphase; in this phase, the cell undergoes t he final preparations for
meiosis.
During DNA duplication in the S phase, each chromosome i s replicated to produce two identical copies, called s ister chromatids,
that are held together at the centromere by cohesin proteins. Cohesin holds the chromatids together until a naphase II. The
centrosomes, which are the structures that organize t he microtubules of the meiotic spindle, also replicat e. This prepares the cell to
enter prophase I, the first meiotic phase.
Prophase I
Early in prophase I, the chromosomes can be seen clea rly microscopically. As the nuclear envelope begins to break down, the
proteins associated with homologous chromosomes bring t he pair close to each other. The tight pairing of t he homologous
chromosomes is called synapsis (Figure). In synapsis, the genes on the chromatids of the homologous chromosomes are
precisely aligned with each other. Recall that synapsis doe s NOT occur during mitosis.
Figure: Early in prophase I, homologous chromosomes come toget her to form a synapse. The chromosomes are bound
tightly together and in perfect alignment by a prot ein lattice called a synaptonemal complex and by coh esin proteins at the
centromere.
In synapsis, the genes on the chromatids of the hom ologous chromosomes are aligned precisely with each o ther. An exchange of
chromosome segments between non-sister homologous chroma tids occurs and is called crossing over (Figure). The
crossover events are the first source of genetic vari ation produced by meiosis. A single crossover event bet ween homologous nonsister chromatids leads to a reciprocal exchange of equivalent DNA between a maternal chromosome and a pat ernal chromosome.1 2

17.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70128Now, when that sister chromatid is moved into a gamete, it will carry some DNA from one parent of the individu al and some DNA
from the other parent. The recombinant sister chromatid has a combination of maternal and p aternal genes that did not exist before
the crossover.
Figure: In this illustration of the effects of crossing over, t he blue chromosome came from the individual’s father and the red
chromosome came from the individual’s mother. Crossover occurs between non-sister chromatids of homologous chro mosomes.
The result is an exchange of genetic material between homologous chromosomes. The chromosomes that have a mix ture of
maternal and paternal sequence are called recombinan t and the chromosomes that are completely paternal or maternal are called
non-recombinant.
Prometaphase I
The key event in prometaphase I is the attachment of the spindle fiber microtubules to the kinetochore proteins at the centromeres.
Kinetochore proteins are multiprotein complexes that bind the centromeres of a chromosome to the microtub ules of the mitotic
spindle. Microtubules grow from centrosomes placed at opposite poles of the cell. The microtubules move to ward the middle of the
cell and attach to one of the two fused homologous ch romosomes. The microtubules attach at each chromosomes’ kinetochores.
With each member of the homologous pair attached to opposite poles of the cell, in the next phase, the m icrotubules can pull the
homologous pair apart. A spindle fiber that has attac hed to a kinetochore is called a kinetochore microtu bule. At the end of
prometaphase I, each tetrad is attached to microtubul es from both poles, with one homologous chromosome faci ng each pole. The
homologous chromosomes are still held together at chias mata. In addition, the nuclear membrane has broken down entirely.

17.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70128
Figure: In prometaphase I, microtubules attach to the fused k inetochores of homologous chromosomes, and the homologo us
chromosomes are arranged at the midpoint of the cell in metaphase I. In anaphase I, the homologous chromosom es are separated.
Metaphase I
During metaphase I, the homologous chromosomes are arra nged in the center of the cell with the kinetochores facing opposite
poles. The orientation of each pair of homologous chro mosomes at the center of the cell is random. This ra ndomness, called
independent assortment, is the physical basis for the generation of the se cond form of genetic variation in offspring (Figure
). Consider that the homologous chromosomes of a sex ually reproducing organism are originally inherited as two separate
sets, one from each parent in the egg and the sperm. Us ing humans as an example, one set of 23 chromosomes is present in the egg
donated by the mother. The father provides the other set of 23 chromosomes in the sperm that fertilizes the egg. In metaphase I,
these pairs line up at the midway point between the two poles of the cell. Because there is an equal chance that a microtubule fiber
will encounter a maternally or paternally inherited chromosome, the arrangement of the tetrads at the me taphase plate is random.
Any maternally inherited chromosome may face either p ole. Any paternally inherited chromosome may also face either pole. The
orientation of each tetrad is independent of the orient ation of the other 22 tetrads.

17.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70128
Figure: Random, independent assortment during metaphase I can be demonstrated by considering a cell with a set of t wo
chromosomes (n = 2). In this case, there are two possible arrangement s at the equatorial plane in metaphase I. The total p ossible
number of different gametes is 2, where n equals the number of chromosomes in a set. In this exam ple, there are four possible
genetic combinations for the gametes. With n = 23 in human cells, there are over 8 million possibl e combinations of paternal and
maternal chromosomes.
In each cell that undergoes meiosis, the arrangemen t of the tetrads is different. The number of variat ions depends on the number of
chromosomes making up a set. There are two possibilitie s for orientation (for each tetrad); thus, the possib le number of alignments
equals 2 where n is the number of chromosomes per set. Humans have 23 chromosome pairs, which results in over eight millio n
(2) possibilities. This number does not include the v ariability previously created in the sister chromati ds by crossover. Given
these two mechanisms, it is highly unlikely that any t wo haploid cells resulting from meiosis will have the same genetic
composition (Figure).
To summarize the genetic consequences of meiosis I: th e maternal and paternal genes are recombined by cro ssover events
occurring on each homologous pair during prophase I; in addition, the random assortment of tetrads at me taphase produces a
unique combination of maternal and paternal chromosomes that will make their way into the gametes.
Anaphase I
In anaphase I, the microtubules pull the linked chrom osomes apart. The sister chromatids remain tightly bo und together at the
centromere. The chiasmata are broken in anaphase I as the microtubules attached to the fused kinetochores p ull the homologous
chromosomes apart (Figure).n
n

17.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70128Telophase I and Cytokinesis I
In telophase, the separated chromosomes arrive at op posite poles. The remainder of the typical telophase events may or may not
occur, depending on the species. In some organisms, the chromosomes decondense and nuclear envelopes for m around the
chromatids in telophase I. In other organisms, cytok inesis—the physical separation of the cytoplasmic co mponents into two
daughter cells—occurs without reformation of the nucl ei. In nearly all species of animals and some fungi, cytokinesis separates the
cell contents via a cleavage furrow (constriction of the actin ring that leads to cytoplasmic division). In plants, a cell plate is formed
during cell cytokinesis by Golgi vesicles fusing at the metaphase plate. This cell plate will ultimately lead to the formation of cell
walls that separate the two daughter cells.
Two haploid cells are the end result of the first mei otic division. The cells are haploid because at eac h pole, there is just one of each
pair of the homologous chromosomes. Therefore, only one full set of the chromosomes is present. This is why the cells are
considered haploid—there is only one chromosome set, even though each homolog still consists of two sister chromatids. Recall
that sister chromatids are merely duplicates of one of the two homologous chromosomes (except for changes that occurred during
crossing over). In meiosis II, these two sister chromatid s will separate, creating four haploid daughter cells.
Summary of Meiosis I
The chromosomes are copied during interphase (prior t o meiosis I). This forms two identical sister chromat ids that are attached
together at the centromere. During prophase I, crossin g over introduces genetic variation by swapping piec es of homologous
chromosomes. Additional genetic variation is introduce d by independent assortment, which takes into account how the homologous
chromosomes line up during metaphase I. At the end of meiosis I, two haploid cells (where each chromosome sti ll consists of two
sister chromatids) are produced.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. January 2, 2017 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:1Q8z96mT@4/Meiosis
17.2: Meiosis I is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

17.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7012917.3: Meiosis II
In some species, cells enter a brief interphase, or int erkinesis, before entering meiosis II. Interkinesis lacks an S phase, so
chromosomes are not duplicated. The two cells produced in meiosis I go thr ough the events of meiosis II at the same time. During
meiosis II, the sister chromatids within the two daug hter cells separate, forming four new haploid gametes. T he mechanics of
meiosis II is similar to mitosis, except that each divi ding cell has only one set of homologous chromosomes. Therefore, each cell
has half the number of sister chromatids to separate out a s a diploid cell undergoing mitosis.
Prophase II
If the chromosomes decondensed in telophase I, they c ondense again. If nuclear envelopes were formed, they fragment into
vesicles. The centrosomes that were duplicated during interkinesis move away from each other toward opposi te poles, and new
spindles are formed.
Prometaphase II
The nuclear envelopes are completely broken down, and the spindle is fully formed. Each sister chromatid forms an individual
kinetochore that attaches to microtubules from opposi te poles.
Metaphase II
The sister chromatids are maximally condensed and a ligned at the equator of the cell.
Anaphase II
The sister chromatids are pulled apart by the kinetoc hore microtubules and move toward opposite poles (Fig ure). Nonkinetochore microtubules elongate the cell.
In meiosis II, the connected sister chromatids remaini ng in the haploid cells from meiosis I will be split to form four haploid cells.
The two cells produced in meiosis I go through the e vents of meiosis II in synchrony. Overall, meiosis II resembles the mitotic
division of a haploid cell. During meiosis II, the sis ter chromatids are pulled apart by the spindle fibe rs and move toward opposite
poles.

17.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70129
Figure: In prometaphase I, microtubules attach to the fused k inetochores of homologous chromosomes. In anaphase I, th e
homologous chromosomes are separated. In prometaphase II, microtubules attach to individual kinetochores of si ster chromatids.
In anaphase II, the sister chromatids are separated.
Telophase II and Cytokinesis
The chromosomes arrive at opposite poles and begin to decondense. Nuclear envelopes form around the chrom osomes. Cytokinesis
separates the two cells into four unique haploid cel ls. At this point, the newly formed nuclei are both hapl oid and have only one
copy of the single set of chromosomes. The cells produ ced are genetically unique because of the random asso rtment of paternal and
maternal homologs and because of the recombining of maternal and paternal segments of chromosomes (with t heir sets of genes)
that occurs during crossover.
The entire process of meiosis is outlined in Figure.

17.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70129

17.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70129
Figure: An animal cell with a diploid number of four (2 n = 4) proceeds through the stages of meiosis to form fou r haploid
daughter cells.
Summary of Meiosis II
Meiosis II begins with the 2 haploid cells where each c hromosome is made up of two connected sister chromati ds. DNA replication
does NOT occur at the beginning of meiosis II. The sister ch romatids are separated, producing 4 genetically different haploid cells.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:1Q8z96mT@4/Meiosis
17.3: Meiosis II is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

17.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7013017.4: Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis
Mitosis and meiosis, which are both forms of division of the nucleus in eukaryotic cells, share some similar ities, but also exhibit
distinct differences that lead to their very differe nt outcomes. Mitosis is a single nuclear division that results in two nuclei, usually
partitioned into two new cells. The nuclei resulting from a mitotic division are genetically identical t o the original. They have the
same number of sets of chromosomes: one in the case of haploid cells, and two in the case of diploid cel ls. On the other hand,
meiosis is two nuclear divisions that result in four nuclei, usually partitioned into four new cells. The n uclei resulting from meiosis
are never genetically identical, and they contain on e chromosome set only—this is half the number of the o riginal cell, which was
diploid.
The differences in the outcomes of meiosis and mitos is occur because of differences in the behavior of t he chromosomes during
each process. Most of these differences in the processes occur in meiosis I, which is a very different nuclear d ivision than mitosis.
In meiosis I, the homologous chromosome pairs become associated with each other, are bound together, experi ence chiasmata and
crossover between sister chromatids, and line up along the metaphase plate in tetrads with spindle fibers fr om opposite spindle
poles attached to each kinetochore of a homolog in a tetr ad. All of these events occur only in meiosis I, never in mito sis.
Homologous chromosomes move to opposite poles during me iosis I so the number of sets of chromosomes in each nucleus-to-be is
reduced from two to one. For this reason, meiosis I is r eferred to as a reduction division. There is no such reduction in ploidy level
in mitosis.
Meiosis II is much more analogous to a mitotic divis ion. In this case, duplicated chromosomes (only one set of them) line up at the
center of the cell with divided kinetochores attached to spindle fibers from opposite poles. During anaphas e II, as in mitotic
anaphase, the kinetochores divide and one sister chrom atid is pulled to one pole and the other sister chroma tid is pulled to the other
pole. If it were not for the fact that there had bee n crossovers, the two products of each meiosis II divisi on would be identical as in
mitosis; instead, they are different because there ha s always been at least one crossover per chromosome. Me iosis II is not a
reduction division because, although there are fewer co pies of the genome in the resulting cells, there is still one set of
chromosomes, as there was at the end of meiosis I.
Cells produced by mitosis will function in different parts of the body as a part of growth or replacing dead or damaged cells. They
may even be involved in asexual reproduction in some organisms. Cells produced by meiosis in a diploid-dominan t organism such
as an animal will only participate in sexual reproduction.

17.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70130
Figure: Meiosis and mitosis are both preceded by one round of DNA replication; however, meiosis includes two nuclear
divisions. The four daughter cells resulting from meiosi s are haploid and genetically distinct. The daughter cells resulting from
mitosis are diploid and identical to the parent cell.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:1Q8z96mT@4/Meiosis
17.4: Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

17.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7013117.5: Errors in Meiosis
Inherited disorders can arise when chromosomes behav e abnormally during meiosis. Chromosome disorders can be divided into
two categories: abnormalities in chromosome number a nd chromosome structural rearrangements. Because even small segments of
chromosomes can span many genes, chromosomal disorders are characteristically dramatic and often fatal.
Disorders in Chromosome Number
The isolation and microscopic observation of chromos omes forms the basis of cytogenetics and is the primar y method by which
clinicians detect chromosomal abnormalities in humans. A karyotype is the number and appearance of chromosomes, includi ng
their length, banding pattern, and centromere positio n. To obtain a view of an individual’s karyotype, cyt ologists photograph the
chromosomes and then cut and paste each chromosome into a chart, or karyogram (Figure).
Figure: This karyogram shows the chromosomes of a normal female human immune cell during mitosis. (Credit: Andreas
Bolzer, et al)
By observing a karyogram, geneticists can actually v isualize the chromosomal composition of an individual to confirm or predict
genetic abnormalities in offspring even before birth.
Although Mendel is referred to as the “father of moder n genetics,” he performed his experiments with none of the tools that the
geneticists of today routinely employ. One such power ful cytological technique is karyotyping, a method i n which traits
characterized by chromosomal abnormalities can be i dentified from a single cell. To observe an individ ual’s karyotype, a
person’s cells (like white blood cells) are first coll ected from a blood sample or other tissue. In the la boratory, the isolated cells
are stimulated to begin actively dividing. A chemic al called colchicine is then applied to cells to ar rest condensed
chromosomes in metaphase. Cells are then made to swell using a hypotonic solution so the chromosomes spread apart. Finally,
the sample is preserved in a fixative and applied to a slide.
The geneticist then stains chromosomes with one of s everal dyes to better visualize the distinct and re producible banding
patterns of each chromosome pair. Following staining, the chromosomes are viewed using bright-field microscop y. A common
stain choice is the Giemsa stain. Giemsa staining resul ts in approximately 400–800 bands (of tightly coile d DNA and
condensed proteins) arranged along all of the 23 chr omosome pairs; an experienced geneticist can identify each band. In
addition to the banding patterns, chromosomes are furt her identified on the basis of size and centromere location. To obtain the
classic depiction of the karyotype in which homologou s pairs of chromosomes are aligned in numerical orde r from longest to
shortest, the geneticist obtains a digital image, ide ntifies each chromosome, and manually arranges the chromosomes into this
pattern (Figure).
At its most basic, the karyogram may reveal genetic abn ormalities in which an individual has too many or to o few
chromosomes per cell. Examples of this are Down Syndrome, which is identified by a third copy of chromosome 21, and
Turner Syndrome, which is characterized by the presenc e of only one X chromosome in women instead of the nor mal two.
Geneticists can also identify large deletions or insert ions of DNA. For instance, Jacobsen Syndrome—which involves
distinctive facial features as well as heart and bleed ing defects—is identified by a deletion on chromoso me 11. Finally, the
karyotype can pinpoint translocations, which occur wh en a segment of genetic material breaks from one chro mosome and
reattaches to another chromosome or to a different p art of the same chromosome. Translocations are implic ated in certain
cancers, including chronic myelogenous leukemia.
During Mendel’s lifetime, inheritance was an abstract concept that could only be inferred by performing c rosses and observing
the traits expressed by offspring. By observing a kary ogram, today’s geneticists can actually visualize th e chromosomal
composition of an individual to confirm or predict gene tic abnormalities in offspring, even before birth.Geneticists Use Karyograms to Identify Chromosomal Aberrations

17.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70131Of all the chromosomal disorders, abnormalities in chromo some number are the most easily identifiable from a karyogram.
Disorders of chromosome number include the duplicati on or loss of entire chromosomes, as well as changes in the number of
complete sets of chromosomes. They are caused by nondisjunction, which occurs when pairs of homologous chromosomes or
sister chromatids fail to separate during meiosis. The r isk of nondisjunction increases with the age of the paren ts.
Nondisjunction can occur during either meiosis I or II, with different results (Figure). If homologous chromosomes fail to
separate during meiosis I, the result is two gametes that lack that chromosome and two gametes with two copi es of the
chromosome. If sister chromatids fail to separate dur ing meiosis II, the result is one gamete that lacks th at chromosome, two
normal gametes with one copy of the chromosome, and one ga mete with two copies of the chromosome.
Figure: Nondisjunction occurs when homologous chromosomes or sist er chromatids fail to separate during meiosis,
resulting in an abnormal chromosome number. Nondisjunc tion may occur during meiosis I or meiosis II. Photo cr edit Tweety207;
Wikimedia.
An individual with the appropriate number of chromoso mes for their species is called euploid; in humans, euploidy corresponds to
22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes (such as is seen in t he karyotype in Figure). An individual with an
error in chromosome number is described as aneuploid, a term that includes monosomy (loss of one chromosome) or trisomy
(gain of an extraneous chromosome). Monosomic human z ygotes missing any one copy of an autosome invariably f ail to develop
to birth because they have only one copy of essenti al genes. Most autosomal trisomies also fail to develo p to birth; however,
duplications of some of the smaller chromosomes (13, 15, 18, 21, or 22) can result in offspring that survi ve for several weeks to
many years. Trisomic individuals suffer from a diff erent type of genetic imbalance: an excess in gene dose. Cell functions are
calibrated to the amount of gene product produced b y two copies (doses) of each gene; adding a third co py (dose) disrupts this
balance. The most common trisomy is that of chromoso me 21, which leads to Down syndrome. Individuals with th is inherited
disorder have characteristic physical features and develop mental delays in growth and cognition.

17.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70131
Figure: Karyotype of an individual with Down Syndrome. Phot o credit U.S. Department of Energy Human Genome
Program. Wikimedia.
The incidence of Down syndrome is correlated with matern al age, such that older women are more likely to give birth to children
with Down syndrome (Figure).
Figure: The incidence of having a fetus with trisomy 21 incr eases dramatically with maternal age.
An individual with more than the correct number of ch romosome sets (two for diploid species) is called polyploid. For instance,
fertilization of an abnormal diploid egg with a normal h aploid sperm would yield a triploid zygote. Polyploid ani mals are extremely
rare, with only a few examples among the flatworms, cr ustaceans, amphibians, fish, and lizards. Triploid ani mals are sterile
because meiosis cannot proceed normally with an odd nu mber of chromosome sets. In contrast, polyploidy is ve ry common in the
plant kingdom, and polyploid plants tend to be larger and more robust than euploids of their species (Figure).

17.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70131
Figure: As with many polyploid plants, this triploid orange d aylily (Hemerocallis fulva) is particularly large and robust, and
grows flowers with triple the number of petals of its d iploid counterparts. (credit: Steve Karg)
Sex Chromosome Nondisjunction
Humans display dramatic deleterious effects with autoso mal trisomies and monosomies. Therefore, it may seem c ounterintuitive
that human females and males can function normally, despite carrying different numbers of the X chromosome. In part, this occurs
because of a process called X inactivation. Early in development, when female mammalian embryos consist of just a few thousand
cells, one X chromosome in each cell inactivates by c ondensing into a structure called a Barr body. The ge nes on the inactive X
chromosome are not expressed. The particular X chromos ome (maternally or paternally derived) that is inact ivated in each cell is
random, but once the inactivation occurs, all cells descended from that cell will have the same inactive X chromosome. By this
process, females compensate for their double genetic dose o f X chromosome.
In so-called “tortoiseshell” cats, X inactivation is obse rved as coat-color variegation (Figure). Females heterozygous for an
X-linked coat color gene will express one of two differ ent coat colors over different regions of their body, c orresponding to
whichever X chromosome is inactivated in the embryonic cell progenitor of that region. When you see a tort oiseshell cat, you will
know that it has to genetically be a female.
Figure: Embryonic inactivation of one of two different X c hromosomes encoding different coat colors gives rise to the
tortoiseshell phenotype in cats. (credit: Michael Bode ga)
In an individual carrying an abnormal number of X ch romosomes, cellular mechanisms will inactivate all but one X in each of her
cells. As a result, X-chromosomal abnormalities are typi cally associated with mild mental and physical defect s, as well as sterility.
If the X chromosome is absent altogether, the individual will n ot develop.
Several errors in sex chromosome number have been cha racterized. Individuals with three X chromosomes, calle d triplo-X, appear
female but express developmental delays and reduced fertility. The XXY chromosome complement, correspondin g to one type of
Klinefelter syndrome, corresponds to male individuals with small testes, enlarged breasts, and reduced body h air. The extra X
chromosome undergoes inactivation to compensate for t he excess genetic dosage. Turner syndrome, characteriz ed as an X0
chromosome complement (i.e., only a single sex chromosom e), corresponds to a female individual with short statur e, webbed skin
in the neck region, hearing and cardiac impairments, an d sterility.
Chromosome Structural Rearrangements
Cytologists have characterized numerous structural r earrangements in chromosomes, including partial dupli cations, deletions,
inversions, and translocations. Duplications and deletio ns often produce offspring that survive but exhibit physical and mental
abnormalities. Cri-du-chat (from the French for “cry o f the cat”) is a syndrome associated with nervous sy stem abnormalities and
identifiable physical features that results from a d eletion of most of the small arm of chromosome 5 (Figure). Infants with
this genotype emit a characteristic high-pitched cry upo n which the disorder’s name is based.

17.5.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70131
Figure: This individual with cri-du-chat syndrome is shown at various ages: (A) age two, (B) age four, (C) age nine, and (D)
age 12. (credit: Paola Cerruti Mainardi)
Chromosome inversions and translocations can be iden tified by observing cells during meiosis because homol ogous chromosomes
with a rearrangement in one of the pair must contort to main tain appropriate gene alignment and pair effectively during prophase I.
A chromosome inversion is the detachment, 180° rotation, and reinsertion of part of a chromosome (Figure). Unless they
disrupt a gene sequence, inversions only change the o rientation of genes and are likely to have more mil d effects than aneuploid
errors.
Figure: An inversion occurs when a chromosome segment breaks fr om the chromosome, reverses its orientation, and then
reattaches in the original position.
A translocation occurs when a segment of a chromosome dissociates and reattaches to a different, nonhomolog ous chromosome.
Translocations can be benign or have devastating effe cts, depending on how the positions of genes are altere d with respect to
regulatory sequences. Notably, specific translocations h ave been associated with several cancers and with schiz ophrenia.
Reciprocal translocations result from the exchange o f chromosome segments between two nonhomologous chrom osomes such that
there is no gain or loss of genetic information (Figure).
Figure: A reciprocal translocation occurs when a segment of D NA is transferred from one chromosome to another,
nonhomologous chromosome. (credit: modification of wo rk by National Human Genome Research/USA)
One specific example of a chromosomal translocation – the “Philadelphia chromosome” – is found in people who suffer from
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In this translocati on, a piece of chromosome 9 is swapped with a section of chromosome 22.
This connects two genes on chromosome 22; one that was originally from chromosome 9 and one that was from c hromosome
22. This translocation produces the BCR-ABL fusion pro tein, which causes white blood cells to divide out of control. BCRABL positive cancers can be treated with the drug Gleevac.Philadelphia Chromosome

17.5.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70131
Figure: “Philadelphia chromosome” showing the location of the BCR-ABL fusion protein. Photo credit A Obeidat;
Wikimedia.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:6-3MVU-j@4/Errors-in -Meiosis
17.5: Errors in Meiosis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
18: Patterns of Inheritance
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the molecular basis of inheritance.
Determine the outcome in crosses involving various types o f inheritance.
Present and decipher information about trait inheritance u sing a pedigree.
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
18.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics o f Heredity
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
18.4: Monohybrid Cross and the Punnett Square
18.5: Laws of Inheritance
18.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance
18.7: Multiple Alleles
18.8: Sex-Linked Traits
18.9: Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent Assortme nt
18.10: Epistasis
Thumbnail: Example of a Punnett square. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Pbro ks13 via Wikimedia Commons).
18: Patterns of Inheritance is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

18.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7053918.1: Mendelian Genetics
Figure: Experimenting with thousands of garden peas, Mendel u ncovered the fundamentals of genetics. (credit: modif ication
of work by Jerry Kirkhart)
Genetics is the study of heredity. Johann Gregor Mend el set the framework for genetics long before chromos omes or genes had
been identified, at a time when meiosis was not well un derstood. Mendel selected a simple biological system a nd conducted
methodical, quantitative analyses using large sample si zes. Because of Mendel’s work, the fundamental principle s of heredity were
revealed. We now know that genes, carried on chromoso mes, are the basic functional units of heredity with th e ability to be
replicated, expressed, or mutated. Today, the postulat es put forth by Mendel form the basis of classical, or Mendelian, genetics. Not
all genes are transmitted from parents to offspring a ccording to Mendelian genetics, but Mendel’s experiment s serve as an excellent
starting point for thinking about inheritance.
Mendel’s Experiments
Figure: Johann Gregor Mendel set the framework for the study of genetics.
Johann Gregor Mendel (1822–1884) (Figure) was a lifelong learner, teacher, scientist, and man o f faith. As a young adult, he
joined the Augustinian Abbey of St. Thomas in Brno in wh at is now the Czech Republic. Supported by the monastery, he taught
physics, botany, and natural science courses at the se condary and university levels. In 1856, he began a deca de-long research
pursuit involving inheritance patterns in honeybees and plants, ultimately settling on pea plants as his pr imary model system (a
system with convenient characteristics that is used to study a specific biological phenomenon to gain unde rstanding to be applied to
other systems). In 1865, Mendel presented the results of his experiments with nearly 30,000 pea plants to the local natural history
society. He demonstrated that traits are transmitted faithfully from parents to offspring in specific patt erns. In 1866, he published
his work, Experiments in Plant Hybridization, in the proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn.
Mendel’s work went virtually unnoticed by the scientifi c community, which incorrectly believed that the proc ess of inheritance
involved a blending of parental traits that produced an intermediate physical appearance in offspring. This hypothetical process
appeared to be correct because of what we know now as c ontinuous variation. Continuous variation is the range of small
differences we see among individuals in a characteris tic like human height. It does appear that offspring are a “blend” of their
parents’ traits when we look at characteristics that e xhibit continuous variation. Mendel worked instead with t raits that show
discontinuous variation. Discontinuous variation is the variation seen among individuals when each individual shows one of two
—or a very few—easily distinguishable traits, such a s violet or white flowers. Mendel’s choice of these kinds of traits allowed him
to see experimentally that the traits were not blende d in the offspring as would have been expected at the time, but that they were
inherited as distinct traits. In 1868, Mendel became abbot of the monastery and exchanged his scientific pursuits for his pastoral

18.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70539duties. He was not recognized for his extraordinary s cientific contributions during his lifetime; in fact, it was not until 1900 that his
work was rediscovered, reproduced, and revitalized by scie ntists on the brink of discovering the chromosomal basis of heredity.
Mendel’s Crosses
Mendel’s seminal work was accomplished using the garden pea, Pisum sativum, to study inheritance.
This species naturally self-fertilizes, meaning that pollen encounters ova within the same flower. The flo wer petals remain sealed
tightly until pollination is completed to prevent t he pollination of other plants. The result is highly inbred, or “true-breeding,” pea
plants. These are plants that always produce offsprin g that look like the parent. By experimenting with t rue-breeding pea plants,
Mendel avoided the appearance of unexpected traits in offspring that might occur if the plants were not tru e breeding. The garden
pea also grows to maturity within one season, meaning t hat several generations could be evaluated over a r elatively short time.
Finally, large quantities of garden peas could be cult ivated simultaneously, allowing Mendel to conclude tha t his results did not
come about simply by chance.
Mendel performed hybridizations, which involve mating two true-breeding individuals that have different traits. In the pea, which
is naturally self-pollinating, this is done by manua lly transferring pollen from the anther of a mature p ea plant of one variety to the
stigma of a separate mature pea plant of the second varie ty.
Plants used in first-generation crosses were called P, or parental generation, plants (Figure). Mendel collected the seeds
produced by the P plants that resulted from each cro ss and grew them the following season. These offspring we re called the F1, or
the first filial (filial = daughter or son), generatio n. Once Mendel examined the characteristics in the F1 g eneration of plants, he
allowed them to self-fertilize naturally. He then colle cted and grew the seeds from the F1 plants to produce the F2, or second filial,
generation. Mendel’s experiments extended beyond the F2 generation to the F3 generation, F4 generation, and so on, but it was the
ratio of characteristics in the P, F1, and F2 generations tha t were the most intriguing and became the basis of Mendel’ s postulates.
Figure: Mendel’s process for performing crosses included examini ng flower color.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....nts-and-the-La

18.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7053918.1: Mendelian Genetics is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

18.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054018.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics of Heredity
In his 1865 publication, Mendel reported the results of his crosses involving seven different characterist ics, each with two
contrasting traits. A trait is defined as a variation in the physical appearance of a heritable characteristic. The characteristics
included plant height, seed texture, seed color, flowe r color, pea-pod size, pea-pod color, and flower positi on. For the characteristic
of flower color, for example, the two contrasting trai ts were white versus violet. To fully examine each charac teristic, Mendel
generated large numbers of F1 and F2 plants and reported results from thousands of F2 plants.
What results did Mendel find in his crosses for flower color? First, Mendel confirmed that he was using plants t hat bred true for
white or violet flower color. Irrespective of the num ber of generations that Mendel examined, all self-cr ossed offspring of parents
with white flowers had white flowers, and all self-crosse d offspring of parents with violet flowers had violet fl owers. In addition,
Mendel confirmed that, other than flower color, the pea plants were physically identical. This was an importa nt check to make sure
that the two varieties of pea plants only differed with re spect to one trait, flower color.
Once these validations were complete, Mendel applied the pollen from a plant with violet flowers to the stigma of a plant with
white flowers. After gathering and sowing the seeds that resulted from this cross, Mendel found that 100 perc ent of the F1 hybrid
generation had violet flowers. Conventional wisdom at that time would have predicted the hybrid flowers to be pale violet or for
hybrid plants to have equal numbers of white and vio let flowers. In other words, the contrasting parental t raits were expected to
blend in the offspring. Instead, Mendel’s results demonst rated that the white flower trait had completely disa ppeared in the F1
generation.
Importantly, Mendel did not stop his experimentation there. He allowed the F1 plants to self-fertilize and fo und that 705 plants in
the F2 generation had violet flowers and 224 had white flowers. This was a ratio of 3.15 violet flowers to on e white flower, or
approximately 3:1. When Mendel transferred pollen fr om a plant with violet flowers to the stigma of a pla nt with white flowers and
vice versa, he obtained approximately the same ratio irrespective of which parent—male or female—contribu ted which trait. This
is called a reciprocal cross —a paired cross in which the respective traits of the male and female in one cross become the respective
traits of the female and male in the other cross. Fo r the other six characteristics that Mendel examined, the F1 and F2 generations
behaved in the same way that they behaved for flower color. One of the two traits would disappear completely from the F1
generation, only to reappear in the F2 generation at a rat io of roughly 3:1 (Figure).
Figure: Mendel identified seven pea plant characteristics.
Upon compiling his results for many thousands of plan ts, Mendel concluded that the characteristics could be divided into expressed
and latent traits. He called these dominant and recessi ve traits, respectively. Dominant traits are those that are inherited unchanged
in a hybridization. Recessive traits become latent, or disappear in the offspring of a hybridization. The recessive trait does,
however, reappear in the progeny of the hybrid offspr ing. An example of a dominant trait is the violet-col ored flower trait. For this
same characteristic (flower color), white-colored flower s are a recessive trait. The fact that the recessive t rait reappeared in the F2
generation meant that the traits remained separate (and were not blended) in the plants of the F1 generati on. Mendel proposed that
this was because the plants possessed two copies of the t rait for the flower-color characteristic, and that e ach parent transmitted one

18.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70540of their two copies to their offspring, where they came together. Moreover, the physical observation of a d ominant trait could mean
that the genetic composition of the organism includ ed two dominant versions of the characteristic, or tha t it included one dominant
and one recessive version. Conversely, the observation of a recessive trait meant that the organism lacked any dominant versions of
this characteristic.
Laws of Inheritance
The seven characteristics that Mendel evaluated in his pea plants were each expressed as one of two versions, or traits. Mendel
deduced from his results that each individual had two discrete copies of the characteristic that are passe d individually to offspring.
We now call those two copies genes, which are carried on chromosomes. The reason we have two copies of each g ene is that we
inherit one from each parent. In fact, it is the chr omosomes we inherit and the two copies of each gene ar e located on paired
chromosomes. Recall that in meiosis these chromosomes a re separated out into haploid gametes. This separation, or segregation, of
the homologous chromosomes means also that only one o f the copies of the gene gets moved into a gamete. Th e offspring are
formed when that gamete unites with one from another parent and the two copies of each gene (and chromosome) are re stored.
For cases in which a single gene controls a single chara cteristic, a diploid organism has two genetic copies that may or may not
encode the same version of that characteristic. For e xample, one individual may carry a gene that determ ines white flower color
and a gene that determines violet flower color. Gene v ariants that arise by mutation and exist at the same relative locations on
homologous chromosomes are called alleles. Mendel examined the inheritance of genes with just two allele forms, but it is
common to encounter more than two alleles for any given gene in a natural population.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....nts-and-the-La
18.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics of Heredity is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

18.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054118.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
Two alleles for a given gene in a diploid organism ar e expressed and interact to produce physical charact eristics. The observable
traits expressed by an organism are referred to as i ts phenotype. An organism’s underlying genetic makeup, consisting o f both the
physically visible and the non-expressed alleles, is called its genotype. Mendel’s hybridization experiments demonstrate the
difference between phenotype and genotype. For exampl e, the phenotypes that Mendel observed in his crosses between pea plants
with differing traits are connected to the diploid g enotypes of the plants in the P, F1, and F2 generation s. We will use a second trait
that Mendel investigated, seed color, as an example. Seed color is governed by a single gene with two allele s. The yellow-seed
allele is dominant and the green-seed allele is rec essive. When true-breeding plants were cross-fertiliz ed, in which one parent had
yellow seeds and one had green seeds, all of the F1 hy brid offspring had yellow seeds. That is, the hybrid o ffspring were
phenotypically identical to the true-breeding paren t with yellow seeds. However, we know that the allele donate d by the parent with
green seeds was not simply lost because it reappeared in some of the F2 offspring (Figure). Therefore, the F1 plants must
have been genotypically different from the parent wit h yellow seeds.
The P plants that Mendel used in his experiments were each homozygous for the trait he was studying. Diplo id organisms that are
homozygous for a gene have two identical alleles, one on each o f their homologous chromosomes. The genotype is often written as
YY or yy, for which each letter represents one of the two alle les in the genotype. The dominant allele is capitali zed and the recessive
allele is lower case. The letter used for the gene (se ed color in this case) is usually related to the dom inant trait (yellow allele, in
this case, or “ Y”). Mendel’s parental pea plants always bred true becaus e both produced gametes carried the same allele. Whe n P
plants with contrasting traits were cross-fertilized, a ll of the offspring were heterozygous for the contrasting trait, meaning their
genotype had different alleles for the gene being ex amined. For example, the F1 yellow plants that receive d a Y allele from their
yellow parent and a y allele from their green parent had the genotype Yy.
Figure: Phenotypes are physical expressions of traits that are t ransmitted by alleles. Capital letters represent domina nt alleles
and lowercase letters represent recessive alleles. The ph enotypic ratios are the ratios of visible characteristi cs. The genotypic ratios
are the ratios of gene combinations in the offspring, and these are not always distinguishable in the phenoty pes.
Law of Dominance
Our discussion of homozygous and heterozygous organis ms brings us to why the F1 heterozygous offspring were id entical to one
of the parents, rather than expressing both alleles. In all seven peaplant characteristics, one of the two co ntrasting alleles was
dominant, and the other was recessive. Mendel called the dominant allele the expressed unit factor; the rece ssive allele was referred
to as the latent unit factor. We now know that these so-called unit factors are actually genes on homolo gous chromosomes. For a
gene that is expressed in a dominant and recessive pat tern, homozygous dominant and heterozygous organisms wi ll look identical
(that is, they will have different genotypes but the same phenotype), and the recessive allele will only be observed in homozygous
recessive individuals (Table).
Table: Correspondence between Genotype and Phenotype for a Domina nt Recessive Characteristic.

18.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70541 Homozygous Heterozygous Homozygous
Genotype YY Yy yy
Phenotype yellow yellow green
Mendel’s law of dominance states that in a heterozygote, one trait will concea l the presence of another trait for the same
characteristic. For example, when crossing true-breeding violet-flowered plants with true-breeding white-flower ed plants, all of the
offspring were violet-flowered, even though they all had one allele for violet and one allele for white. Rather than both alleles
contributing to a phenotype, the dominant allele will be expressed exclusively. The recessive allele will rem ain latent, but will be
transmitted to offspring in the same manner as that b y which the dominant allele is transmitted. The recessi ve trait will only be
expressed by offspring that have two copies of this allele (Figure), and these offspring will breed true when self-crossed.
Figure: The allele for albinism, expressed here in humans, is r ecessive. Both of this child’s parents carried the recessi ve
allele.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....ics-and-Traits
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

18.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054218.4: Monohybrid Cross and the Punnett Square
When fertilization occurs between two true-breeding p arents that differ by only the characteristic being studied, the process is
called a monohybrid cross, and the resulting offspring are called monohyb rids. Mendel performed seven types of monohybrid
crosses, each involving contrasting traits for diff erent characteristics. Out of these crosses, all of the F1 offspring had the phenotype
of one parent, and the F2 offspring had a 3:1 phenotyp ic ratio. On the basis of these results, Mendel postul ated that each parent in
the monohybrid cross contributed one of two paired un it factors to each offspring, and every possible combi nation of unit factors
was equally likely.
The results of Mendel’s research can be explained in terms of probabilities, which are mathematical measu res of likelihood. The
probability of an event is calculated by the number of times the event occurs divided by the total numb er of opportunities for the
event to occur. A probability of one (100 percent) for some event indicates that it is guaranteed to oc cur, whereas a probability of
zero (0 percent) indicates that it is guaranteed to not occur, and a probability of 0.5 (50 percent) me ans it has an equal chance of
occurring or not occurring.
To demonstrate this with a monohybrid cross, consider the case of true-breeding pea plants with yellow vers us green seeds. The
dominant seed color is yellow; therefore, the parental genotypes were YY for the plants with yellow seeds and yy for the plants with
green seeds. A Punnett square, devised by the British geneticist Reginald Punnett, is useful for determining probabilities because
it is drawn to predict all possible outcomes of all po ssible random fertilization events and their expecte d frequencies. Figure
shows a Punnett square for a cross between a plant with yellow peas and one with green peas. To prepare a Punne tt square, all
possible combinations of the parental alleles (the g enotypes of the gametes) are listed along the top (fo r one parent) and side (for
the other parent) of a grid. The combinations of eg g and sperm gametes are then made in the boxes in th e table on the basis of
which alleles are combining. Each box then represents the diploid genotype of a zygote, or fertilized egg. Because each possibility
is equally likely, genotypic ratios can be determine d from a Punnett square. If the pattern of inheritanc e (dominant and recessive) is
known, the phenotypic ratios can be inferred as well. For a monohybrid cross of two true-breeding parents, each parent contributes
one type of allele. In this case, only one genotype is poss ible in the F1 offspring. All offspring are Yy and have yellow seeds.
Figure: This Punnett square shows the cross between plants with ye llow seeds and green seeds. The cross between the truebreeding P plants produces F1 heterozygotes that can be self-fertilized. The self-cross of the F1 generation ca n be analyzed with a
Punnett square to predict the genotypes of the F2 gener ation. Given an inheritance pattern of dominant-rec essive, the genotypic and
phenotypic ratios can then be determined.
When the F1 offspring are crossed with each other, each has an equal probability of contributing either a Y or a y to the F2
offspring. The result is a 1 in 4 (25 percent) probabi lity of both parents contributing a Y, resulting in an offspring with a yellow
phenotype; a 25 percent probability of parent A con tributing a Y and parent B a y, resulting in offspring with a yellow phenotype; a
25 percent probability of parent A contributing a y and parent B a Y, also resulting in a yellow phenotype; and a (25 per cent)
probability of both parents contributing a y, resulting in a green phenotype. When counting all four possible outcomes, there is a 3
in 4 probability of offspring having the yellow phen otype and a 1 in 4 probability of offspring having t he green phenotype. This

18.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70542explains why the results of Mendel’s F2 generation occur red in a 3:1 phenotypic ratio. Using large numbers of crosses, Mendel was
able to calculate probabilities, found that they fit th e model of inheritance, and use these to predict the outc omes of other crosses.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....ics-and-Traits
18.4: Monohybrid Cross and the Punnett Square is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

18.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054318.5: Laws of Inheritance
Observing that true-breeding pea plants with contrasti ng traits gave rise to F1 generations that all expre ssed the dominant trait and
F2 generations that expressed the dominant and recessi ve traits in a 3:1 ratio, Mendel proposed the law of segregation. This law
states that paired unit factors (genes) must segregat e equally into gametes such that offspring have an e qual likelihood of inheriting
either factor. For the F2 generation of a monohybrid c ross, the following three possible combinations of geno types result:
homozygous dominant, heterozygous, or homozygous recess ive. Because heterozygotes could arise from two diffe rent pathways
(receiving one dominant and one recessive allele fro m either parent), and because heterozygotes and homo zygous dominant
individuals are phenotypically identical, the law supp orts Mendel’s observed 3:1 phenotypic ratio. The equa l segregation of alleles
is the reason we can apply the Punnett square to accu rately predict the offspring of parents with known ge notypes. The physical
basis of Mendel’s law of segregation is the first div ision of meiosis in which the homologous chromosomes wi th their different
versions of each gene are segregated into daughter n uclei. This process was not understood by the scientif ic community during
Mendel’s lifetime (Figure).
Figure: The first division in meiosis is shown.
Test Cross
Beyond predicting the offspring of a cross between kn own homozygous or heterozygous parents, Mendel also deve loped a way to
determine whether an organism that expressed a domina nt trait was a heterozygote or a homozygote. Called the test cross, this
technique is still used by plant and animal breeders. In a test cross, the dominant-expressing organism is crossed with an organism
that is homozygous recessive for the same characteri stic. If the dominant-expressing organism is a homozygo te, then all F1
offspring will be heterozygotes expressing the dominan t trait (Figure). Alternatively, if the dominant-expressing organism is
a heterozygote, the F1 offspring will exhibit a 1:1 r atio of heterozygotes and recessive homozygotes (Figure). The test cross
further validates Mendel’s postulate that pairs of unit factors segregate equally.
Figure: A test cross can be performed to determine whether an organism expressing a dominant trait is a homozygote o r a
heterozygote.
Law of Independent Assortment
Mendel’s law of independent assortment states that genes do not influence each other with r egard to the sorting of alleles into
gametes, and every possible combination of alleles fo r every gene is equally likely to occur. Independen t assortment of genes can

18.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70543be illustrated by the dihybrid cross, a cross between two true-breeding parents that express different traits for two characteristics.
Consider the characteristics of seed color and seed t exture for two pea plants, one that has wrinkled, green seeds (rryy) and another
that has round, yellow seeds (RRYY). Because each parent is homozygous, the law of segre gation indicates that the gametes for the
wrinkled–green plant all are ry, and the gametes for the round–yellow plant are all RY. Therefore, the F1 generation of offspring all
are RrYy (Figure).
Figure: A dihybrid cross in pea plants involves the genes for se ed color and texture. The P cross produces F1 offspring that
are all heterozygous for both characteristics. The resu lting 9:3:3:1 F2 phenotypic ratio is obtained using a Punnett square.
The gametes produced by the F1 individuals must have o ne allele from each of the two genes. For example, a ga mete could get an
R allele for the seed shape gene and either a Y or a y allele for the seed color gene. It cannot get both a n R and an r allele; each
gamete can have only one allele per gene. The law of independent assortment states that a gamete into which an r allele is sorted
would be equally likely to contain either a Y or a y allele. Thus, there are four equally likely gametes that can be formed when the
RrYy heterozygote is self-crossed, as follows: RY, rY, Ry, and ry. Arranging these gametes along the top and left of a 4 × 4 Punnett
square (Figure) gives us 16 equally likely genotypic combinations. From these genotypes, we find a phenotypic ratio of 9
round–yellow:3 round–green:3 wrinkled–yellow:1 wrinkled –green (Figure). These are the offspring ratios we would expect,
assuming we performed the crosses with a large enough sampl e size.
The physical basis for the law of independent assortm ent also lies in meiosis I, in which the different ho mologous pairs line up in
random orientations. Each gamete can contain any co mbination of paternal and maternal chromosomes (and therefore the genes on
them) because the orientation of tetrads on the metaphase p lane is random (Figure).
Figure: The random segregation into daughter nuclei that ha ppens during the first division in meiosis can lead to a variety of
possible genetic arrangements.

18.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70543References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....of-Inheritance
18.5: Laws of Inheritance is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

18.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054418.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance
Mendel studied traits with only one mode of inheritan ce in pea plants. The inheritance of the traits he studied all followed the
relatively simple pattern of dominant and recessive alleles for a single characteristic. There are seve ral important modes of
inheritance, discovered after Mendel’s work, that do not follow the dominant and recessive, single-gene model.
Alternatives to Dominance and Recessiveness
Mendel’s experiments with pea plants suggested that: 1) two types of “units” or alleles exist for every gene; 2) alleles maintain
their integrity in each generation (no blending); a nd 3) in the presence of the dominant allele, the rec essive allele is hidden, with no
contribution to the phenotype. Therefore, recessive al leles can be “carried” and not expressed by individu als. Such heterozygous
individuals are sometimes referred to as “ carriers.” Since then, genetic studies in other organisms have shown that much more
complexity exists, but that the fundamental principles of Mendelian genetics still hold true. In the sectio ns to follow, we consider
some of the extensions of Mendelism.
Incomplete Dominance
Mendel’s results, demonstrating that traits are inherite d as dominant and recessive pairs, contradicted the vi ew at that time that
offspring exhibited a blend of their parents’ traits. However, the heterozygote phenotype occasionally doe s appear to be
intermediate between the two parents. For example, in the snapdragon, Antirrhinum majus (Figure), a cross between a
homozygous parent with white flowers (C C) and a homozygous parent with red flowers (C C) will produce offspring with
pink flowers (C C). (Note that different genotypic abbreviations are u sed for Mendelian extensions to distinguish these pa tterns
from simple dominance and recessiveness.) This pattern of inheritance is described as incomplete dominance, meaning that one of
the alleles appears in the phenotype in the heterozy gote, but not to the exclusion of the other, which can also be seen. The allele for
red flowers is incompletely dominant over the allele for white flowers. However, the results of a heterozygote self-cross can still be
predicted, just as with Mendelian dominant and recessi ve crosses. In this case, the genotypic ratio would be 1 C C:2 C C:1
C C, and the phenotypic ratio would be 1:2:1 for red:pi nk:white. The basis for the intermediate color in the heterozygote is
simply that the pigment produced by the red allele (anthocyanin) is diluted in the heterozygote and th erefore appears pink because
of the white background of the flower petals.
Figure: These pink flowers of a heterozygote snapdragon result from incomplete dominance. (credit:
“storebukkebruse”/Flickr)
Codominance
A variation on incomplete dominance is codominance, in which both alleles for the same characteristic a re simultaneously
expressed in the heterozygote. An example of codomina nce occurs in the ABO blood groups of humans. The A an d B alleles are
expressed in the form of A or B molecules present on the surface of red blood cells. Homozygotes (I I and I I) express either the
A or the B phenotype, and heterozygotes (I I) express both phenotypes equally. The I I individual has blood type AB. In a
selfcross between heterozygotes expressing a codominan t trait, the three possible offspring genotypes are phenotypically distinct.
However, the 1:2:1 genotypic ratio characteristic of a Men delian monohybrid cross still applies (Figure).W W R R
R W
R R R W
W W
A A B B
A B A B

18.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70544
Figure: This Punnet square shows an AB/AB blood type cross.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....ics-and-Traits
18.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

18.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054518.7: Multiple Alleles
Mendel implied that only two alleles, one dominant and one recessive, could exist for a given gene. We now k now that this is an
oversimplification. Although individual humans (and a ll diploid organisms) can only have two alleles for a given gene, multiple
alleles may exist at the population level, such that many combinations of two alleles are observed. Note th at when many alleles
exist for the same gene, the convention is to denote the most common phenotype or genotype in the natura l population as the wild
type (often abbreviated “+”). All other phenotypes or gen otypes are considered variants (mutants) of this typi cal form, meaning
they deviate from the wild type. The variant may be r ecessive or dominant to the wild-type allele.
An example of multiple alleles is the ABO blood-type sy stem in humans. In this case, there are three allele s circulating in the
population. The I allele codes for A molecules on the red blood cells, the I allele codes for B molecules on the surface of red
blood cells, and the i allele codes for no molecules on the red blood cell s. In this case, the I and I alleles are codominant with
each other and are both dominant over the i allele. Although there are three alleles present in a p opulation, each individual only gets
two of the alleles from their parents. This produces the genotypes and phenotypes shown in Figure. Notice that instead of
three genotypes, there are six different genotypes whe n there are three alleles. The number of possible phen otypes depends on the
dominance relationships between the three alleles.
Figure: Inheritance of the ABO blood system in humans is shown.
Multiple Alleles Confer Drug Resistance in the Malaria Parasite
Malaria is a parasitic disease in humans that is tran smitted by infected female mosquitoes, including Anopheles gambiae, and is
characteried by cyclic high fevers, chills, flu-lik e symptoms, and severe anemia. Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax are the most
common causative agents of malaria, and P. falciparum is the most deadly. When promptly and correctly tre ated, P. falciparum
malaria has a mortality rate of 0.1 percent. However, in some parts of the world, the parasite has evolved resist ance to commonly
used malaria treatments, so the most effective malarial treatments can vary by geographic region.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....ics-and-Traits
18.7: Multiple Alleles is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.A B
A B

18.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054618.8: Sex-Linked Traits
In humans, as well as in many other animals and some plants, the sex of the individual is determined by se x chromosomes—one
pair of non-homologous chromosomes. Until now, we have o nly considered inheritance patterns among non-sex c hromosomes, or
autosomes. In addition to 22 homologous pairs of auto somes, human females have a homologous pair of X chromo somes, whereas
human males have an XY chromosome pair. Although the Y chromosome contains a small region of similarity to the X
chromosome so that they can pair during meiosis, the Y chromosome is much shorter and contains fewer genes. When a gene being
examined is present on the X, but not the Y, chromosome, it is X-linked.
Eye color in Drosophila, the common fruit fly, was the first X-linked trait t o be identified. Thomas Hunt Morgan mapped this trait
to the X chromosome in 1910. Like humans, Drosophila males have an XY chromosome pair, and females are XX. In flies the
wild-type eye color is red (X) and is dominant to whi te eye color (X) (Figure). Because of the location of the eye-color
gene, reciprocal crosses do not produce the same offs pring ratios. Males are said to be hemizygous, in that they have only one
allele for any X-linked characteristic. Hemizygosity ma kes descriptions of dominance and recessiveness irre levant for XY males.
Drosophila males lack the white gene on the Y chromosome; that i s, their genotype can only be X Y or X Y. In contrast, females
have two allele copies of this gene and can be X X, X X, or X X.
Figure: In Drosophila, the gene for eye color is located on the X chromoso me. Red eye color is wild-type and is dominant to
white eye color.
In an X-linked cross, the genotypes of F and F offspr ing depend on whether the recessive trait was express ed by the male or the
female in the P generation. With respect to Drosophila eye color, when the P male expresses the white-eye ph enotype and the
female is homozygously red-eyed, all members of the F generation exhibit red eyes (Figure). The F females are
heterozygous (X X), and the males are all X Y, having received their X chromosome from the homozygous domin ant P female
and their Y chromosome from the P male. A subsequent cross between the X X female and the X Y male would produce only
red-eyed females (with X X or X X genotypes) and both red- and white-eyed males (with X Y or X Y genotypes). Now,
consider a cross between a homozygous white-eyed femal e and a male with red eyes. The F generation would ex hibit only
heterozygous red-eyed females (X X) and only white-eye d males (X Y). Half of the F females would be red-eyed (X X) and
half would be white-eyed (X X). Similarly, half of the F males would be red-eyed (X Y) and half would be white-eyed (X Y).W w
W w
W W W w w w
1 2
1 1
W w W
W w W
W W W w W w
W w w2W w
w w2W w

18.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70546
Figure: Crosses involving sex-linked traits often give rise to d ifferent phenotypes for the different sexes of offsprin g, as in
the case for this cross involving red and white eye col or in Drosophila. In the diagram, w is the white-eye mutant allele and W is
the wild-type, red-eye allele.
Discoveries in fruit fly genetics can be applied to human genetics. When a female parent is homozygous for a recessive X-linked
trait, she will pass the trait on to 100 percent of h er male offspring, because the males will receive the Y chromosome from the
male parent. In humans, the alleles for certain cond itions (some color-blindness, hemophilia, and muscular dystrophy) are Xlinked. Females who are heterozygous for these diseases are said to be carriers and may not exhibit any phe notypic effects. These
females will pass the disease to half of their sons and will pass carrier status to half of their daughters; t herefore, X-linked traits
appear more frequently in males than females.
In some groups of organisms with sex chromosomes, the sex with the non-homologous sex chromosomes is the f emale rather than
the male. This is the case for all birds. In this case, sex-linked traits will be more likely to appear in the female, in whom they are
hemizygous.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....ics-and-Traits
18.8: Sex-Linked Traits is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

18.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054718.9: Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent Assortment
Although all of Mendel’s pea plant characteristics beha ved according to the law of independent assortment, we now know that
some allele combinations are not inherited independ ently of each other. Genes that are located on separate, non-homologous
chromosomes will always sort independently. However, each chromosome contains hundreds or thousands of genes, organized
linearly on chromosomes like beads on a string. The segregation of alleles into gametes can be influenced by linkage, in which
genes that are located physically close to each othe r on the same chromosome are more likely to be inhe rited as a pair. However,
because of the process of recombination, or “crossover,” it is possible for two genes on the same chromosome to behave
independently, or as if they are not linked. To under stand this, let us consider the biological basis of gene linkage and
recombination.
Homologous chromosomes possess the same genes in the same order, though the specific alleles of the gene can be different on
each of the two chromosomes. Recall that during interp hase and prophase I of meiosis, homologous chromoso mes first replicate
and then synapse, with like genes on the homologs ali gning with each other. At this stage, segments of homolog ous chromosomes
exchange linear segments of genetic material (Figure). This process is called recombination, or crossover, and it is a
common genetic process. Because the genes are aligne d during recombination, the gene order is not alter ed. Instead, the result of
recombination is that maternal and paternal alleles are combined onto the same chromosome. Across a given chromosome, several
recombination events may occur, causing extensive shuf fling of alleles.
Figure: The process of crossover, or recombination, occurs when two homologous chromosomes align and exchange a
segment of genetic material.
When two genes are located on the same chromosome, th ey are considered linked, and their alleles tend to be transmitted through
meiosis together. To exemplify this, imagine a dihyb rid cross involving flower color and plant height in which the genes are next to
each other on the chromosome. If one homologous chr omosome has alleles for tall plants and red flowers, and the other
chromosome has genes for short plants and yellow flowers, then when the gametes are formed, the tall and red alleles will tend to
go together into a gamete and the short and yellow al leles will go into other gametes. These are called the parental genotypes
because they have been inherited intact from the pa rents of the individual producing gametes. But unlik e if the genes were on
different chromosomes, there will be no gametes with ta ll and yellow alleles and no gametes with short and re d alleles. If you
create a Punnett square with these gametes, you will see that the classical Mendelian prediction of a 9:3:3: 1 outcome of a dihybrid
cross would not apply. As the distance between two gene s increases, the probability of one or more crossovers b etween them
increases and the genes behave more like they are o n separate chromosomes. Geneticists have used the propor tion of recombinant
gametes (the ones not like the parents) as a measure of how far apart genes are on a chromosome. Using this i nformation, they have
constructed linkage maps of genes on chromosomes for well-s tudied organisms, including humans.
Mendel’s seminal publication makes no mention of linkag e, and many researchers have questioned whether he enc ountered linkage
but chose not to publish those crosses out of concer n that they would invalidate his independent assortm ent postulate. The garden
pea has seven chromosomes, and some have suggested that his choice of seven characteristics was not a coincid ence. However,
even if the genes he examined were not located on sep arate chromosomes, it is possible that he simply did n ot observe linkage
because of the extensive shuffling effects of recombin ation.

18.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70547References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....of-Inheritance
18.9: Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent Asso rtment is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

18.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7054818.10: Epistasis
Mendel’s studies in pea plants implied that the sum of an individual’s phenotype was controlled by genes (o r as he called them, unit
factors), such that every characteristic was distinc tly and completely controlled by a single gene. In f act, single observable
characteristics are almost always under the influence of multiple genes (each with two or more alleles) ac ting in unison. For
example, at least eight genes contribute to eye color in humans.
In some cases, several genes can contribute to aspec ts of a common phenotype without their gene products ever directly interacting.
In the case of organ development, for instance, genes may be expressed sequentially, with each gene adding to the complexity and
specificity of the organ. Genes may function in comp lementary or synergistic fashions, such that two or more genes expressed
simultaneously affect a phenotype. An apparent exampl e of this occurs with human skin color, which appears to involve the action
of at least three (and probably more) genes. Cases in which inheritance for a characteristic like skin col or or human height depend
on the combined effects of numerous genes are called poly genic inheritance.
Genes may also oppose each other, with one gene suppre ssing the expression of another. In epistasis, the interaction between genes
is antagonistic, such that one gene masks or interfe res with the expression of another. “Epistasis” is a word composed of Greek
roots meaning “standing upon.” The alleles that are being masked or silenced are said to be hypostatic t o the epistatic alleles that
are doing the masking. Often the biochemical basis of e pistasis is a gene pathway in which expression of one ge ne is dependent on
the function of a gene that precedes or follows it in the pathway.
An example of epistasis is pigmentation in mice. The wil d-type coat color, agouti (AA) is dominant to solid-colored fur (aa).
However, a separate gene C, when present as the recessive homozygote (cc), negates any expression of pigment from the A gene
and results in an albino mouse (Figure). Therefore, the genotypes AAcc, Aacc, and aacc all produce the same albino
phenotype. A cross between heterozygotes for both gene s (AaCc x AaCc) would generate offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 9
agouti:3 black:4 albino (Figure). In this case, the C gene is epistatic to the A gene.
Figure: In this example of epistasis, one gene (C) masks the expression of another (A) for coat color. When the C allele is
present, coat color is expressed; when it is absent (cc), no coat color is expressed. Coat color depends on th e A gene, which shows
dominance, with the recessive homozygote showing a dif ferent phenotype than the heterozygote or dominant homozygote.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10....of-Inheritance
18.10: Epistasis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the molecular basis of inheritance.
Determine the outcome in crosses involving complete dom inance.
Present and decipher information about inheritance using a pedigree.
Figure: Experimenting with thousands of garden peas, Johann Gr egor Mendel uncovered the fundamentals of genetics. (credit:
modification of work by Jerry Kirkhart)
Remember that a trait is an aspect of the physical appearance of an organism that can vary. Organisms ge t their traits from proteins;
proteins are produced using the information found i n the organism’s DNA. Variation in the DNA between different organisms
causes the production of proteins that contain differi ng orders of amino acids. These proteins can have dif ferent shapes and
therefore different functions. When proteins function dif ferently, this leads to differences in traits.
Recall that diploid organisms have two copies of each chromosome: a pair of homologous chromosomes. The reas on that they have
two copies is because they inherited one copy of each chromosome from each parent. Each parent donates on e haploid gamete (egg
or sperm) to the reproductive process. A haploid game te contains one copy of each chromosome because duri ng meiosis the
number of chromosomes is cut in half: the DNA is copie d once and then divided twice. This separation of the homologous
chromosomes means that only one of the copies of the gene gets moved into a gamete. The offspring are for med when that gamete
unites with one from another parent and the two copies of ea ch gene (and chromosome) are restored.
Figure: A karyogram is a picture of all the chromosomes in a cell, organized into homologous pairs. This is a human
karyogram which shows the 46 chromosomes present in dipl oid human somatic cells. (credit: Andreas Bolzer, et a l)
A diploid organism has two copies of a given gene. Th e two copies may or may not encode the same version of that characteristic.
For example, one individual pea plant (such as those st udied by Mendel) would have two copies of the gene th at controls flower
color. That individual could carry one version of t he gene that leads to white flower color and a second different version of that
same gene that leads to violet flower color. The inte raction between these two different versions of the sa me gene will lead to the
visible flower color in the pea plant. Gene variation s that arise by mutation and exist at the same relativ e locations on homologous
chromosomes are called alleles. Mendel examined the inheritance of genes with just t wo allele forms, but it is common to
encounter more than two alleles for many genes in a natural population.
Each individual (assuming it is a diploid organism) wi ll have two alleles for a specific gene: one from ea ch of its two parents.
These two alleles are expressed and interact to produc e physical characteristics. The observable traits expr essed by an organism are
referred to as its phenotype. An organism’s underlying genetic makeup, consisting of both the physically visible and the nonexpressed alleles, is called its genotype.Learning Objectives

2Diploid organisms that are homozygous for a gene have two identical alleles, one on each of their homologous chromosomes. If
the organism has two different alleles, this is referred to as heterozygous.
This chapter will address a simple type of inheritanc e: complete dominance. In this type of inheritance, t here are two alleles:
dominant and recessive. A dominant allele will completely cover up a recessive allele. This means that if one dominant allele is
present, the organism will have the trait conferred by that allele. In order for the recessive phenotype to be seen, the organism must
have two recessive alleles. Just because an allele is dominant does not automatically make it better than a recessive trait. It also
does not make it more common than the recessive trai t. All it means for an allele to be dominant is that i t is able to cover up the
recessive allele.
We typically abbreviate the genotype of an organism by using single letters. The letter chosen is ofte n the first letter of the
dominant trait. A homozygous dominant genotype would b e written AA, a heterozygous genotype as Aa, and a homoz ygous
recessive genotype as aa.
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares
19.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait
19.4: Yellow fur color - a recessive trait
19.5: Epistasis - the relationship between black, brown, and yellow fur
19.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and epistasis
19.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend
19.8: White spotting - when there's more than two alleles
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder
19.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together
19.11: KIT - embryonic lethality
19.12: It's not all in the genes - the effect of environm ent
19.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one tr ait
Thumbnail: Genotypes for the three recognized colors of labs. (CC BY 3.0; EArellano via Wikipedia).
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

19.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7069219.1: Introduction to Genetics
“Genetics” is the study of how traits are inherited. A trait is defined as a variation in the physical appearanc e of a heritable
characteristic. It seeks to understand how traits are passed from generation to generation. Before you start learning about the details
of inheritance, let’s review some topics that are impo rtant in order to understand genetics.
Recall that genes are segments of DNA that are typical ly several hundred or thousand bases long. Each gene d irects the production
of a protein through the process of protein synthesis: DNA gets transcribed to produce an mRNA; mRNA provides t o code for a
ribosome to produce a chain of amino acids. Read th is section of the book if you need to review this top ic: How do genes direct the
production of proteins?
Figure: The Central Dogma – DNA is used to make RNA is used to make protein. (CC BY 4.0; OpenStax via Concepts of
Biology)
Recall that eukaryotic genes are found on chromosom es and that each eukaryotic chromosome typically con tains hundreds or
thousands of genes. In most eukaryotes, including hum ans and other animals, each cell contains two copies of each chromosome.
The reason we have two copies of each gene is that we inheri t one from each parent.
In contrast to eukaryotes, prokaryotes have one circul ar chromosome. This means they have one copy of each gene.
Read this section of the book if you need to review thi s topic: How DNA is arranged in the cell
Figure: There are 23 pairs of chromosomes in a female human b ody cell. These chromosomes are viewed within the nucl eus
(top), removed from a cell during cell division (rig ht), and arranged according to length (left) in an arrangement called a karyotype.
In this image, the chromosomes were exposed to fluoresce nt stains to distinguish them. (credit: “718 Bot”/Wikim edia Commons,
National Human Genome Research)
Chromosomes are inherited by the offspring from the parents via the egg or sperm. Inside one egg or one sp erm is one copy of each
chronometer (so 23 total in humans). When an egg is fertilized by a sperm, the resulting zygote (fertilized egg) will contain two
copies of each chromosome, just like each of its parents.
Meiosis is the process that produces eggs and sperm. Eggs and sperm are also known as gametes. During meiosis, one copy of
each paired chromosome is moved into the gamete. Cel ls with one copy of each chromosome are known as “ haploid “. This
separation, or segregation, of the homologous (paired) chromosomes means also that only one of th e copies of the gene gets moved
into a gamete.
The offspring are formed when that gamete unites with one from another parent and the two copies of each ge ne (and chromosome)
are restored. Read this section of the book if you need more information on this topic: Overview of Meiosis

19.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70692
Figure: During meiosis, the DNA is copied once, then the cell divides twice. This produces cells with half as much ge netic
information as the original cell (1 copy of each chr omosome). These cells become the sex cells (eggs or sperm). When two sex
cells unite during fertilization, the original numbe r of chromosomes (2 copies of each one) is restored. (CC BY-SA 4.0; Rdbickel
via Wikimedia Commons)
The offspring will receive two copies of each gene (o ne from each parent), but the copies are not necessar ily identical. You already
knew this – you don’t get identical information from your mother and your father because they have differ ent DNA (which gives
them different traits). The different versions of one specific gene are known as alleles. As you learn about genetics, you will learn
about how the information from both alleles of a spec ific gene interact to give an individual their trai t. The genetic information that
an individual has is called their genotype. The genotype of an individual produces the individual’s phenotype, or physical traits.
References
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
OpenStax, Concepts of Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 18, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:8v2Xzdco@5/TheStructure-of-DNA
19.1: Introduction to Genetics is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

19.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7069319.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares
Pedigrees
Inheritance of a trait through generations can be sh own visually using a pedigree, such as is pictured in Figure. Square
shapes represent males; circles represent females. Fill ed-in shapes are individuals that have whatever trait is being shown in the
pedigree. Two individuals connected together with a ho rizontal line between them are the parents of the ind ividuals that are
connected by vertical lines below them. Siblings are typic ally shown in birth order with the oldest sibling to the left.
Figure: A simple pedigree. In this pedigree, the parents (at the top) have produced three children: a male and t wo females.
The first female has the condition being shown in the pedigree.
Punnett Squares
As discussed above, diploid individuals have two copies of each chromosome: one from their male parent, one from their female
parent. This means they have two copies of each gene. The y can have two of the same alleles (homozygous) or two different alleles
(heterozygous). Regardless of their genotype, they will randomly pass only one copy of each chromosome to t heir offspring. This is
because meiosis produces haploid gametes that conta in one copy of each chromosome, and those chromosomes are assorted into
gametes randomly. Since genes are present on chromosom es, this means they will pass one copy of each gene to t heir offspring.
That means that an offspring inherits one allele of each gene from each of its two parents. This is illust rated in Figure. This
concept is called Mendel’s Law of Segregation.
Figure: Two parents who are heterozygous each pass one chromoso me / gene / allele to each offspring. Each resulting
offspring has two of each chromosome / gene. The indiv idual can have two of the same or two different alle les. (CC BY-SA 3.0;
Cburnett via Wikimedia Commons)
An easy, organized way of illustrating the offspring t hat can result from two specific parents is to use a Punnett square. The
gametes that can be generated by each parent are rep resented above the rows and next to the columns of t he square. Each gamete is
haploid for the “A gene”, meaning it only contains one copy of that gene. In the Punnett square seen in Fi gure, haploid eggs
are above each column and haploid sperm are next to each row. When a haploid sperm and a haploid egg (eac h with 1 copy of the
“A gene”) combine during the process of fertilization, a diploid offspring (with 2 copies of the A gene) is the resul t.

19.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70693
Figure: A Punnett square showing a cross between two individual s who are both heterozygous for A.
A Punnett square shows the probability of an offspring with a given genotype resulting from a cross. It does not show actual
offspring. For example, the Punnett square in Figure s hows that there is a 25% chance that a homozygous rec essive offspring
will result from the cross Aa x Aa. It does not mean that these parents must have 4 offspring and th at they will have the ratio 1 AA:
2 Aa: 1 aa. It’s just like flipping a coin: you expec t 50% heads, but you wouldn’t be too surprised to see 7 heads out of 10 coin
flips. Additionally, the probability does not change fo r successive offspring. The probability that the firs t offspring will have the
genotype “aa” is 25% and the probability of the sec ond offspring having the genotype “aa” is still 25%. Again, it’s just like flipping
a coin: if you flip heads the first time, that doesn’t chang e the probability of getting heads on the next flip.
Organisms don’t just inherit one trait at a time, tho ugh. They inherit all their traits at once. Sometimes, we want to determine the
probability of an individual inheriting two differen t traits. The easiest way to do this is to determine t he probability of the
individual inheriting each trait separately, then m ultiply those probabilities together. An example of this can be seen in Figure
. In order for this to work, we must assume that genes d o not influence each other with regard to the sortin g of alleles into
gametes, and every possible combination of alleles for every gene is equally likely to occur. This is called Mendel’s Law of
Independent Assortment.
Figure: These two Punnett squares show the cross between two ind ividuals who are both heterozygous for two different
genes: BbAa x BbAa. We can determine the probability of an offspring having the recessive trait for “B” an d the dominant trait for
“A”. The probability of the offspring having the rec essive phenotype for “B” is 1/4. The probability of th e offspring having the
dominant phenotype for “A” is 3/4. 1/4 x 3/4 = 3/16.
Another way of determining the probability of getting two different traits is to use a dihybrid Punnett squ are. Figure shows
three generations of the inheritance of pea seed colo r and shape. Peas can be either yellow or green, and t hey can be either round or
wrinkled. These are two of the traits that Mendel stud ied in his work with peas. In the first generation (th e “P” generation), two
true-breeding (homozygous) individuals are crossed. Th eir offspring will get one allele of the Y gene and one allele of the R gene
from each parent. This means that all their offsprin g (the “F ” generation) will be heterozygous for both genes. The results (the
“F ” generation) from crossing two heterozygous individua ls can be seen in the 4×4 Punnett square in Figure.1

19.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70693
Figure: This dihybrid cross shows the expected offspring from th e F generation after crossing YYRR x yyrr. Compare the
results from this Punnett square to the results seen in th e previous figure. They match! Photo Credit: OpenStax Biology.
The gametes produced by the F individuals must have one allele from each of the two genes. For example, a g amete could get an
R allele for the seed shape gene and either a Y or a y allele for the seed color gene. It cannot get both a n R and an r allele; each
gamete can have only one allele per gene. The law of independent assortment states that a gamete into which an r allele is sorted
would be equally likely to contain either a Y or a y allele. Thus, there are four equally likely gametes that can be formed when the
RrYy heterozygote is self-crossed, as follows: RY, rY, Ry, and ry. Arranging these gametes along the top and left of a 4 × 4 Punnett
square (Figure) gives us 16 equally likely genotypic combinations. From these genotypes, we find a phenotypic ratio of 9
round–yellow:3 round–green:3 wrinkled–yellow:1 wrinkled –green (Figure). These are the offspring ratios we would expect,
assuming we performed the crosses with a large enough sampl e size.
We can look for individuals who have the recessive p henotype for Y and the dominant phenotype for R. These individuals must
have two little y’s and at least one big R. The possible genotypes are yyRR or yyRr. Examining the Punnett square in Figure,
we can find 3 individuals with these genotypes (they ar e round and green). If you compare the results from Figure and
Figure, you’ll see that we have arrived at the same value: 3/1 6!
References
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

19.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7069419.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait
Figure: This chocolate lab has two recessive alleles of the TYR P1 gene. (Credit: Rob Hanson; photo from Wikimedia.)
Most of us are familiar with the labrador retriever do g breed, such as the chocolate lab seen in Figure. But have you ever
thought about what makes this dog brown? The differenc e between brown and black coat color in dogs is cause d by a mutation in
the TYRP1 gene. The TYRP1 gene provides instructions for making an enzyme called tyrosinase-related protein 1. This enzyme is
required to produce a pigment called eumelanin. Eum elanin is a dark colored pigment. The TYRP1 gene is loc ated on chromosome
11 in dogs (Parker, 2001).
A group of scientists who were interested in determini ng what caused the difference between black and brown coats sequenced the
DNA within the protein-coding region of the TYRP1 gene (Schmutz, 2002). They identified three variations in t he DNA making up
the TYRP1 gene between brown dogs and black dogs. These variations in DNA sequence are examples of different alleles of the
TYRP1 gene.
Table: Variations in the TYRP1 allele that lead to brown color in dog s. Data from Schmutz, 2002.
Location Black DNA sequence Brown DNA sequence Effect on protein
exon 2 TGT CGTchanges a cysteine amino acid
to a serine
exon 5 CAG TAGintroduces a premature stop
codon which results in 330
amino acids instead of 512
amino acids in the protein
exon 5 CCT — (deleted) deletion of a proline amino aci d
All of these variations in the DNA sequence are predict ed to cause a change in the amino acid sequence of t he TYRP1 protein.
These changes affect the production of eumelanin pig ment, which is black in color. When eumelanin is not b eing produced
correctly, the dog appears brown instead of black.
Like other diploid organisms, dogs all have two copie s of the TYRP1 gene (one from their male parent, one from their female
parent). Dogs that are homozygous for the black allele (dogs that have two copies of the black allele) are obviously going to be
black in color. Dogs that are homozygous for the brown allele are obviously going to be brown. Dogs that are h eterozygous (dogs
that have one black allele and one brown allele) app ear black. The black and brown colors do not blend t ogether: the black allele
covers up the brown allele. This means that the black a llele is dominant over the brown allele. Remember that dominant allel es
cover up recessive alleles. If there is one dominant allele present, the dog will appear black. The brown allele is recessive to the
black allele. There must be two copies of the recessive b rown allele present in order for the dog to appear brown.
Figure: Black and brown phenotypes in labrador retrievers. (Credit: demealiffe; from Wikimedia)

19.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70694Remember that genotypes can be abbreviated with a si ngle letter and that the letter which is chosen is t ypically the first letter of the
dominant trait. In this case, the letter “B” is used t o represent the dominant black allele, while “b” repre sents a recessive brown
allele.
The reason that the black allele is dominant over the brown allele in this specific situation is because the black allele produces
functional TYRP1 protein, while the brown allele does no t. The presence of one functional allele produces eno ugh TYRP1 protein
allows the cells to produce eumelanin and appear black.
Remember: dominant does not mean “better” or “more normal”. Bla ck color does not confer any special advantages on
dogs compared to brown color. It’s just a difference.
Figure: What alleles of TYRP1 does this black lab puppy have? We can’t tell by looking at it. The puppy could be
homozygous (BB) or heterozygous (Bb). Since black is c ompletely dominant over brown, both options would be black. (Credit:
Alice Birkin)
Let’s visualize the inheritance of black and brown us ing a pedigree. The pedigree in Figure shows a litter of puppies. The
shaded symbol shows a brown puppy, while open symbols are bla ck individuals.
Figure: An example litter of puppies. The filled-in symbol sh ows a brown individual.
To interpret this pedigree, let’s start with information that we already know:
Brown is recessive, which means brown individuals must have the genotype bb. In this pedigree, brown individuals are filled in.
Black is dominant, which means black individuals must ha ve at least one B allele. Their genotype could be either BB or Bb. In
this pedigree, black individuals are not filled in.
Figure shows the same pedigree, but with information about the individual’s genotypes filled in.
1. The shaded individual, who is a brown female puppy, must h ave the genotype bb. If she had any B alleles, she would be bl ack
because the black allele is dominant over the brown alle le.
2. In order for the brown puppy to have the genotype bb, she must have gotten two “b” alleles: one from each of her pare nts. We
know that her parents are both black (because they are uns haded), which means they must have a least one “B” allele. T his
means that both parents must be heterozygous: Bb.
3. The three black puppies must have at least one “B” al lele in order for them to be black in color. However, we can’t tell whether
they are homozygous dominant (BB) or heterozygous (Bb) since both of those genotypes would result in black color. One way
to represent this on a pedigree is B-, meaning that the seco nd allele could be either B or b.

19.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70694
Figure: Genotypes of the individuals in this pedigree.
We can also show the cross between these parents as a Punnett square (Figure). We would expect 1/4 of the offspring to have
the genotype bb, and that is what we see in the pedigree abov e.
Figure: The information from the pedigree shown in Figure can also be shown as a Punnett square.
A small number of mutations in the TYRP1 gene have be en found to cause oculocutaneous albinism type 3. This condition
includes a form of albinism called rufous oculocutan eous albinism, which has been described primarily in d ark-skinned people
from southern Africa. Affected individuals have reddis h-brown skin, ginger or red hair, and hazel or brown ir ises.
Two TYRP1 mutations are known to cause this form of albi nism in individuals from Africa. One mutation replaces a protein
building block (amino acid) in tyrosine-related pro tein 1 with a signal that prematurely stops protein p roduction. This mutation,
written as Ser166Ter or S166X, affects the amino acid ser ine at protein position 166. The other mutation, writt en as 368delA,
deletes a single DNA building block from the TYRP1gene. Ot her alterations in this gene have been reported in a few affected
people of non-African heritage. Most TYRP1 mutations le ad to the production of an abnormally short, nonfunc tional version
of tyrosinase-related protein 1. Because this enzyme plays a role in normal pigmentation, its loss leads to the changes in skin,
hair, and eye coloration that are characteristic of oculo cutaneous albinism.
Photo credit: Muntuwandi; from Wikipedia.
References
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
Parker HG, Yuhua X, Mellersh CS, Khan S, Shibuya H, Johnson GS, Ost rander EA. Sept 2001. Meiotic linkage mapping of 52
genes onto the canine map does not identify significant le vels of microrearrangement. Mamm Genome. 12(9):713-8.
Schmutz SM, Berryere TG, Goldfinch AD. 2002. TYRP1 and MC1R genotypes and their effects on coat col or in dogs. Mammalian
Genome 13, 380-387.Human Connection

19.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70694OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.1...ls-Experiments
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.1...of-Inheritance
Information about TYRP1 and oculocutaneous albinism t ype 3: “Tyrp1” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to
Understanding Genetic Conditions, National Institutes of Health: U.S. National Library of Medici ne is in the Public Domain
19.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

19.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7069519.4: Yellow fur color - a recessive trait
Yellow color in dogs
Labrador retrievers don’t only come in brown and bla ck, they also come in yellow. Yellow color in labs is caused by variations in a
different gene: MC1R. This gene controls the productio n of the melanocortin 1 receptor protein. MC1R is loc ated on chromosome
5 in dogs (Schmutz, 2001).
Figure: This yellow lab is producing light-colored pheomelan in instead of dark-colored eumelanin. (Credit: Djmirko; from
Wikimedia)
Melanocytes make two forms of melanin, eumelanin and p heomelanin. The relative amounts of these two pigments help determine
the color of an individual’s hair and skin. Individua ls who produce mostly eumelanin tend to have brown or black hair and dark
skin that tans easily (in humans). Eumelanin also prot ects skin from damage caused by ultraviolet (UV) radiat ion in sunlight.
Individuals who produce mostly pheomelanin tend to h ave red or blond hair, freckles, and light-colored skin that tans poorly.
Because pheomelanin does not protect skin from UV ra diation, people with more pheomelanin have an increase d risk of skin
damage caused by sun exposure.
The melanocortin 1 receptor controls which type of m elanin is produced by melanocytes. When the recepto r is activated, it triggers
a series of chemical reactions inside melanocytes tha t stimulate these cells to make eumelanin. If the re ceptor is not activated or is
blocked, melanocytes make pheomelanin instead of eum elanin. This means that if the receptor is working c orrectly and is turned
on, dark pigment will be produced. If the receptor is not fu nctional or is not turned on, light pigment will be produce d.
Figure: The three recognized colors of labs are due to black eumelanin, brown eumelanin, or pheomelanin. (Credi t: Erikeltic,
from Wikimedia)
Schmutz et. al. (2002) determined the DNA sequence for the MC1R gene from dogs of various colors. They deter mined that black
and brown dogs all have one allele of MC1R, while yello w and red dogs have a different allele. The allele tha t leads to yellow or
red color has a premature stop codon which results in a shorter-than-normal protein. This protein would be predicted to not function
correctly. Remember that when the melanocortin 1 rec eptor is not functioning correctly, light pheomelanin pigment is produced and
not dark eumelanin.
Dogs that are homozygous for the functioning allele of MC1R (which would cause eumelanin to be produced) are dark in color.
Dogs that are homozygous for the non-functioning allel e (which would cause pheomelanin to be produced) are light in color. Dogs
that are heterozygous are dark in color. What does t his tell you about which allele is dominant? If you s aid “the dark allele is
dominant because it covers up the light allele”, you’ re correct. We will use “E” to represent the genotype at MC1R because the

19.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70695dominant phenotype in this case is the production of eumelanin. Dogs that have the genotype EE or Ee will produce eumelanin and
be dark. Dogs that have the genotype “ee” will produce pheom elanin and be light.
Figure: In this pedigree, the shaded individual is yellow. Sh e therefore has the genotype ee and produces pheomela nin. We
can’t tell the genotype of her mate by looking (he could be Ee or EE), but since all of their puppies we re dark in color, we would
predict that his genotype was EE. In this cross: EE x ee, 100% of the puppies would have the genotype Ee, so 100% of the puppies
would produce eumelanin instead of pheomelanin.
The cross shown in Figure can also be shown as a Punnett square (Figure). Since we are unsure whether the male dog
has the genotype “EE” or “Ee”, we have to make two Punn ett squares. Since all of the puppies resulting from t his cross were black,
we would predict that the first Punnett square shows the cross. However, it is possible that the second Punnett square is correct.
There are only 4 puppies, so it’s not hard to imagine that they could all be black even though the Punnett square predicts only 50%
black. It would be comparable to flipping a coin 4 ti mes and getting 4 heads in a row. Getting 4 heads in a row is less likely, but
definitely possible.
Figure: Cross from Figure shown as Punnett squares.
It is very important to note here that yellow dogs still have the TYRP1 gene, even though they are not black or brown!
Common variations (polymorphisms) in the MC1R gene a re associated with normal differences in skin and ha ir color. Certain
genetic variations are most common in people with re d hair, fair skin, freckles, and an increased sensit ivity to sun exposure.
These MC1R polymorphisms reduce the ability of the mela nocortin 1 receptor to stimulate eumelanin productio n, causing
melanocytes to make mostly pheomelanin. Although MC1R i s a key gene in normal human pigmentation, researcher s believe
that the effects of other genes also contribute to a person’ s hair and skin coloring.
The melanocortin 1 receptor is also active in cells other than melanocytes, including cells involved in the body’s immune and
inflammatory responses. The receptor’s function in the se cells is unknown.
Photo credit: dusdin on flickr; from Wikipedia.Human Connection

19.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70695Resources
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:FtsD6vMd@3/Mendels-Exp eriments
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:sbdXt0s3@4/Laws-of-Inh eritance
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:zLLYW2hj@5/Extensio ns-of-theLaws-of-Inhe
Human Connection – information about MC1R: “MC1R” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to Understanding Gen etic
Conditions, National Institutes of Health: U.S. National Library of Medici ne is in the Public Domain
Schmutz SM, Moker JS, Berryere TG, Christison KM, Dolf G. 2001. An SNP is used to map MC1R to dog chromosome 5. Anim
Genet. 32(1):43-4.
Schmutz SM, Berryere TG, Goldfinch AD. 2002. TYRP1 and MC1R genotypes and their effects on coat col or in dogs. Mammalian
Genome 13, 380-387.
19.4: Yellow fur color - a recessive trait is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

19.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7069619.5: Epistasis - the relationship between black, brown, and yellow fur
Epistasis
Dogs don’t have either the TYRP1 gene or the MC1R gene – they have both. In fact, every dog will have two copies of the TYRP1
gene and two copies of the MC1R gene. Since both genes control aspects of coat color, it makes sense that t hey interact. In fact,
TYRP1 and MC1R have what is called an epistatic relati onship: the action of one gene controls the expressio n of a second gene.
Another way to phrase this relationship is that the effect o f one gene is dependent on another gene.
Remember that TYRP1 is required for the production of eumelanin. The dominant allele of TYRP1 (B) produces black eumelanin,
while the recessive allele (b) produces brown eumelani n. However, if a dog is homozygous recessive for MC1R (ee), they lack the
ability to produce eumelanin at all. If no eumelani n is being produced, it doesn’t matter whether it would have been black or
brown: there is none. This means that any dog that is homozygous recessive for MC1R will appear yellow regard less of its
genotype at TYRP1. These two genes are epistatic: the action of MC1R controls the expression of TYRP1. The ef fect of TYRP1 is
dependent on MC1R.
If a dog has at least one dominant functioning allel e of MC1R, then its genotype at TYRP1 can be seen. If t he dog has at least one
dominant allele of TYRP1, it will appear black. If it has t wo recessive alleles, it will appear brown.
Figure: Genotypes for TYRP1 (B) and MC1R (E) that lead to t he three recognized colors of labs. (Credit EArellano, from
Wikimedia)
A pedigree can be used to show the inheritance of two diffe rent genes such as TYRP1 and MC1R.
Figure: In this pedigree, a cross between an individual who i s heterozygous for both MC1R and TYRP1 and an individ ual
who has the genotype “Bbee” is shown. Black individual s are shaded black, yellow individuals are shaded yello w, and brown
individuals are shaded grey. The 6 different possible g enotypes are each shown as one offspring. This does not g ive you any
information about the probability of getting a cert ain genotype of offspring – it gives you the actual n umber of offspring observed
and their traits.
Punnett squares can also be used to show this cross. If the probability of inheriting one trait is multipli ed by the probability of
inheriting the second trait, the overall probability o f getting any given offspring can be determined.
Figure: These two Punnett squares can be used to determine the results of a cross between these individuals: Bbee x BbEe. If
you wanted to determine the probability of getting a brown dog, you would multiply the probability of getting bb by the probability
of having at least one dominant E. That would equal 1/4 x 1/2 = 1/8. This gives you the probability of ge tting a brown dog, but
doesn’t tell you anything about the number of brown dogs actually observed.

19.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70696Individuals who have albinism lack the ability to pr oduce any pigment. If no pigment is being produced, t he color that the
pigment would have been is unimportant. The effect of the pigment genes is controlled by the gene that a llows pigment to be
produced. This is an example of epistasis.
Albinism can occur in humans (see the section on TYRP1) a s well as other animals, such as the squirrel seen below.
Photo credit: Stephenkniatt from Wikipedia.
References:
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:zLLYW2hj@5/Extensio ns-of-theLaws-of-Inhe
Schmutz SM, Berryere TG, Goldfinch AD. 2002. TYRP1 and MC1R genotypes and their effects on coat col or in dogs. Mammalian
Genome 13, 380-387.
19.5: Epistasis - the relationship between black, brown, and yellow fur is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by LibreTexts.Human Connection

19.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7069719.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and epistasis
Brindle coloration is a black and brown striping patt ern that is caused by different alleles at the “K loc us”, which is probably a gene
called ASIP that controls pigment switching (Figure; C iampolini, 2013). There are three alleles of the K lo cus: K, k, and
k (Kerns, 2007). The K allele is dominant over the ot her two alleles and produces solid black color. k prod uces the brindle color
pattern and is dominant over the k allele. This means that dogs with the genotype k k or k k will have the bri ndle color pattern.
Dogs with the genotype k k are yellow in color.
Figure: This boxer shows the brindle color pattern, which loo ks sort of like tiger stripes. (Credit: Steve Henderson Location:
Memphis, TN)
The K locus and MC1R (which controls the difference bet ween dark eumelanin and light pheomelanin production) have an
epistatic relationship. If a dog has two recessive alle les for MC1R and is therefore unable to make eumela nin, the dog will appear
yellow regardless of its genotype at the K locus.
References
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
Ciampolini R, Cecchi F, Spaterna A, Bramante A, Bardet SM, Oulmouden A. 2013. Characterization of different 5′-untranslated
exons of the ASIP gene in black-and-tan Doberman Pinscher and brindle Boxer dogs. Anim Genet. 44(1):114-7.
Kerns JA, Cargill EJ, Clark LA, Candille SI, Berryere TG, Ol ivier M, Lust G, Todhunter RJ, Schmutz SM, Murphy KE, Barsh GS.
2007. Linkage and segregation analysis of black and brindle coat color in domestic dogs. Genetics. 176(3):1679-89.
19.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and epistasis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.B br
y B br
y br br br y
y y

19.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7069819.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend
Flower color in snapdragons
Mendel’s results in crossing peas, black vs brown fur co lor, and eumelanin production vs pheomelanin produc tion all demonstrate
traits are inherited as dominant and recessive. This contradicts the historical view that offspring always e xhibited a blend of their
parents’ traits. However, sometimes heterozygote phenoty pe is intermediate between the two parents. For exampl e, in the
snapdragon, Antirrhinum majus (Figure), a cross between a homozygous parent with white flowers (C C) and a
homozygous parent with red flowers (C C) will produce offspring with pink flowers (C C) (Figure).
Figure: These pink flowers of a heterozygote snapdragon result from incomplete dominance. (credit:
“storebukkebruse”/Flickr)
Note that different genotypic abbreviations are used to distinguish these patterns from simple dominance and recessiveness. The
abbreviation C can be read as “at the flower color gene (C), the white al lele is present.”
Figure: A cross between a red and white snapdragon will yield 100% pink offspring.
This pattern of inheritance is described as incomplete dominance, meaning that neither of the alleles is completely dominant over
the other: both alleles can be seen at the same tim e. The allele for red flowers is incompletely domina nt over the allele for white
flowers. Red + white = pink. The results of a cross wher e the alleles are incompletely dominant can still be predicted, just as with
complete dominant and recessive crosses. Figure shows the results from a cross between two heterozygous i ndividuals:
C C x C C. The expected offspring would have the genotypic rat io 1 C C:2 C C:1 C C, and the phenotypic ratio would be
1:2:1 for red:pink:white. The basis for the intermed iate color in the heterozygote is simply that the p igment produced by the red
allele (anthocyanin) is diluted in the heterozygote an d therefore appears pink because of the white background of the flower petals.
Figure: The results of crossing two pink snapdragons.W W
R R R W
W
R W R W R R R W W W

19.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70698Straight, curly, and wavy hair in dogs
Figure: The wavy hair on this labradoodle is caused by incomp lete dominance. (Credit: Localpups, Flickr)
Another example of incomplete dominance is the inher itance of straight, wavy, and curly hair in dogs. The KRT71 gene is used to
synthesize the keratin 71 protein. Genes in the KRT fa mily provide instructions for making proteins calle d keratins. Keratins are a
group of tough, fibrous proteins that form the struct ural framework of epithelial cells, which are cells t hat line the surfaces and
cavities of the body. Epithelial cells make up tissu es such as the hair, skin, and nails. These cells also line the internal organs and
are an important part of many glands.
Keratins are best known for providing strength and resilience to cells that form the hair, skin, and nails. These proteins allow t issues
to resist damage from friction and minor trauma, suc h as rubbing and scratching. Keratins are also involve d in several other critical
cell functions, including cell movement (migration), regulation of cell size, cell growth and division (p roliferation), wound healing,
and transport of materials within cells. Different combina tions of keratin proteins are found in different tissues.
The mutation which causes curly hair in dogs, such as t he labradoodle seen in Figure, is in exon 2 of the g ene and is
predicted to substantially disrupt the structure of the keratin 71 protein (Cadieu, 2009). This change i n protein shape prevents the
keratin proteins from interacting together correctl y within the hair, altering the structure of the hair and resulting in a curly coat
(Runkel, 2006).
When a dog has two curly alleles (K K), it has a very curly coat, such as on the poodle in Figure. A dog with two straight
alleles (K K) has a straight coat. Dogs that are heter ozygous (K K) have an intermediate or wavy coat like t he labradoodle in
Figure.
Figure: This poodle has two copies of the curly allele of the KRT71 gene (K K). Compare his curly hair to the wavy hair
of the labradoodle in Figure. The labradoodle is het erozygous (K K). (Credit B. Schoener; From Wikimedia)
Blood is classified into different groups according to the presence or absence of molecules called anti gens on the surface of
every red blood cell in a person’s body. Antigens dete rmine blood type and can either be proteins or comp lexes of sugar
molecules (polysaccharides). The genes in the blood g roup antigen family provide instructions for making antigen proteins.
Blood group antigen proteins serve a variety of fun ctions within the cell membrane of red blood cells. Th ese protein functions
include transporting other proteins and molecules int o and out of the cell, maintaining cell structure, at taching to other cells
and molecules, and participating in chemical reactions.
There are 29 recognized blood groups, most involving only one gene. Variations (polymorphisms) within th e genes that
determine blood group give rise to the different an tigens for a particular blood group protein. For exam ple, changes in a few
DNA building blocks (nucleotides) in the ABO gene give rise to the A, B, and O blood types of the ABO blood gr oup. TheC C
+ + + C
C C
+ C
Human Connection – Blood Type

19.7.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70698changes that occur in the genes that determine bloo d group typically affect only blood type and are no t associated with adverse
health conditions, although exceptions do occur.
The A and B alleles are codominant, which is similar to incomplete dominance in that heterozygotes have an intermediate
phenotype. If both the A and B alleles are present, both will be seen in the phenotype. The O allele is recessive to both A and B.
Photo credit: InvictaHOG, from Wikipedia.
References
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
Cadieu E, Neff MW, Quignon P, Walsh K, Chase K, Parker HG, V onh oldt BM, Rhue A, Boyko A, Byers A, Wong A, Mosher DS,
Elkahloun AG, Spady TC, André C, Lark KG, Cargill M, Bustamant e CD, Wayne RK, Ostrander EA. 2009. Coat variation in the
domestic dog is governed by variants in three genes. Science. 326(5949):150-3.
Runkel F, Klaften M, Koch K, Böhnert V, Büssow H, Fuchs H, Franz T, Hrabé de Angelis M. 2006. Morphologic and molecular
characterization of two novel Krt71 (Krt2-6g) mutations: Kr t71rco12 and Krt71rco13. Mamm Genome. 17(12):1172-82.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:zLLYW2hj@5/Extensio ns-of-theLaws-of-Inhe
“Blood Group Antigens” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to Understanding Gen etic Conditions, National Institutes of
Health: U.S> National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
“Keratins” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to Understanding Gen etic Conditions, National Institutes of Health: U.S.
National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
19.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

19.8.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7069919.8: White spotting - when there's more than two alleles
So far, we have discussed genes which have only two alle les. However, that is not always the case: there can be more than two
alleles for a given gene. One example is the MITF gene, which is the major gene that controls white spotting in dogs. This protein
is required for the migration and survival of melan ocytes into the skin during development. If it is no t functional, it impairs the
ability of the skin to make pigment, thus “covering up” the effect of other color genes. There are thou ght to be at least four alleles
that can contribute (Karlsson, 2007). Depending on which alleles are present in a dog, the amount of white can vary from none (a
solid-colored dog) to mostly white (Table and Figure).
Table: Combinations of different alleles for MITF result in differ ent amounts of white present in the coat.
Alleles Amount of white
SS None (solid colored)
Ss Small amounts of white possible on face, chest, feet, an d tail tip
SsMore than 50% solid colored, with white on the face, chest, feet,
collar, underbelly, and tail tip
s s Approximately even amounts of color and white
s s More than 50% white with irregular splashes of color
s sMostly white with only minimal areas of color, perhap s on one or
both ears, an eye patch, or a spot near the tail
Figure: These dogs have different combinations of alleles of t he MITF gene. The first dog probably has the genotype “Ss ”;
the dog in the center is likely “SS”; the dog on the right is likely “s s ”. (Credits: Funny black dog by X posid from
Publicdomainpictures. A black and white dog by Petr Kratochvil from Free stock photos. White dog with black ears by RetyiRetyi
from Pixabay.)
Human blood type was discussed in the previous sectio n. You may remember that there are three alleles for the ABO gene: A,
B, and O. A and B are codominant, meaning that if bot h alleles are present, both will be seen in the pheno type. A person with
type AB blood has one A allele and one B allele.
O is recessive to A and B. A person with the genotype AO will have Type A blood. A person with the genotype BO wil l have
type B blood. Type O blood results from two O alleles.
Photo credit: Kalaiarasy, from Wikipedia.i
p
i p
i e
e e
p
e e
Human Connection – Blood Type

19.8.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70699References
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
Karlsson EK, Baranowska I, Wade CM, Salmon Hillbertz NH, Zody MC, Anderson N, Biagi TM, Patterson N, Pielberg GR,
Kulbokas EJ 3rd, Comstock KE, Keller ET, Mesirov JP, von Eul er H, Kämpe O, Hedhammar A, Lander ES, Andersson G,
Andersson L, Lindblad-Toh K. 2007. Efficient mapping of mendelian traits in dogs through genome-wide association. Nat Genet.
39(11):1321-8.
19.8: White spotting - when there's more than two all eles is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

19.9.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7070019.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder
So far, all the genes we have discussed have had two co pies present in all individuals. This is because the individual inherited one
from the male parent’s haploid gamete and one from t he female parent’s haploid gamete. The two gametes ca me together during
fertilization to produce a diploid individual. There is, however, one exception to this: genes which are present on the sex
chromosomes.
In humans, as well as in many other animals and some p lants, the sex of the individual is determined by sex chromosomes – one
pair of non-homologous chromosomes. Until now, we have o nly considered inheritance patterns among non-sex c hromosomes, or
autosomes. In addition to 22 homologous pairs of autosomes, hu man females have a homologous pair of X chromosomes, wher eas
human males have an XY chromosome pair. Although the Y chromosome contains a small region of similarity to the X
chromosome so that they can pair during meiosis, the Y chromosome is much shorter and contains fewer genes. When a gene being
examined is present on the X, but not the Y, chromosome, it is X-linked.
The X chromosome is one of two sex chromosomes. Humans an d most mammals have two sex chromosomes, the X and Y.
Females have two X chromosomes in their cells, while male s have X and Y chromosomes in their cells. Egg cells al l contain an X
chromosome, while sperm cells contain an X or a Y chrom osome. This arrangement means that during fertilizati on, it is the male
that determines the sex of the offspring since the female can only give an X chromosome to the offspring.
Figure: A diagram showing the autosomal and sex chromosomes. Re member that in a diploid cell, there would be two c opies
of each autosomal chromosome present. (Credit: Darryl Lega, NHGRI)
Most sex-linked genes are present on the X chromosome si mply because it is much larger than the Y chromosome. The X
chromosome spans about 155 million DNA base pairs and r epresents approximately 5 percent of the total DNA in cells. The X
chromosome likely contains 800 to 900 genes. In contra st, the Y chromosome has approximately 59 million b ase pairs and only 5060 genes. Sex is determined by the SRY gene, which is loca ted on the Y chromosome and is responsible for the d evelopment of a
fetus into a male. This means that the presence of a Y chromosome is what causes a fetus to develop as ma le. Other genes on the Y
chromosome are important for male fertility.

19.9.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70700Hemophilia is a bleeding disorder that slows the bloo d clotting process. People with this condition experien ce prolonged bleeding
or oozing following an injury, surgery, or having a t ooth pulled. In severe cases of hemophilia, continuo us bleeding occurs after
minor trauma or even in the absence of injury (spon taneous bleeding). Serious complications can result fro m bleeding into the
joints, muscles, brain, or other internal organs. Milder forms of hemophilia do not necessarily involve sponta neous bleeding, and
the condition may not become apparent until abnormal bleeding occurs following surgery or a serious injury.
The major types of this condition are hemophilia A (also known as classic hemophilia or factor VIII defic iency) and hemophilia B
(also known as Christmas disease or factor IX deficienc y). Although the two types have very similar signs and symptoms, they are
caused by mutations in different genes.
Hemophilia A and hemophilia B are inherited in an X-l inked recessive pattern. The genes associated with the se conditions are
located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two se x chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosom e), one
altered copy of the gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chr omosomes), a mutation
would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cau se the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females wi ll have two altered
copies of this gene, it is very rare for females to have hemophilia. A characteristic of X-linked inherit ance is that fathers cannot pass
X-linked traits to their sons (Figure and).
Figure: X-linked recessive inheritance. Photo credit OpenStax College; OpenStax Anatomy and Physiology.

19.9.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70700
Figure: If a carrier female and a normal male produce offsp ring, there is a 25% total chance that they will hav e a child with
hemophilia. None of their daughters will have the di sease (although half will be carriers). Half their sons will be hemophiliacs.
In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one a ltered copy of the gene in each cell is called a ca rrier. Carrier females have
about half the usual amount of coagulation factor VIII or coagulation factor IX, which is generally enough for normal blood
clotting. However, about 10 percent of carrier females have less than half the normal amount of one of th ese coagulation factors;
these individuals are at risk for abnormal bleeding, par ticularly after an injury, surgery, or tooth extraction.
Colorblindness is another example of a sex-linked trait in humans. The genes that produce the photopigments necessary f or color
vision are located on the X chromosome. If one of thes e genes is not functional because it contains a harmf ul mutation, the
individual will be colorblind. Men are much more like ly than women to be colorblind: up to 100 times more men than women have
various types of colorblindness (http://www.colour-blindness.com/general/prevalence/).
Figure: A test image for color-blindness as seen by someone with normal color vision and several types of colorblindne ss.
(Credit: Sakurambo)
References:
Unless otherwise noted, text adapted by and images by Lisa Bartee, 2016.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:zLLYW2hj@5/Extensio ns-of-theLaws-of-Inhe
“X chromosome” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to Understanding Gen etic Conditions, National Institutes of Health:
U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
“Y chromosome” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to Understanding Gen etic Conditions, National Institutes of Health:
U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
“Hemophilia” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to Understanding Gen etic Conditions, National Institutes of Health: U.S.
National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

19.10.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7070119.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together
None of the genes discussed in these sections occur i n isolation: one individual dog would have all the g enes for color, hair
structure, and hemoglobin (dogs can get hemophilia to o). Genes interact together to produce the overall ph enotype of the
individual.
Example 1: Sugar
For example, look at Sugar in Figure. She has short hair that is mostly white. The colored portion of her hair is the tigerstriped pattern termed “brindle.”
Figure: Sugar has short hair with brindle colored spots. (Credi t: Lisa Bartee)
The difference between short and long hair in dogs is caused by different alleles of a gene called FGF5. This g ene produces a
protein that is important in regulating the hair gr owth cycle. When the protein doesn’t function correct ly, the growth phase of the
hair cycle is longer, resulting in long hair. Short hair is the dominant trait. Since Sugar has short hai r, we know she has at least one
dominant allele of FGF5. We can use the letter “S” for sh ort hair. Sugar’s genotype for FGF5 is therefore “S-”, mean ing she has
one dominant allele and we can’t tell by looking at her wha t her second allele is.
Sugar’s hair is also straight, which means that she has two stra ight alleles of KRT71. Her genotype would be K K.
Sugar is more than 50% white with irregular splashes of color, which means that her genotype for MITF (the gen e that controls
white spotting) is s s.
The brindle pattern is caused by the k allele at th e K locus. Sugar can’t have the K allele or she would ha ve solid color instead of
the brindle pattern because K is dominant over k and k. She could have either the genotype k k or k k, sinc e the k allele is
dominant over the yellow allele (k).
Sugar has black eumelanin pigment in her hair and no se. This means she has the dominant phenotype for TYPR1, so her genotype
would be “B-”. Because she has eumelanin and not pheo melanin in her coat, she has the dominant phenotype f or MC1R, so her
genotype would be “E-”.
Sugar is a female dog who does not have hemophilia. This means that her genotype would be either X X or X X.
Putting all these together, we could say that Sugar’s overa ll coat genotype is S- K K s s B- E- X X –
We could potentially determine some of the unknown a lleles in her genotype if we knew anything about her parents, but Sugar was
adopted from the Multnomah County Animal Shelter after being picked up as a stray. Therefore, her a ncestry is unknown.
However, it turns out that after having her ancestry determi ned using DNA sequencing, she is 100% American Staffordshire Terrier.+ +
i e
br B
B br y br br br y br
y
H H H h
+ + i e H

19.10.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70701Example 2: Rags
Figure: Rags is similar in color to Sugar, but has a very diff erent fur type. (Credit: Lisa Bartee)
Rags has “furnishings”, a term used to describe his b eard and mustache. Furnishings are caused by a mutatio n in the RSPO2 gene.
This gene produces a protein that is involved in esta blishing hair follicles. The allele that leads to fu rnishings is dominant over the
allele for no furnishings. Rags must therefore have t he genotype “F-” at RSPO2. This allele also causes the long-ish hair on his legs
and tail.
Gene Genotype Phenotype
RSPO2 FF or Ff has furnishings
FGF5 SS or Ssshort fur (his longer fur is caused by the
furnishings allele)
KRT71 K K straight fur
MITF s s more than 50% white
K locus K K, K k, or K k solid color, not brindle or yell ow
TYRP1 BB or Bb produces black eumelanin, not brown
MC1R EE or Ee produces eumelanin instead of pheomelanin
F8 X Y male, no hemophilia+ +
i e
B B B br B y
H

19.10.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70701Example 3: Black poodle
Figure: Black poodle. (Credit: B. Schoener from Wikimedia)
Gene Genotype Phenotype
RSPO2 ff no furnishings
FGF5 ss long fur
KRT71 K K curly fur
MITF SS entirely solid color
K locus K K, K k, or K k solid color, not brindle or yell ow
TYRP1 BB or Bb produces black eumelanin, not brown
MC1R EE or Ee produces eumelanin instead of pheomelanin
Example 4: Golden Retriever
Figure: Golden Retriever. (Credit: Dirk V orderstraße)c c
B B B br B y

19.10.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70701Gene Genotype Phenotype
RSPO2 ff no furnishings
FGF5 ss long fur
KRT71 K K straight fur
MITF SS entirely solid color
K locus K K, K k, or K k solid color, not brindle or yell ow
TYRP1 BB or Bbproduces black eumelanin, not brown (seen
in the nose)
MC1R eeproduces pheomelanin instead of
eumelanin, so appears yellow
But wait, there’s more!
Figure: An English Cocker Spaniel. (Credit eNil)
We haven’t exhaustively discussed all the genes that can affect dog appearance. For example, what gene (or genes) causes the
English Springer Spaniel in Figure to be red? What gene(s) cause it to be speckled on its back? Or lead to its freckles?
There are estimated to be about 19,000 genes in the dog genome (Ostrander, 2005). The interactions of all t hese genes together lead
to the overall phenotype of one individual dog.
If you’re interested in learning more about the gen es that are involved in the appearance of dogs, check out the Dog Coat Color
Genetics website at http://www.doggenetics.co.uk.
References
Unless otherwise noted, text and images by Lisa Bartee, 201 6.
Ostrander EA, Wayne RK. 2005. The Canine Genome. Genome Res. 15: 1 706-1716.
19.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.+ +
B B B br B y

19.11.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7070219.11: KIT - embryonic lethality
Although MITF is the major gene impacting white spotting in dogs, a second gene known as KIT has also been shown to have an
impact in a subpopulation of German Shepherd dogs. This mutation in KIT arose very recently (it appeared sp ontaneously in a
female dog born in 2000) and causes a phenotype calle d “panda spotting.” The KIT gene produces a tyrosine kinase receptor
protein that functions in the same melanogenesis path way as MITF. The KIT receptor controls many important p rocesses within the
cells including growth and division, survival, and cell migration. Its signaling function is important in the development of many
different types of cells, including melanocytes which produc t the pigment melanin.
Interestingly, no dogs have been identified that are homozygous for the mutation in KIT. This is probably because having two
mutations in this gene is lethal because of its many imp ortant functions. This is called a homozygous lethal allele that results in
embryonic lethality. There are other examples of embryonic lethal genes:
The Agouti gene causes coat color changes in many anim als, including mice. One mutation that has been isolated in m ice
causes a yellow colored coat in mice heterozygous for the mut ation. Homozygous mice die in the womb (Figure).
Figure: Lethality of homozygous agouti mutation. Photo credi t Jcfidy; Wikimedia.
Mutations in the FGFR3 gene result in Achondroplasia, a fo rm of dwarfism in humans (Figure). This disorder is
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Two dominant al leles results in lethality.
Figure: Jason Acuña outside of the Waterfront Mariott in Port land, OR. on August 15, 2009. Photo credit Sakibomb222;
Wikimedia.
Manx cats have a dominant mutation that leads to them being ta illess or having short, stubby tails (Figure). Kittens wi th
two dominant alleles are thought to not survive until birth (Catworld, 2009).
Figure: A “rumpy riser” manx kitten. Photo credit Michelle W iegold; Wikimedia.

19.11.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70702Mexican hairless dogs contain a mutation in the FOXI3 gene. Hete rozygous dogs are hairless (Figure). Homozygous
mutant dogs are never observed.
Figure: Michelob (Michael) and Irish Mist (Misty), a hairless a nd a coated Xoloitzcuintli. Christopher A. and Amand a L.
Dellario, Nottingham, NH, USA. Photo taken by Amanda L. Dellario, August 2006. Wikimedia.
In humans, the KIT gene is located on chromosome 4 (Figure), while it is located on chromosome 13 in dogs (Wong, 2012).
Figure: Chromosomal location of the KIT gene in humans. Phot o credit Genetics Home Reference; Public Domain.
While KIT has only been shown to have a phenotypic effe ct in one family of German Shepherd dogs (at least so far), at least 69
mutations in the human KIT gene have been identified (GHR, 2018). Mutations in the human KIT gene lead to pi ebaldism, where
melanocytes are absent from certain areas of the hai r and skin (Figure). These mutations are inherited in an autosomal
dominant fashion. I couldn’t find any information a bout whether homozygous piebald mutations are lethal in humans. This is likely
because generating a homozygous piebald human would require mating two heterozygous piebald humans, and th is disorder is rare
so this mating would be unlikely.
Figure: Piebaldism in a 5 year old boy. Neither of his paren ts nor any of his five siblings showed any white spotting. Photo
credit Wellcome Images; Wikimedia.

19.11.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70702References
Wilson J. 2009. Cat World [Internet]. Feline Genetic Loc i Table. [accessed on January 2, 2017]. Available fro m: https://www.catworld.com.au/feline-...oci-table.html
Genetics Home Reference (GHR). 2018. National Institutes of He alth. Available from https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/KIT#conditions
Wong AK, Ruhe AL, Roberson KR, Lowe ER, Williams DC, Neff MW. 2012. A de novo mutation in KIT causes white spotting in a
subpopulation of German Shepherd dogs. Animal Genetics: 44:305-310.
19.11: KIT - embryonic lethality is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

19.12.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7070319.12: It's not all in the genes - the effect of environment
Not all traits are directly caused by DNA alone. The envi ronment also plays a large role in shaping an indiv idual’s traits. Some
examples can be seen below.
Height and weight: A number of genes interact to determine the general heigh t and weight that a person will have. But the
environment has a major influence as well. If an individua l is malnourished, their growth may be slowed and they may be
smaller than they would have been if they had gotten en ough food. In contrast, if a person consumes more calories than they
need, their weight will likely increase regardless of their genetics.
Fingerprints: the general characteristics of a person’s fingerprints a re determined by genetics, but the specific pattern is
generated randomly during development. Identical twins ty pically have fingerprints that are similar, but not id entical.
Intelligence: Like most aspects of human behavior and cognition, int elligence is a complex trait that is influenced by both
genetic and environmental factors. Roughly 50% of a pe rson’s IQ appears to be determined by genetic factors. Facto rs related to
a child’s home environment and parenting, education an d availability of learning resources, and nutrition, amon g others,
also contribute to intelligence. A person’s environment a nd genes influence each other, and it can be challengin g to tease apart
the effects of the environment from those of genetics. For e xample, if a child’s IQ is similar to that of his or her par ents, is that
similarity due to genetic factors passed down from parent to child, to shared environmental factors, or (most likely) t o a
combination of both? It is clear that both environmenta l and genetic factors play a part in determining intell igence.
Cancer Risk: For example, a person could inherit a mutation in the BRCA1 gene, which increases the risk of developing breast
or ovarian cancer. Researchers have identified more th an 1,800 mutations in the BRCA1 gene. Most BRCA1 gene muta tions
lead to the production of an abnormally short version of t he BRCA1 protein or prevent any protein from being made f rom one
copy of the gene. As a result, less of this protein is availa ble to help repair damaged DNA or fix mutations that occur in other
genes. As these defects accumulate, they can trigger cel ls to grow and divide uncontrollably to form a tumor. These mutations
are present in every cell in the body and can be passed from one generation to the next. As a result, they are ass ociated with
cancers that cluster in families. However, not everyone who i nherits a mutation in the BRCA1 gene will develop cancer. Ot her
genetic, environmental, and lifestyle factors also con tribute to a person’s cancer risk.
In contrast, cancer can be caused by purely environmenta l factors. According to the CDC, cigarette smoking is the number one
risk factor for lung cancer. In the United States, cigarett e smoking is linked to about 90% of lung cancers and peop le who
smoke are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer o r die from lung cancer than people who do not smoke. Radon exposure
also increases the likelihood that a person will develop lu ng cancer.
Figure: The colors on the poodle seen in this figure have no relationship to his DNA: he was dyed for a parade. (Cr edit:
skeeze)
References
“BRCA1” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to Understanding Gen etic Conditions, National Institutes of Health: U.S.
National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
“Is intelligence determined by genetics?” by Genetics Home Reference: Your Guide to Understanding Gen etic Conditions, National
Institutes of Health: U.S. National Library of Medicine is in the Public Domain
19.12: It's not all in the genes - the effect of envi ronment is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

19.13.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7070419.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one trait
So far, we have discussed examples where changing the DNA s equence of one gene affects one protein, which affect s one specific
trait (for example, the change from brown to black f ur). However, there are examples where one mutation can affect more than one
trait. This is called pleiotropy.
MC1R
MC1R, the gene which leads to the difference between y ellow and dark colored dogs, is also found in humans. Recall that MC1R
helps determine whether mostly eumelanin (dark pigmen t) or pheomelanin (lighter reddish pigment) will be p roduced. Humans
who produce mostly eumelanin have the active allele o f MC1R and have darker skin that tans easily and dar ker hair. Humans who
produce mostly pheomelanin have inactive MC1R protei ns and have red or blonde hair and light skin with f reckles that does not
tan easily.
One relatively obvious secondary phenotype of having lighter skin is that rates of skin cancer are higher in those individuals
compared to individuals who have darker skin that ta ns easily. Since MC1R affects skin pigmentation, it als o has an effect on skin
cancer rates. In addition, MC1R has an effect on can cer rates that is unrelated to skin pigmentation due to its interactions with other
genes that regulate inflammatory responses, DNA repair, and apo ptosis (Feller, 2016).
Interestingly, red headed individuals also exhibit higher pain tolerance due to their MC1R alleles (Lie m, 2004; Liem, 2006). So far,
the reason for this is unknown.
Mutations in MC1R have been shown to decrease knee car tilage in mice (Lorenz, 2014). Again, the mechanism fo r this is not
understood, but likely relates to MC1Rs signaling role.
MC1R polymorphisms have been associated with a decrease in the development of sepsis (blood poisoning) in humans (Seaton,
2017). This is probably due to the role that MC1R plays in inflammation (again, due to its role in signal tran sduction).
Activation of MC1R by agonists (chemicals that activat e receptors) were shown to reduce several harmful sympt oms in the kidneys
of rats (Lindskog, 2010). The specific reason for this is not understood.
“Frizzled” chickens
The dominant “frizzle” allele causes feathers to tu rn upwards rather than remain flat against the chick en’s body (Figure).
However, along with producing defective feathers, the f rizzle allele also leads to abnormal body temperatu res, higher metabolic
and blood flow rates, and greater digestive capacity. Furthermore, chickens who have this allele also lay fewer eggs than their wildtype counterparts.
Figure: A “frizzled” chicken. Photo credit Joe Goldberg; Flickr.
Phenylketonuria
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a disorder that affects the lev els of the amino acid phenylalanine in the body. We get phenylalanine from
food, then process it within our cells. Individuals wit h PKU have a mutation in the enzyme required to break down phenylalanine.
Levels of this amino acid build up in individuals with PKU. This build up can lead to a variety of different symptoms including
intellectual disability, seizures, poor bone strength, skin rashes, behavioral and mental disorders, and an u nusually small head. If
you’ve ever seen a warning on a package that says “Phenylket onurics – contains phenylalanine”, this is why.

19.13.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70704
References
Feller L, Khammissa RAG, Kramer B, Altini M, Lemmer J. 2016. Basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and m elanoma
of the head and face. Head Face Med. 12:11.
Liem EB, et. al. 2004. Anesthetic Requirement is Increased in Redheads. Anesthesiology. 101(2): 279-283.
Liem EB, Joiner TV, Tsueda K, Sessler DI. 2006. Increase d sensitivity to Thermal Pain and Reduced Subcutaneiou s Lidocaine
Efficacy in Redheads. Anesthesiology. 102(3): 509-514.
Lindskog A, et. al. 2010. Melanocortin 1 Receptor Agonists Redu ce Proteinuria. J Am Soc Néphron. 21(8): 1290-1298.
Lorenz J, et. al. 2014. Melanocortin 1 Receptor-Signal ing Deficiency Results in an Articular Cartilage Phenot ype and Accelerates
Pathogenesis of Surgically Induced Murine Osteoarthritis. PLoS One. 9(9): e105858.
Seaton ME, Parent BA, Mood RF, Wurfel MM, Muffley LA, O’Keefe GE, Gibran NS. 2017. MELANOCORTIN-1 RECEPTOR
POLYMORPHISMS AND THE RISK OF COMPLICATED SEPSIS AFTER TRAUMA: A CANDIDATE GENE ASSOCIATION
STUDY. Shock. 47(1): 79-85.
19.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one t rait is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
20: Biotechnology
The latter half of the twentieth century began with t he discovery of the structure of DNA, then progressed to the development of
the basic tools used to study and manipulate DNA. These a dvances, as well as advances in our understanding of and ability to
manipulate cells, have led some to refer to the twenty- first century as the biotechnology century. The rate of discovery and of the
development of new applications in medicine, agricult ure, and energy is expected to accelerate, bringing hu ge benefits to
humankind and perhaps also significant risks. Many of these developments are expected to raise significan t ethical and social
questions that human societies have not yet had to consider.
Figure: (a) A thermal cycler, such as the one shown here, is a basic tool used to study DNA in a process called the po lymerase
chain reaction (PCR). The polymerase enzyme most ofte n used with PCR comes from a strain of bacteria that li ves in (b) the hot
springs of Yellowstone National Park. (credit a: modifi cation of work by Magnus Manske; credit b: modificati on of work by Jon
Sullivan)
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR
20.2: Cloning
20.3: Genetic Engineering
20.4: Mapping Genomes
20.5: Applying Genomics
20.6: Proteomics
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:Pdu1uR8Y@2/Introduc tion
Thumbnail: Mice expressing green fluorescent protein. (CC B Y 2.0; Ingrid Moen et al. via Wikimedia Commons).
20: Biotechnology is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

20.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7075920.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR
Biotechnology is the use of artificial methods to modify the gene tic material of living organisms or cells to produc e novel
compounds or to perform new functions. Biotechnology has been used for improving livestock and crops since the beginning of
agriculture through selective breeding. Since the disc overy of the structure of DNA in 1953, and particularly since the development
of tools and methods to manipulate DNA in the 1970s, biotechnology has become synonymous with the manipula tion of
organisms’ DNA at the molecular level. The primary appli cations of this technology are in medicine (for the production of vaccines
and antibiotics) and in agriculture (for the geneti c modification of crops). Biotechnology also has many i ndustrial applications,
such as fermentation, the treatment of oil spills, an d the production of biofuels, as well as many househ old applications such as the
use of enzymes in laundry detergent.
Figure: The majority of biotechnology companies are involve d in human health. Photo credit 1Rileyw; Wikimedia.
To accomplish any of the applications described abov e, biotechnologists must be able to extract, manipula te, and analyze nucleic
acids.
Review of Nucleic Acid Structure
To understand the basic techniques used to work with nuc leic acids, remember that nucleic acids are macromol ecules made of
nucleotides (a sugar, a phosphate, and a nitrogenous b ase). The phosphate groups on these molecules each h ave a net negative
charge. An entire set of DNA molecules in the nucleus o f eukaryotic organisms is called the genome. DNA has two complementary
strands linked by hydrogen bonds between the paired base s.
Unlike DNA in eukaryotic cells, RNA molecules leave the nucleus. Messenger RNA (mRNA) is analyzed most frequentl y because
it represents the protein-coding genes that are being exp ressed in the cell.
Isolation of Nucleic Acids
To study or manipulate nucleic acids, the DNA must firs t be extracted from cells. Various techniques are use d to extract different
types of DNA (Figure). Most nucleic acid extraction techniques involve s teps to break open the cell, and then the use of
enzymatic reactions to destroy all undesired macromol ecules. Cells are broken open using a detergent sol ution containing buffering
compounds. To prevent degradation and contamination, macromolecules such as proteins and RNA are inactivate d using enzymes.
The DNA is then brought out of solution using alcohol. The resulting DNA, because it is made up of long poly mers, forms a
gelatinous mass. This method extracts all the nucleic acid within a cell. This includes genomic DNA (all the DNA in the genome),
as well as RNA. If this DNA was to be used for further study, the RNA wo uld often be digested with an enzyme to remove it.

20.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70759
Figure: This diagram shows the basic method used for the extrac tion of DNA.
RNA is studied to understand gene expression patterns in cells. RNA is naturally very unstable because enzym es that break down
RNA are commonly present in nature. Some are even sec reted by our own skin and are very difficult to inac tivate. Similar to DNA
extraction, RNA extraction involves the use of various buffers and enzymes to inactivate other macromolecul es and preserve only
the RNA.
Gel Electrophoresis
Because nucleic acids are negatively charged ions at neutral or alkaline pH in an aqueous environment, the y can be moved by an
electric field. Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate charged molecules o n the basis of size and charge. The nucleic
acids can be separated as whole chromosomes or as fragm ents. The nucleic acids are loaded into a slot at o ne end of a gel matrix,
an electric current is applied, and negatively char ged molecules are pulled toward the opposite end of t he gel (the end with the
positive electrode). Smaller molecules move through t he pores in the gel faster than larger molecules; th is difference in the rate of
migration separates the fragments on the basis of siz e. The nucleic acids in a gel matrix are invisible u ntil they are stained with a
compound that allows them to be seen, such as a dye. Disti nct fragments of nucleic acids appear as bands at spe cific distances from
the top of the gel (the negative electrode end) tha t are based on their size (Figure). A mixture of many fragments of varying
sizes appear as a long smear, whereas uncut genomic DNA i s usually too large to run through the gel and forms a single large band
at the top of the gel.
Figure: Shown are DNA fragments from six samples run on a gel, stained with a fluorescent dye and viewed under UV li ght.
(credit: modification of work by James Jacob, Tompkins Cortland Community College)

20.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70759Polymerase Chain Reaction
DNA analysis often requires focusing on one or more spec ific regions of the genome. It also frequently involve s situations in which
only one or a few copies of a DNA molecule are availab le for further analysis. These amounts are insuffici ent for most procedures,
such as gel electrophoresis. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique used to rapidly increase the number of copies of one
specific region of DNA for further analyses (Figure). Typically the DNA that is used as the starting sample in a PCR reaction
is genomic DNA, which would contain all the genes in the organism. PCR uses a special form of heat tolerant DNA polymerase,
the enzyme that replicates DNA, and other short nucleot ide sequences called primers that base pair to a spe cific portion of the DNA
being copied. A PCR reaction does not copy the entire g enome, rather it makes millions of copies of one specific region of interest.
Taq DNA polymerase – this polymerase was isolated from Thermus aquaticus, which is a bacteria that lives at high
temperatures in hot springs and deep sea vents. Taq polymerase has an optimum temperature of 70-80ºC and can su rvive nearly
an hour at 95ºC. Like other DNA polymerases, Taq polymerase assembles nucleotides only in the 5′ to 3′ dire ction.
Primers – Just like during DNA replication, Taq polymerase needs a free 3′ end to begin synthesis of t he new DNA. Primers in a
PCR reaction are man-made synthetic segments of DNA that mat ch the ends of the sequence that the scientist is inter ested in
amplifying. In order to synthesize both strands of the DNA double helix, a forward and a reverse primer must be added. These
two primers have free 3′ ends that point towards the sequenc e of interest (Figure, middle).
PCR is used for many purposes in laboratories. These include: 1) the identification of the owner of a DNA sample left at a crime
scene; 2) paternity analysis; 3) the comparison of small amounts of ancient DNA with modern organisms; and 4) determining the
sequence of nucleotides in a specific region. In all of these cases, the starting sample is genomic DNA. In some cases, the complete
genome may not be present due to the DNA being old or broken down.
PCR involves the following basic steps:
1. Denaturation (94ºC): The sample is heated in a small plastic tube inside a thermocycler (which is able to rapidl y change
temperatures very accurately). Heating the sample to 94ºC c auses the hydrogen bonds holding the DNA double helix to
denature so the strands are separated (Figure, top). Taq polymerase is heat tolerant and does not denature at th is
temperature.
2. Annealing (54-60ºC): The sample is cooled so that the pri mers can anneal (base pair) with their complementary sequenc e
(Figure; middle). Because of the base pairing rules, prime rs can only anneal in the specific spot that contains their
complementary base sequence. This allows scientists to c hoose which region of DNA will be amplified.
3. Extension (72ºC): The sample is warmed up to the optimum te mperature for Taq polymerase. Taq extends off of the free 3′ end
of both primers, producing a double helix (Figure; bot tom).

20.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70759
Figure: The steps of a PCR reaction. Photo credit Tinojasontra n; Wikimedia.
The three basic steps of a PCR reaction are repeated multiple times (“cycles”). Each cycle causes a rough ly 2x increase in the
number of amplified copies of the specific section of interest (Figure). Remember that only one section o f DNA is being
amplified due to the specificity of the primers.

20.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70759
Figure: Repeated cycling causes exponential growth of the de sired sequence. Photo credit Madprime; Wikimedia.
For the question below, drag TWO primers to the appropr iate location where they would anneal. The arrowhead sh ows the 3′ end of
the primer. Keep in mind that Taq DNA polymerase can only extend from the 3′ of the primer.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:8CA_YwJq@3/Cloning-a nd-GeneticEngineering
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

20.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076020.2: Cloning
In general, cloning means the creation of a perfect replica. Typically, the word is used to describe the creation of a genet ically
identical copy. In biology, the re-creation of a who le organism is referred to as “reproductive cloning.” Long before attempts were
made to clone an entire organism, researchers learned how to copy short stretches of DNA—a process that is refer red to as
molecular cloning.
Molecular Cloning
Cloning allows for the creation of multiple copies o f genes, expression of genes, and study of specific gen es. To get the DNA
fragment into a bacterial cell in a form that will b e copied or expressed, the fragment is first inserted into a plasmid. A plasmid
(also called a vector in this context) is a small cir cular DNA molecule that replicates independently of th e chromosomal DNA in
bacteria. In cloning, the plasmid molecules can be use d to provide a “vehicle” in which to insert a desired DNA fragment. Modified
plasmids are usually reintroduced into a bacterial h ost for replication. As the bacteria divide, they copy their own DNA (including
the plasmids). The inserted DNA fragment is copied alon g with the rest of the bacterial DNA. In a bacterial cel l, the fragment of
DNA from the human genome (or another organism that i s being studied) is referred to as foreign DNA to diffe rentiate it from the
DNA of the bacterium (the host DNA).
Figure: Plasmids occur naturally in bacteria, but can also be modified by scientists. (CC BY-SA 2.5; Spaully via Wikimedia
Commons)
Plasmids occur naturally in bacterial populations (suc h as Escherichia coli) and have genes that can contribute favorable trai ts to
the organism, such as antibiotic resistance (the abilit y to be unaffected by antibiotics). Plasmids have be en highly engineered as
vectors for molecular cloning and for the subsequent large-scale production of important molecules, such as insulin. A valuable
characteristic of plasmid vectors is the ease with whi ch a foreign DNA fragment can be introduced. These plas mid vectors contain
many short DNA sequences that can be cut with differen t commonly available restriction enzymes. Restriction enzymes (also
called restriction endonucleases) recognize specifi c DNA sequences and cut them in a predictable manner; they are naturally
produced by bacteria as a defense mechanism against fo reign DNA. Many restriction enzymes make staggered cuts in the two
strands of DNA, such that the cut ends have a 2- to 4-nu cleotide single-stranded overhang. The sequence that is recognized by the
restriction enzyme is a four- to eight-nucleotide seq uence that is a palindrome. Like with a word palindro me, this means the
sequence reads the same forward and backward. In most c ases, the sequence reads the same forward on one strand a nd backward
on the complementary strand. When a staggered cut is made in a sequence like this, the overhangs are comp lementary (Figure
Figure: In this (a) six-nucleotide restriction enzyme recogni tion site, notice that the sequence of six nucleotides reads the
same in the 5′ to 3′ direction on one strand as it doe s in the 5′ to 3′ direction on the complementary stra nd. This is known as a
palindrome. (b) The restriction enzyme makes breaks in the DNA strands, and (c) the cut in the DNA results in “sticky ends”.
Another piece of DNA cut on either end by the same r estriction enzyme could attach to these sticky ends and be inserted into the
gap made by this cut.

20.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70760Because these overhangs are capable of coming back t ogether by hydrogen bonding with complementary overh angs on a piece of
DNA cut with the same restriction enzyme, these are cal led “sticky ends.” The process of forming hydrogen bon ds between
complementary sequences on single strands to form doubl estranded DNA is called annealing. Addition of an enzyme called DNA
ligase, which takes part in DNA replication in cells, p ermanently joins the DNA fragments when the sticky end s come together. In
this way, any DNA fragment can be spliced between the two ends of a plasmid DNA that has been cut with the same restriction
enzyme (Figure).
Figure: This diagram shows the steps involved in molecular clon ing.
Plasmids with foreign DNA inserted into them are called recombinant DNA molecules because they contain new combinations of
genetic material. Proteins that are produced from re combinant DNA molecules are called recombinant proteins. Not all
recombinant plasmids are capable of expressing genes. Plasmids may also be engineered to express proteins o nly when stimulated
by certain environmental factors, so that scientists can con trol the expression of the recombinant proteins.
Cellular Cloning
Unicellular organisms, such as bacteria and yeast, nat urally produce clones of themselves when they replicat e asexually by binary
fission; this is known as cellular cloning. The nucle ar DNA duplicates by the process of mitosis, which cre ates an exact replica of
the genetic material.

20.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70760Reproductive Cloning
Reproductive cloning is a method used to make a clone or an identical co py of an entire multicellular organism. Most
multicellular organisms undergo reproduction by sexua l means, which involves the contribution of DNA from two individuals
(parents), making it impossible to generate an ident ical copy or a clone of either parent. Recent advan ces in biotechnology have
made it possible to reproductively clone mammals in the labo ratory.
Natural sexual reproduction involves the union, duri ng fertilization, of a sperm and an egg. Each of thes e gametes is haploid,
meaning they contain one set of chromosomes in their nuclei. The resulting cell, or zygote, is then diplo id and contains two sets of
chromosomes. This cell divides mitotically to produce a multicellular organism. However, the union of just an y two cells cannot
produce a viable zygote; there are components in th e cytoplasm of the egg cell that are essential for th e early development of the
embryo during its first few cell divisions. Without the se provisions, there would be no subsequent developme nt. Therefore, to
produce a new individual, both a diploid genetic com plement and an egg cytoplasm are required. The appro ach to producing an
artificially cloned individual is to take the egg c ell of one individual and to remove the haploid nuc leus (Figure). Then a
diploid nucleus from a body cell of a second individ ual, the donor, is put into the egg cell. The egg is then stimulated to divide so
that development proceeds. This sounds simple, but in fact it takes many attempts before each of the step s is completed
successfully.
The first cloned agricultural animal was Dolly, a sheep wh o was born in 1996. The success rate of reproductive c loning at the time
was very low. Dolly lived for six years and died of a lung tumor. There was speculation that because the ce ll DNA that gave rise to
Dolly came from an older individual, the age of the DNA may have affected her life expectancy. Since Dolly, several species of
animals (such as horses, bulls, and goats) have been successf ully cloned.
Figure: The creation of Dolly, the cloned sheep.
There have been attempts at producing cloned human e mbryos as sources of embryonic stem cells. In the pr ocedure, the DNA from
an adult human is introduced into a human egg cell, which is then stimulated to divide. The technology is similar to the technology
that was used to produce Dolly, but the embryo is never im planted into a surrogate mother. The cells produced are c alled embryonic
stem cells because they have the capacity to develop into many different kinds of cells, such as muscle or nerve cells. The stem
cells could be used to research and ultimately provid e therapeutic applications, such as replacing damage d tissues. The benefit of
cloning in this instance is that the cells used to re generate new tissues would be a perfect match to the donor of the original DNA.
For example, a leukemia patient would not require a siblin g with a tissue match for a bone-marrow transplant.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:8CA_YwJq@3/Cloning-a nd-GeneticEngineerin

20.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076020.2: Cloning is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

20.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076120.3: Genetic Engineering
Genetic engineering is the alteration of an organism’ s genotype using recombinant DNA technology to modify an organism’s DNA
to achieve desirable traits. The addition of foreig n DNA in the form of recombinant DNA vectors generated b y molecular cloning is
the most common method of genetic engineering. The organism that receives the recombinant DNA is called a genetically
modified organism (GMO). If the foreign DNA that is introduced comes from a different species, the host organism is called
transgenic. Bacteria, plants, and animals have been genetically modified since the early 1970s for academic, medical, agricultural,
and industrial purposes. In the US, GMOs such as Roundup-ready soybeans and borer-resistant corn are part of many common
processed foods.
Gene Targeting
Although classical methods of studying the function of genes began with a given phenotype and determined the genetic basis of
that phenotype, modern techniques allow researchers to start at the DNA sequence level and ask: “What does t his gene or DNA
element do?” This technique, called reverse genetic s, has resulted in reversing the classic genetic meth odology. This method would
be similar to damaging a body part to determine its function. An insect that loses a wing cannot fly, which me ans that the function
of the wing is flight. The classical genetic method would compare insects that cannot fly with insects that can fly, and observe that
the non-flying insects have lost wings. Similarly, muta ting or deleting genes provides researchers with clue s about gene function.
The methods used to disable gene function are collec tively called gene targeting. Gene targeting is the use of recombinant DNA
vectors to alter the expression of a particular gen e, either by introducing mutations in a gene, or by eliminating the expression of a
certain gene by deleting a part or all of the gene sequ ence from the genome of an organism.
Genetic Diagnosis and Gene Therapy
The process of testing for suspected genetic defects before administering treatment is called genetic di agnosis by genetic testing.
Depending on the inheritance patterns of a disease-ca using gene, family members are advised to undergo ge netic testing. For
example, women diagnosed with breast cancer are usual ly advised to have a biopsy so that the medical team can determine the
genetic basis of cancer development. Treatment plans are based on the findings of genetic tests that det ermine the type of cancer. If
the cancer is caused by inherited gene mutations, o ther female relatives are also advised to undergo g enetic testing and periodic
screening for breast cancer. Genetic testing is also offered for fetuses (or embryos with in vitro fertil ization) to determine the
presence or absence of disease-causing genes in families with specific debilitating diseases.
Gene therapy is a genetic engineering technique used to cure disease. In its simplest form, it involves the introduction of a good
gene at a random location in the genome to aid the cure of a disease that is caused by a mutated gene. Th e good gene is usually
introduced into diseased cells as part of a vector t ransmitted by a virus that can infect the host cell and deliver the foreign DNA
(Figure). More advanced forms of gene therapy try t o correct the mutation at the original site in the genome, such as is the
case with treatment of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).

20.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70761
Figure: Gene therapy using an adenovirus vector can be used t o cure certain genetic diseases in which a person has a
defective gene. (credit: NIH)
Production of Vaccines, Antibiotics, and Hormones
Traditional vaccination strategies use weakened or in active forms of microorganisms to mount the initial immune response.
Modern techniques use the genes of microorganisms clo ned into vectors to mass produce the desired antigen. The antigen is then
introduced into the body to stimulate the primary im mune response and trigger immune memory. Genes clone d from the influenza
virus have been used to combat the constantly changing s trains of this virus.
Antibiotics are a biotechnological product. They are n aturally produced by microorganisms, such as fungi, to attain an advantage
over bacterial populations. Antibiotics are produced on a large scale by cultivating and manipulating fungal cel ls.
Recombinant DNA technology was used to produce large-sc ale quantities of human insulin in E. coli as early as 1978. Previously,
it was only possible to treat diabetes with pig insulin, which caused allergic reactions in humans because o f differences in the gene
product. Currently, the vast majority of diabetes suffer ers who inject insulin do so with insulin produced by bact eria.
Human growth hormone (HGH) is used to treat growth disord ers in children. The HGH gene was cloned from a cDNA libra ry and
inserted into E. coli cells by cloning it into a bacterial vector. Bacte rial HGH can be used in humans to reduce symptoms of va rious
growth disorders.
Transgenic Animals
Although several recombinant proteins used in medicin e are successfully produced in bacteria, some proteins require a eukaryotic
animal host for proper processing. For this reason, the desired genes are cloned and expressed in animals, suc h as sheep, goats,
chickens, and mice. Animals that have been modified to express recombinant DNA are called transgenic animals. Several human
proteins are expressed in the milk of transgenic shee p and goats, and some are expressed in the eggs of ch ickens. Mice have been
used extensively for expressing and studying the effects o f recombinant genes and mutations.
Figure: These mice have been engineered to contain the gree n fluorescent protein (GFP) gene, which was originally isolated
from jellyfish. Photo credit Moen, 2012.

20.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70761Transgenic Plants
Manipulating the DNA of plants (i.e., creating GMOs) has help ed to create desirable traits, such as disease resista nce, herbicide and
pesticide resistance, better nutritional value, and better shelf-life (Figure). Plants are the most impor tant source of food for
the human population. Farmers developed ways to select for plant varieties with desirable traits long before modern-day
biotechnology practices were established.
Figure: Corn, a major agricultural crop used to create prod ucts for a variety of industries, is often modified thr ough plant
biotechnology. (credit: Keith Weller, USDA)
Plants that have received recombinant DNA from other spe cies are called transgenic plants. Because they are not natural, transgenic
plants and other GMOs are closely monitored by governmen t agencies to ensure that they are fit for human co nsumption and do not
endanger other plant and animal life. Because foreig n genes can spread to other species in the environment, extensive testing is
required to ensure ecological stability. Staples like corn, potatoes, and tomatoes were the first crop plants to be genetically
engineered.
Transformation of Plants Using Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Gene transfer occurs naturally between species in mic robial populations. Many viruses that cause human dise ases, such as cancer,
act by incorporating their DNA into the human genome. In plants, tumors caused by the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens
occur by transfer of DNA from the bacterium to the pl ant. Although the tumors do not kill the plants, they make the plants stunted
and more susceptible to harsh environmental conditio ns. Many plants, such as walnuts, grapes, nut trees, and b eets, are affected by
A. tumefaciens. The artificial introduction of DNA into plant cells is more challenging than in animal cells because of the thick
plant cell wall.
Figure: Tumor caused by infection with Agrobacterium tumefaciens. Photo credit C-M; Wikimedia.
Researchers used the natural transfer of DNA from Agrobacterium to a plant host to introduce DNA fragments of their c hoice into
plant hosts. In nature, the disease-causing A. tumefaciens have a set of plasmids, called the Ti plasmids (tum or-inducing plasmids),
that contain genes for the production of tumors in p lants. DNA from the Ti plasmid integrates into the inf ected plant cell’s genome.
Researchers manipulate the Ti plasmids to remove th e tumor-causing genes and insert the desired DNA fragmen t for transfer into
the plant genome. The Ti plasmids carry antibiotic res istance genes to aid selection and can be propagated in E. coli cells as well.

20.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70761The Organic Insecticide Bacillus thuringiensis
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is a bacterium that produces protein crystals during sporulation that are toxic to many insect sp ecies that
affect plants. Bt toxin has to be ingested by insect s for the toxin to be activated. Insects that have e aten Bt toxin stop feeding on the
plants within a few hours. After the toxin is activated in the intestines of the insects, death occurs within a couple of days. Modern
biotechnology has allowed plants to encode their own crystal Bt toxin that acts against insects. The crysta l toxin genes have been
cloned from Bt and introduced into plants. Bt toxin h as been found to be safe for the environment, non-to xic to humans and other
mammals, and is approved for use by organic farmers as a natural insecticide.
Flavr Savr Tomato
The first GM crop to be introduced into the market was the Flavr Savr Tomato produced in 1994. Antisense RNA t echnology was
used to slow down the process of softening and rotting caused by fungal infections, which led to increased sh elf life of the GM
tomatoes. Additional genetic modification improved the flavor of this tomato. The Flavr Savr tomato did not successfully stay in
the market because of problems maintaining and shipp ing the crop.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:8CA_YwJq@3/Cloning-a nd-GeneticEngineerin
Moen I, Jevne C, Kalland K-H, Chekenya M, Akslen LA, Sleire L, Enger P, Reed RK, Oyan AM, Stuhr LEB. 2012. Gene
expression in tumor cells and stroma in dsRed 4T1 tu mors in eGFP-expressing mice with and without enhanced oxyg enation. BMC
Cancer. 12:21. doi:10.1186/1471-2407-12-21 PDF
20.3: Genetic Engineering is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

20.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076220.4: Mapping Genomes
Genomics is the study of entire genomes, including the complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence an d organization, and their
interactions within a species and with other species. Ge nome mapping is the process of finding the locations o f genes on each
chromosome. The maps created by genome mapping are co mparable to the maps that we use to navigate streets. A genetic map is
an illustration that lists genes and their location on a chromosome. Genetic maps provide the big picture (similar to a map of
interstate highways) and use genetic markers (simila r to landmarks). A genetic marker is a gene or sequ ence on a chromosome that
co-segregates (shows genetic linkage) with a specific t rait. Early geneticists called this linkage analysi s. Physical maps present the
intimate details of smaller regions of the chromosome s (similar to a detailed road map). A physical map is a representation of the
physical distance, in nucleotides, between genes or genetic markers. Both genetic linkage maps and phys ical maps are required to
build a complete picture of the genome. Having a com plete map of the genome makes it easier for research ers to study individual
genes. Human genome maps help researchers in their eff orts to identify human disease-causing genes related to illnesses like
cancer, heart disease, and cystic fibrosis. Genome mappi ng can be used in a variety of other applications, su ch as using live
microbes to clean up pollutants or even prevent poll ution. Research involving plant genome mapping may le ad to producing higher
crop yields or developing plants that better adapt to cli mate change.
Genetic Maps
The study of genetic maps begins with linkage analys is, a procedure that analyzes the recombination fre quency between genes to
determine if they are linked or show independent asso rtment. The term linkage was used before the discovery of DNA. Early
geneticists relied on the observation of phenotypic changes to understand the genotype of an organism. Sh ortly after Gregor
Mendel (the father of modern genetics) proposed that traits were determined by what are now known as genes, o ther researchers
observed that different traits were often inherited t ogether, and thereby deduced that the genes were phy sically linked by being
located on the same chromosome. The mapping of genes relative to each other based on linkage analysis led to the development of
the first genetic maps.
Observations that certain traits were always linked and certain others were not linked came from studying the offspring of crosses
between parents with different traits. For example, in experiments performed on the garden pea, it was discover ed that the color of
the flower and shape of the plant’s pollen were linked traits, and therefore the genes encoding these traits were in close proximity
on the same chromosome. The exchange of DNA between ho mologous pairs of chromosomes is called genetic recomb ination,
which occurs by the crossing over of DNA between homolo gous strands of DNA, such as nonsister chromatids. Linkage analysis
involves studying the recombination frequency betwee n any two genes. The greater the distance between two genes, the higher the
chance that a recombination event will occur between them, and the higher the recombination frequency be tween them. Two
possibilities for recombination between two nonsister c hromatids during meiosis are shown in Figure. If the recombination
frequency between two genes is less than 50 percent, they are said to be linked.
Figure: Crossover may occur at different locations on the chr omosome. Recombination between genes A and B is more
frequent than recombination between genes B and C be cause genes A and B are farther apart; a crossover is th erefore more likely to
occur between them.
The generation of genetic maps requires markers, just as a road map requires landmarks (such as rivers and m ountains). Early
genetic maps were based on the use of known genes as ma rkers. More sophisticated markers, including those based on non-coding

20.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70762DNA, are now used to compare the genomes of individuals in a population. Although individuals of a given spec ies are genetically
similar, they are not identical; every individual ha s a unique set of traits. These minor differences in th e genome between
individuals in a population are useful for the purpos es of genetic mapping. In general, a good genetic ma rker is a region on the
chromosome that shows variability or polymorphism (multip le forms) in the population.
Some genetic markers used in generating genetic maps are restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP), va riable number of
tandem repeats (VNTRs), microsatellite polymorphisms, and the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). RFLPs (som etimes
pronounced “rif-lips”) are detected when the DNA of an individual is cut with a restriction endonuclease tha t recognizes specific
sequences in the DNA to generate a series of DNA fragmen ts, which are then analyzed by gel electrophoresis. The DNA of every
individual will give rise to a unique pattern of ban ds when cut with a particular set of restriction endon ucleases; this is sometimes
referred to as an individual’s DNA “fingerprint.” Cert ain regions of the chromosome that are subject to p olymorphism will lead to
the generation of the unique banding pattern. VNTRs ar e repeated sets of nucleotides present in the non-co ding regions of DNA.
Non-coding, or “junk,” DNA has no known biological functi on; however, research shows that much of this DNA is actu ally
transcribed. While its function is uncertain, it is ce rtainly active, and it may be involved in the regul ation of coding genes. The
number of repeats may vary in individual organisms of a population. Microsatellite polymorphisms are simil ar to VNTRs, but the
repeat unit is very small. SNPs are variations in a single nucleot ide.
Because genetic maps rely completely on the natural process of recombination, mapping is affected by na tural increases or
decreases in the level of recombination in any give n area of the genome. Some parts of the genome are re combination hotspots,
whereas others do not show a propensity for recombinati on. For this reason, it is important to look at mapping information
developed by multiple methods.
Physical Maps
A physical map provides detail of the actual physica l distance between genetic markers, as well as the numbe r of nucleotides. There
are three methods used to create a physical map: cyt ogenetic mapping, radiation hybrid mapping, and sequ ence mapping.
Cytogenetic mapping uses information obtained by micr oscopic analysis of stained sections of the chromosome (Figure). It is
possible to determine the approximate distance betwee n genetic markers using cytogenetic mapping, but not the exact distance
(number of base pairs). Radiation hybrid mapping uses radiation, such as x-rays, to break the DNA into fragm ents. The amount of
radiation can be adjusted to create smaller or large r fragments. This technique overcomes the limitation of genetic mapping and is
not affected by increased or decreased recombinatio n frequency. Sequence mapping resulted from DNA sequenci ng technology that
allowed for the creation of detailed physical maps wit h distances measured in terms of the number of base pairs. The creation of
genomic libraries and complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries (collections of cloned sequences or all DNA from a gen ome) has sped
up the process of physical mapping. A genetic site use d to generate a physical map with sequencing technolo gy (a sequence-tagged
site, or STS) is a unique sequence in the genome with a known exact chromosomal location. An expressed sequenc e tag (EST) and
a single sequence length polymorphism (SSLP) are commo n STSs. An EST is a short STS that is identified with cDNA l ibraries,
while SSLPs are obtained from known genetic markers and provid e a link between genetic maps and physical maps.

20.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70762
Figure: This is a physical map of the human X chromosome. (cre dit: modification of work by NCBI, NIH)
Integration of Genetic and Physical Maps
Genetic maps provide the outline and physical maps pr ovide the details. It is easy to understand why both ty pes of genome
mapping techniques are important to show the big pic ture. Information obtained from each technique is use d in combination to
study the genome. Genomic mapping is being used with d ifferent model organisms that are used for research. Ge nome mapping is
still an ongoing process, and as more advanced techni ques are developed, more advances are expected. Genom e mapping is similar
to completing a complicated puzzle using every piec e of available data. Mapping information generated i n laboratories all over the
world is entered into central databases, such as GenBank at the National Center for Biotechnology Informatio n (NCBI). Efforts are
being made to make the information more easily access ible to researchers and the general public. Just as we u se global positioning
systems instead of paper maps to navigate through roa dways, NCBI has created a genome viewer tool to simplify the data-mining
process.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. January 2, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...apping-Genomes
20.4: Mapping Genomes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

20.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076320.5: Applying Genomics
The introduction of DNA sequencing and whole genome se quencing projects, particularly the Human Genome Proje ct, has
expanded the applicability of DNA sequence informatio n. Genomics is now being used in a wide variety of fiel ds, such as
metagenomics, pharmacogenomics, and mitochondrial gen omics. The most commonly known application of genomics is to
understand and find cures for diseases.
Predicting Disease Risk at the Individual Level
Predicting the risk of disease involves screening and identifying currently healthy individuals by genom e analysis at the individual
level. Intervention with lifestyle changes and drugs ca n be recommended before disease onset. However, this app roach is most
applicable when the problem arises from a single gene mutation. Such defects only account for about 5 percen t of diseases found in
developed countries. Most of the common diseases, suc h as heart disease, are multifactorial or polygenic, which refers to a
phenotypic characteristic that is determined by two o r more genes, and also environmental factors such as die t. In April 2010,
scientists at Stanford University published the genome analysis of a healthy individual (Stephen Quake, a scient ist at Stanford
University, who had his genome sequenced); the analysi s predicted his propensity to acquire various diseases. A risk assessment
was done to analyze Quake’s percentage of risk for 55 different medical conditions. A rare genetic mutati on was found that showed
him to be at risk for sudden heart attack. He was also predicted to have a 23 percent risk of developing pr ostate cancer and a 1.4
percent risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease. The sci entists used databases and several publications to a nalyze the genomic data.
Even though genomic sequencing is becoming more aff ordable and analytical tools are becoming more reli able, ethical issues
surrounding genomic analysis at a population level re main to be addressed. For example, could such data be legitimately used to
charge more or less for insurance or to affect credit rat ings?
Genome-wide Association Studies
Since 2005, it has been possible to conduct a type of study called a genome-wide association study, or GWAS. A GWAS is a
method that identifies differences between individual s in single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that may b e involved in causing
diseases. The method is particularly suited to diseases that may be affected by one or many genetic changes throughout the
genome. It is very difficult to identify the genes i nvolved in such a disease using family history info rmation. The GWAS method
relies on a genetic database that has been in develo pment since 2002 called the International HapMap Proje ct. The HapMap Project
sequenced the genomes of several hundred individual s from around the world and identified groups of SNPs. T he groups include
SNPs that are located near to each other on chromosomes so they tend to stay together through recombinatio n. The fact that the
group stays together means that identifying one mark er SNP is all that is needed to identify all the SNPs in the group. There are
several million SNPs identified, but identifying them i n other individuals who have not had their complete g enome sequenced is
much easier because only the marker SNPs need to be iden tified.
In a common design for a GWAS, two groups of individual s are chosen; one group has the disease, and the othe r group does not.
The individuals in each group are matched in other characteristics to reduce the effect of confounding variables causing differences
between the two groups. For example, the genotypes may d iffer because the two groups are mostly taken from dif ferent parts of the
world. Once the individuals are chosen, and typically t heir numbers are a thousand or more for the study to work, samples of their
DNA are obtained. The DNA is analyzed using automated syst ems to identify large differences in the percentage of particular SNPs
between the two groups. Often the study examines a milli on or more SNPs in the DNA. The results of GWAS can be used in two
ways: the genetic differences may be used as markers f or susceptibility to the disease in undiagnosed indiv iduals, and the particular
genes identified can be targets for research into th e molecular pathway of the disease and potential the rapies. An offshoot of the
discovery of gene associations with disease has been the formation of companies that provide socalled “pers onal genomics” that
will identify risk levels for various diseases based on an individual’s SNP complement. The science behind these services is
controversial.
Because GWAS looks for associations between genes and di sease, these studies provide data for other research into causes, rather
than answering specific questions themselves. An associa tion between a gene difference and a disease does not necessarily mean
there is a cause-and-effect relationship. However, some studies have provided useful information about the gen etic causes of
diseases. For example, three different studies in 2005 id entified a gene for a protein involved in regulatin g inflammation in the
body that is associated with a disease-causing blindness called age-related macular degeneration. This open ed up new possibilities

20.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70763for research into the cause of this disease. A large number of genes have been identified to be associate d with Crohn’s disease using
GWAS, and some of these have suggested new hypothetical mech anisms for the cause of the disease.
Pharmacogenomics
Pharmacogenomics involves evaluating the effectiveness and safety of drugs on the basis of information from an individua l’s
genomic sequence. Personal genome sequence informatio n can be used to prescribe medications that will be most effective and
least toxic on the basis of the individual patient’ s genotype. Studying changes in gene expression could provide information about
the gene transcription profile in the presence of the drug, which can be used as an early indicator of the potential for toxic effects.
For example, genes involved in cellular growth and con trolled cell death, when disturbed, could lead to the growth of cancerous
cells. Genome-wide studies can also help to find new gen es involved in drug toxicity. The gene signatures ma y not be completely
accurate, but can be tested further before pathologic sym ptoms arise.
Metagenomics
Traditionally, microbiology has been taught with the view that microorganisms are best studied under pure culture conditions,
which involves isolating a single type of cell and c ulturing it in the laboratory. Because microorganism s can go through several
generations in a matter of hours, their gene expressio n profiles adapt to the new laboratory environment v ery quickly. On the other
hand, many species resist being cultured in isolatio n. Most microorganisms do not live as isolated entiti es, but in microbial
communities known as biofilms. For all of these reason s, pure culture is not always the best way to study micr oorganisms.
Metagenomics is the study of the collective genomes of multiple species that grow and interact in an environmental nic he.
Metagenomics can be used to identify new species more rapidly and to analyze the effect of pollutants on the environment (Figure
). Metagenomics techniques can now also be applied to c ommunities of higher eukaryotes, such as fish.
Figure: Metagenomics involves isolating DNA from multiple spec ies within an environmental niche. The DNA is cut up and
sequenced, allowing entire genome sequences of multipl e species to be reconstructed from the sequences of over lapping pieces.
Creation of New Biofuels
Knowledge of the genomics of microorganisms is being use d to find better ways to harness biofuels from algae and cyanobacteria.
The primary sources of fuel today are coal, oil, wood, and other plant products such as ethanol. Although pla nts are renewable
resources, there is still a need to find more alterna tive renewable sources of energy to meet our populati on’s energy demands. The
microbial world is one of the largest resources for genes that encode new enzymes and produce new organic compounds, and it
remains largely untapped. This vast genetic resource ho lds the potential to provide new sources of biofuels (Figure).

20.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70763
Figure: Renewable fuels were tested in Navy ships and aircraft at the first Naval Energy Forum. (credit: modificati on of
work by John F Williams, US Navy)
Mitochondrial Genomics
Mitochondria are intracellular organelles that conta in their own DNA. Mitochondrial DNA mutates at a rapid rate and is often used
to study evolutionary relationships. Another feature that makes studying the mitochondrial genome intere sting is that in most
multicellular organisms, the mitochondrial DNA is passed on from the mother during the process of fertilizat ion. For this reason,
mitochondrial genomics is often used to trace genealogy.
Genomics in Forensic Analysis
Information and clues obtained from DNA samples found at crime scenes have been used as evidence in court cases, and genetic
markers have been used in forensic analysis. Genomic an alysis has also become useful in this field. In 2001, the first use of
genomics in forensics was published. It was a collabor ative effort between academic research institutions an d the FBI to solve the
mysterious cases of anthrax (Figure) that was transported by the US Postal Service. Anthrax ba cteria were made into an
infectious powder and mailed to news media and two U.S. Se nators. The powder infected the administrative staff a nd postal
workers who opened or handled the letters. Five people d ied, and 17 were sickened from the bacteria. Using micro bial genomics,
researchers determined that a specific strain of ant hrax was used in all the mailings; eventually, the so urce was traced to a scientist
at a national biodefense laboratory in Maryland.
Figure: Bacillus anthracis is the organism that causes anthrax. (credit: modification of work by CDC; scale-bar data from
Matt Russell)
Genomics in Agriculture
Genomics can reduce the trials and failures involved in scientific research to a certain extent, which coul d improve the quality and
quantity of crop yields in agriculture (Figure). Linking traits to genes or gene signatures helps to i mprove crop breeding to
generate hybrids with the most desirable qualities. Scie ntists use genomic data to identify desirable trait s, and then transfer those

20.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70763traits to a different organism to create a new genet ically modified organism, as described in the previ ous module. Scientists are
discovering how genomics can improve the quality and quantity of agricultural production. For example, sc ientists could use
desirable traits to create a useful product or enha nce an existing product, such as making a drought-sen sitive crop more tolerant of
the dry season.
Figure: Transgenic agricultural plants can be made to resist d isease. These transgenic plums are resistant to the plum p ox
virus. (credit: Scott Bauer, USDA ARS)
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:TE1njgbY@4/Genomics- andProteomics
20.5: Applying Genomics is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

20.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076420.6: Proteomics
Proteins are the final products of genes that perform the function encoded by the gene. Proteins are compose d of amino acids and
play important roles in the cell. All enzymes (excep t ribozymes) are proteins and act as catalysts that aff ect the rate of reactions.
Proteins are also regulatory molecules, and some are hormones. Transport proteins, such as hemoglobin, he lp transport oxygen to
various organs. Antibodies that defend against foreign particles are also proteins. In the diseased state, protein function can be
impaired because of changes at the genetic level or beca use of direct impact on a specific protein.
A proteome is the entire set of proteins produced b y a cell type. Proteomes can be studied using the kno wledge of genomes because
genes code for mRNAs, and the mRNAs encode proteins. The stu dy of the function of proteomes is called proteomics. Proteomics
complements genomics and is useful when scientists want to test their hypotheses that were based on genes. Eve n though all cells
in a multicellular organism have the same set of gene s, the set of proteins produced in different tissues is different and dependent
on gene expression. Thus, the genome is constant, bu t the proteome varies and is dynamic within an organ ism. In addition, RNAs
can be alternatively spliced (cut and pasted to creat e novel combinations and novel proteins), and many p roteins are modified after
translation. Although the genome provides a blueprint, the final architecture depends on several factors t hat can change the
progression of events that generate the proteome.
Genomes and proteomes of patients suffering from specifi c diseases are being studied to understand the gene tic basis of the
disease. The most prominent disease being studied with proteomic approaches is cancer (Figure). Proteomic approaches are
being used to improve the screening and early detec tion of cancer; this is achieved by identifying prot eins whose expression is
affected by the disease process. An individual protein is called a biomarker, whereas a set of proteins with altered expression
levels is called a protein signature. For a biomarker or protein signature to be useful as a candidate for early screening and
detection of a cancer, it must be secreted in body fluids such as sweat, blood, or urine, so that large-sc ale screenings can be
performed in a noninvasive fashion. The current prob lem with using biomarkers for the early detection of c ancer is the high rate of
false-negative results. A false-negative result is a n egative test result that should have been positive. In other words, many cases of
cancer go undetected, which makes biomarkers unrelia ble. Some examples of protein biomarkers used in cance r detection are CA125 for ovarian cancer and PSA for prostate cancer. Pro tein signatures may be more reliable than biomarkers to detect cancer cells.
Proteomics is also being used to develop individuali zed treatment plans, which involves the prediction of whether or not an
individual will respond to specific drugs and the side effects that the individual may have. Proteomics is a lso being used to predict
the possibility of disease recurrence.
Figure: This machine is preparing to do a proteomic pattern analysis to identify specific cancers so that an accurat e cancer
prognosis can be made. (credit: Dorie Hightower, NCI, NIH)
The National Cancer Institute has developed programs to improve the detection and treatment of cancer. Th e Clinical Proteomic
Technologies for Cancer and the Early Detection Rese arch Network are efforts to identify protein signature s specific to different
types of cancers. The Biomedical Proteomics Program is d esigned to identify protein signatures and design e ffective therapies for
cancer patients.

20.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70764References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. May 27, 2016 http://cnx.org/contents/s8Hh0oOc@9.10:TE1njgbY@4/Genomics- andProteomics
20.6: Proteomics is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

20.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076520.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
Although there have been significant advances in the medical sciences in recent years, doctors are still confounded by some
diseases, and they are using whole-genome sequencing to get to the bottom of the problem. Whole-genome sequ encing is a process
that determines the DNA sequence of an entire genome. W hole-genome sequencing is a brute-force approach to problem solving
when there is a genetic basis at the core of a disea se. Several laboratories now provide services to sequence, analyze, and interpret
entire genomes.
For example, whole-exome sequencing is a lower-cost alter native to whole genome sequencing. In exome sequenci ng, only the
coding, exon-producing regions of the DNA are sequenced. In 2010, whole-exome sequencing was used to save a young boy whose
intestines had multiple mysterious abscesses. The chi ld had several colon operations with no relief. Finall y, whole-exome
sequencing was performed, which revealed a defect in a pathway that controls apoptosis (programmed cell dea th). A bone-marrow
transplant was used to overcome this genetic disorder, leading to a cure for the boy. He was the first person to be successfully
treated based on a diagnosis made by whole-exome seq uencing. Today, human genome sequencing is more readi ly available and
can be completed in a day or two for about $1000.
Strategies Used in Sequencing Projects
The basic sequencing technique used in all modern da y sequencing projects is the chain termination meth od (also known as the
dideoxy method), which was developed by Fred Sanger in the 1970s. The chain termination method involves DNA replication of a
single-stranded template with the use of a primer and a regular deoxynucleotide (dNTP), which is a monomer, or a single unit, of
DNA. The primer and dNTP are mixed with a small proportio n of fluorescently labeled dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The ddNTPs
are monomers that are missing a hydroxyl group (–OH) at the site at which another nucleotide usually attache s to form a chain
(Figure).
Figure: A dideoxynucleotide is similar in structure to a deox ynucleotide, but is missing the 3′ hydroxyl group (ind icated by
the box). When a dideoxynucleotide is incorporated i nto a DNA strand, DNA synthesis stops.
Each ddNTP is labeled with a different color of fluor ophore. Every time a ddNTP is incorporated in the gro wing complementary
strand, it terminates the process of DNA replication, whi ch results in multiple short strands of replicated DNA that are each
terminated at a different point during replication. When the reaction mixture is processed by gel electr ophoresis after being
separated into single strands, the multiple newly repli cated DNA strands form a ladder because of the differi ng sizes. Because the
ddNTPs are fluorescently labeled, each band on the gel reflects the size of the DNA strand and the ddNTP that terminated the
reaction. The different colors of the fluorophore-l abeled ddNTPs help identify the ddNTP incorporated at that position. Reading the
gel on the basis of the color of each band on the ladder p roduces the sequence of the template strand (Figure).

20.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70765
Figure: Frederick Sanger’s dideoxy chain termination method is illustrated. Using dideoxynucleotides, the DNA fragm ent
can be terminated at different points. The DNA is sepa rated on the basis of size, and these bands, based on the size of the
fragments, can be read.
Early Strategies: Shotgun Sequencing and Pair-Wise End Sequencing
In shotgun sequencing method, several copies of a DNA fragment are cut randomly into many smaller pieces (somewhat like what
happens to a round shot cartridge when fired from a s hotgun). All of the segments are then sequenced using the chain-sequencing
method. Then, with the help of a computer, the fragment s are analyzed to see where their sequences overlap. By matching up
overlapping sequences at the end of each fragment, the entire DNA sequence can be reformed. A larger seque nce that is assembled
from overlapping shorter sequences is called a conti g. As an analogy, consider that someone has four cop ies of a landscape
photograph that you have never seen before and know n othing about how it should appear. The person then r ips up each
photograph with their hands, so that different size p ieces are present from each copy. The person then m ixes all of the pieces
together and asks you to reconstruct the photograph. In one of the smaller pieces you see a mountain. In a larger piece, you see that
the same mountain is behind a lake. A third fragment shows only the lake, but it reveals that there is a cabin on the shore of the
lake. Therefore, from looking at the overlapping info rmation in these three fragments, you know that the p icture contains a
mountain behind a lake that has a cabin on its shore. This is the principle behind reconstructing entire DNA sequences using
shotgun sequencing.
Originally, shotgun sequencing only analyzed one end o f each fragment for overlaps. This was sufficient fo r sequencing small
genomes. However, the desire to sequence larger genome s, such as that of a human, led to the development of double-barrel
shotgun sequencing, more formally known as pairwise-end sequencing. In pairwise-end sequencing, both ends of each fragment are
analyzed for overlap. Pairwise-end sequencing is, theref ore, more cumbersome than shotgun sequencing, but it is easier to
reconstruct the sequence because there is more available i nformation.
Next-generation Sequencing
Since 2005, automated sequencing techniques used by lab oratories are under the umbrella of next-generation sequencing, which is
a group of automated techniques used for rapid DNA seq uencing. These automated low-cost sequencers can gen erate sequences of
hundreds of thousands or millions of short fragments (25 to 500 base pairs) in the span of one day. Thes e sequencers use
sophisticated software to get through the cumbersome process of putting all the fragments in order.
Use of Whole-Genome Sequences of Model Organisms
The first genome to be completely sequenced was of a bacterial virus, the bacteriophage fx174 (5368 bas e pairs); this was
accomplished by Fred Sanger using shotgun sequencing. Several other organelle and viral genomes were later sequenced. The first
organism whose genome was sequenced was the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae; this was accomplished by Craig Venter in the
1980s. Approximately 74 different laboratories colla borated on the sequencing of the genome of the yeas t Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, which began in 1989 and was completed in 1996, becau se it was 60 times bigger than any other genome that h ad been
sequenced. By 1997, the genome sequences of two importa nt model organisms were available: the bacterium Escherichia coli K12
and the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genomes of other model organisms, such as the mouse Mus musculus, the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, and humans Homo sapiens are now known. A lot of basic
research is performed in model organisms because the information can be applied to genetically similar o rganisms. A model
organism is a species that is studied as a model to understand the biological processes in other species represented by the model
organism. Having entire genomes sequenced helps with t he research efforts in these model organisms. The proces s of attaching
biological information to gene sequences is called g enome annotation. Annotation of gene sequences helps wit h basic experiments
in molecular biology, such as designing PCR primers and RNA ta rgets.

20.7.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70765Uses of Genome Sequences
DNA microarrays are methods used to detect gene expres sion by analyzing an array of DNA fragments that are fixed to a glass
slide or a silicon chip to identify active genes and identify sequences. Almost one million genotypic ab normalities can be
discovered using microarrays, whereas whole-genome sequ encing can provide information about all six billion base pairs in the
human genome. Although the study of medical applicati ons of genome sequencing is interesting, this discipl ine tends to dwell on
abnormal gene function. Knowledge of the entire genom e will allow future onset diseases and other genetic diso rders to be
discovered early, which will allow for more informed d ecisions to be made about lifestyle, medication, and h aving children.
Genomics is still in its infancy, although someday it may become routine to use whole-genome sequencing to screen every newborn
to detect genetic abnormalities.
In addition to disease and medicine, genomics can co ntribute to the development of novel enzymes that co nvert biomass to biofuel,
which results in higher crop and fuel production, and lower cost to the consumer. This knowledge should allow better methods of
control over the microbes that are used in the prod uction of biofuels. Genomics could also improve the me thods used to monitor
the impact of pollutants on ecosystems and help clean up environmental contaminants. Genomics has allowed fo r the development
of agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals that could benef it medical science and agriculture.
It sounds great to have all the knowledge we can get from whole-genome sequencing; however, humans have a r esponsibility to use
this knowledge wisely. Otherwise, it could be easy to misu se the power of such knowledge, leading to discriminat ion based on a
person’s genetics, human genetic engineering, and o ther ethical concerns. This information could also le ad to legal issues regarding
health and privacy.
References
Unless otherwise noted, images on this page are licensed under CC-BY 4.0 by OpenStax.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. January 2, 2017 https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10...ome-Sequencing
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1SECTION OVERVIEW
BIOLOGY 213: Ecology and Evolution
Principles of Biology introduces biology as a scientif ic discipline for students planning to major in biolo gy and other science
disciplines. Laboratories and classroom activities intro duce techniques used to study biological processes and provide opportunities
for students to develop their ability to conduct res earch. The course focus of BI213 is on the interacti ons of living systems and the
ecology and evolution of biodiversity.
Upon successful completion of this course, students sho uld be able to
1. Apply the scientific method to biological questions by de signing experiments and using the resulting data to form and
communicate a conclusion.
2. Assess the strengths and weaknesses of the design of scie ntific studies and the conclusions drawn from such studi es.
3. Select, evaluate and utilize discipline-specific infor mation and literature to research a biological topic.
4. Use evidence to develop informed opinions on contempo rary biological issues while considering cultural and ethica l
implications.
5. Apply biological theories and concepts to solve problems related to ecology and evolution.
6. Discuss and describe modern evolutionary theory and the o bservations, evidence, and conclusions used to develop th e
theory of evolution by natural selection.
7. Describe how structure and function reflect the ecolog ical challenges faced by organisms and reveal the process es
underlying evolutionary change.
8. Describe patterns of biological diversity and discuss the b iotic and physical processes that have led to these patter ns.
9. Describe major ecological processes including the tr ansformation of energy and nutrient cycling at the e cosystem and
community levels and discuss change in ecological system s.
10. Discuss the complexities of biological systems and how i nteractions at different ecological levels can lead to e mergent
properties.
21: Introduction to Evolution
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
21.2: Formation of New Species
21.3: Speciation
22: Evolution in Action
22.1: Population Evolution
22.2: Population Genetics
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
23: Evolutionary Relationships
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
24: Ecology and the Biosphere
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
24.2: BiogeographyCourse Outcomes

224.3: Terrestrial Biomes
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate Change
25: Population and Community Ecology
25.1: Population Demography
25.2: Population Dynamics and Regulation
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
25.5: Human Population Growth
25.6: Community Ecology
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate Causes of Behavior
26: Ecosystems
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
27: Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
27.2: The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity
Thumbnail: Illustration of Darwin's finches. (Public domain; John Gould via Wikimedia Commons).
BIOLOGY 213: Ecology and Evolution is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
21: Introduction to Evolution
The theory of evolution is the unifying theory of b iology, meaning it is the framework within which biologi sts ask questions about
the living world. Its power is that it provides directio n for predictions about living things that are born e out in experiment after
experiment. The Ukrainian-born American geneticist Theo dosius Dobzhansky famously wrote that “nothing makes sen se in
biology except in the light of evolution” (Dobzhansky, 1964). He meant that the tenet that all life has evo lved and diversified from
a common ancestor is the foundation from which we approach all questions in biology.
Evolution by natural selection describes a mechanism for how species change over time. That species change had been suggested
and debated well before Darwin began to explore this i dea. The view that species were static and unchanging was grounded in the
writings of Plato, yet there were also ancient Greeks who e xpressed evolutionary ideas. In the eighteenth cent ury, ideas about the
evolution of animals were reintroduced by the natural ist Georges-Louis Leclerc Comte de Buffon who observed that various
geographic regions have different plant and animal populations, even when the environments are similar. It was also accepted that
there were extinct species.
During this time, James Hutton, a Scottish naturalist, p roposed that geological change occurred gradually by the accumulation of
small changes from processes operating like they are t oday over long periods of time. This contrasted with the predominant view
that the geology of the planet was a consequence of c atastrophic events occurring during a relatively brie f past. Hutton’s view was
popularized in the nineteenth century by the geolog ist Charles Lyell who became a friend to Darwin. Lyell’ s ideas were influential
on Darwin’s thinking: Lyell’s notion of the greater age of Earth gave more time for gradual change in speci es, and the process of
change provided an analogy for gradual change in sp ecies. In the early nineteenth century, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck published a book
that detailed a mechanism for evolutionary change. T his mechanism is now referred to as an inheritance of acquired
characteristics by which modifications in an individual are caused by its environment, or the use or disuse of a structure during its
lifetime, could be inherited by its offspring and th us bring about change in a species. While this mechan ism for evolutionary
change was discredited, Lamarck’s ideas were an important inf luence on evolutionary thought.
Charles Darwin and Natural Selection
In the mid-nineteenth century, the actual mechanism for evolution was independently conceived of and desc ribed by two
naturalists: Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace. Importantly, each naturalist spent time exploring the natural world on
expeditions to the tropics. From 1831 to 1836, Darwin t raveled around the world on H.M.S. Beagle, including stops in South
America, Australia, and the southern tip of Africa. Wall ace traveled to Brazil to collect insects in the Amaz on rainforest from 1848
to 1852 and to the Malay Archipelago from 1854 to 18 62. Darwin’s journey, like Wallace’s later journeys to t he Malay
Archipelago, included stops at several island chains, the last being the Galápagos Islands west of Ecuador. On t hese islands,
Darwin observed species of organisms on different isl ands that were clearly similar, yet had distinct diffe rences. For example, the
ground finches inhabiting the Galápagos Islands compr ised several species with a unique beak shape (Figure). T he species on
the islands had a graded series of beak sizes and sh apes with very small differences between the most sim ilar. He observed that
these finches closely resembled another finch species o n the mainland of South America. Darwin imagined that th e island species
might be species modified from one of the original mainland species. Upon further study, he realized that t he varied beaks of each
finch helped the birds acquire a specific type of f ood. For example, seed-eating finches had stronger, thi cker beaks for breaking
seeds, and insect-eating finches had spear-like beaks for stabbing their prey.

Figure: Darwin observed that beak shape varies among finch spe cies. He postulated that the beak of an ancestral speci es had
adapted over time to equip the finches to acquire di fferent food sources. (“Galápagos Island Finches” by Ope nStax is licensed
under CC BY 4.0)
Wallace and Darwin both observed similar patterns in o ther organisms and they independently developed the same explanation for
how and why such changes could take place. Darwin called this mechanism natural selection. Natural selection, also known as
“survival of the fittest,” is the more prolific repr oduction of individuals with favorable traits that surv ive environmental change
because of those traits; this leads to evolutionary change.
For example, a population of giant tortoises found i n the Galapagos Archipelago was observed by Darwin to hav e longer necks
than those that lived on other islands with dry lowland s. These tortoises were “selected” because they could reach more leaves and
access more food than those with short necks. In time s of drought when fewer leaves would be available, those that could reach
more leaves had a better chance to eat and survive t han those that couldn’t reach the food source. Conse quently, long-necked
tortoises would be more likely to be reproductively successful and pass the long-necked trait to their off spring. Over time, only
long-necked tortoises would be present in the population.
Natural selection, Darwin argued, was an inevitable outco me of three principles that operated in nature. First, most characteristics
of organisms are inherited, or passed from parent to o ffspring. Although no one, including Darwin and Wallace, knew how this
happened at the time, it was a common understanding. Sec ond, more offspring are produced than are able to sur vive, so resources
for survival and reproduction are limited. The capa city for reproduction in all organisms outstrips the availability of resources to
support their numbers. Thus, there is competition for those resources in each generation. Both Darwin and W allace’s understanding
of this principle came from reading an essay by the e conomist Thomas Malthus who discussed this principle i n relation to human
populations. Third, offspring vary among each other i n regard to their characteristics and those variatio ns are inherited. Darwin and
Wallace reasoned that offspring with inherited charact eristics that allow them to best compete for limited resources will survive and
have more offspring than those individuals with variat ions that are less able to compete. Because characte ristics are inherited, these
traits will be better represented in the next generat ion. This will lead to change in populations over gen erations in a process that
Darwin called descent with modification. Ultimately, natu ral selection leads to greater adaptation of the pop ulation to its local
environment; it is the only mechanism known for adaptive evolution.
Papers by Darwin and Wallace presenting the idea of nat ural selection were read together in 1858 before the Linnean Society in
London. The following year Darwin’s book, On the Origin of Species, was published. His book outlined in considerable detai l his
arguments for evolution by natural selection. It’s i mportant to note that Darwin is a deeply problematic figure and that many of
his contributions to science are remembered because o f his privilege and power. Darwin had many racist and of fensive beliefs, and
the fact that he is often celebrated in biology cla sses is an example of systematic racism in the classroo m. Scientists and educators
need to be doing a better job of recognizing prejudice in our materials and highlighting ways to promote racia l equity.
Demonstrations of evolution by natural selection are time-consuming and difficult to obtain. One of the b est examples has been
demonstrated in the very birds that helped to inspir e Darwin’s theory: the Galápagos finches. Peter and Rosemary Grant and their
colleagues have studied Galápagos finch populations every year since 1976 and have provided important d emonstrations of natural
selection. The Grants found changes from one generat ion to the next in the distribution of beak shapes with the medium ground
finch on the Galápagos island of Daphne Major. The birds have inherited variation in the bill shape with som e birds having wide
deep bills and others having thinner bills. During a pe riod in which rainfall was higher than normal because of an El Niño, the large
hard seeds that large-billed birds ate were reduced in number; however, there was an abundance of the small so ft seeds which the
small-billed birds ate. Therefore, survival and repr oduction were much better in the following years for th e small-billed birds. In

3the years following this El Niño, the Grants measured be ak sizes in the population and found that the averag e bill size was smaller.
Since bill size is an inherited trait, parents with sm aller bills had more offspring and the size of bills had evolved to be smaller. As
conditions improved in 1987 and larger seeds became mor e available, the trend toward smaller average bill size cea sed.
The book The Beak of the Finch: A Story of Evolution in Our Tim e by Jonathan Weiner is a wonderful exploration of Pet er and
Rosemary Grant’s work. If you want to learn more, I highly re commend checking it out.
Processes and Patterns of Evolution
Natural selection can only take place if there is variation, or differences, among individuals in a population. Importantly, these
differences must have some genetic basis; otherwise, the selection will not lead to change in the next gener ation. This is critical
because variation among individuals can be caused by non-genetic reasons such as an individual being talle r because of better
nutrition rather than different genes.
Genetic diversity in a population comes from two main mechanisms: mutation and sexual reproduction. Mutation, a change in
DNA, is the ultimate source of new alleles, or new genetic v ariation in any population. The genetic changes cau sed by mutation can
have one of three outcomes on the phenotype. A muta tion affects the phenotype of the organism in a way th at gives it reduced
fitness —lower likelihood of survival or fewer offspring. A mut ation may produce a phenotype with a beneficial effe ct on fitness.
And, many mutations will also have no effect on the fit ness of the phenotype; these are called neutral mutations. Mutations may
also have a whole range of effect sizes on the fitnes s of the organism that expresses them in their phenoty pe, from a small effect to
a great effect. Sexual reproduction also leads to ge netic diversity: when two parents reproduce, unique com binations of alleles
assemble to produce the unique genotypes and thus pheno types in each of the offspring.
A heritable trait that helps the survival and reprod uction of an organism in its present environment is c alled an adaptation.
Scientists describe groups of organisms becoming ada pted to their environment when a change in the range of genetic variation
occurs over time that increases or maintains the “fit” of the population to its environment. The webbed fee t of platypuses are an
adaptation for swimming. The snow leopards’ thick fur is an adaptation for living in the cold. The cheetah s’ fast speed is an
adaptation for catching prey.
Whether or not a trait is favorable depends on the environmental conditions at the time. The same traits are not always selected
because environmental conditions can change. For exam ple, consider a species of plant that grew in a moist c limate and did not
need to conserve water. Large leaves were selected be cause they allowed the plant to obtain more energy f rom the sun. Large
leaves require more water to maintain than small lea ves, and the moist environment provided favorable co nditions to support large
leaves. After thousands of years, the climate changed, a nd the area no longer had excess water. The direction of natural selection
shifted so that plants with small leaves were selecte d because those populations were able to conserve wat er to survive the new
environmental conditions.
The evolution of species has resulted in enormous var iation in form and function. Sometimes, evolution give s rise to groups of
organisms that become tremendously different from each other. When two species evolve in diverse directions from a common
point, it is called divergent evolution.
In other cases, similar phenotypes evolve independently in distantly related species. For example, flight ha s evolved in both bats
and insects, and they both have structures we refer to as wings, which are adaptations to flight. However, the wi ngs of bats and
insects have evolved from very different original st ructures. This phenomenon is called convergent evolution, where similar traits
evolve independently in species that do not share a common ancestry. The two species came to the same f unction, flying, but did so
separately from each other.
These physical changes occur over enormous spans of ti me and help explain how evolution occurs. Natural sele ction acts on
individual organisms, which in turn can shape an ent ire species. Although natural selection may work in a single generation on an
individual, it can take thousands or even millions of years for the genotype of an entire species to evo lve. It is over these large time
spans that life on earth has changed and continues to chan ge.
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
21.2: Formation of New Species
21.3: Speciation

4References
Dobzhansky, T. 1964. “Biology, Molecular and Organismic.” American Zoologist 4, no. 4: 449.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 23, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Thumbnail: A silhouette of human evolution. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Tkg d2007 via Wikimedia Commons).
21: Introduction to Evolution is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

21.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076621.1: Evidence of Evolution
The evidence for evolution is compelling and extensiv e. Looking at every level of organization in living systems, biologists see the
signature of past and present evolution. Darwin dedic ated a large portion of his book, On the Origin of Species, to identifying
patterns in nature that were consistent with evolution, and since Darwin, our understanding has become clearer and b roader.
Fossils
Fossils provide solid evidence that organisms from the past are not the same as those found today, and fossils sh ow a progression
of evolution. Scientists determine the age of fossils and categorize them from all over the world to deter mine when the organisms
lived relative to each other. The resulting fossil record tells the story of the past and shows the evol ution of form over millions of
years. For example, scientists have recovered highly detail ed records showing the evolution of humans and horses (Figur e).
Figure: In this (a) display, fossil hominids are arranged from oldest (bottom) to newest (top). As hominids evolved, t he shape
of the skull changed. An artist’s rendition of (b) ext inct species of the genus Equus reveals that these ancient species resembled the
modern horse (Equus ferus) but varied in size. (credit: “Fossil evidence” by Op enStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Anatomy and Embryology
Another type of evidence for evolution is the presen ce of structures in organisms that share the same ba sic form. For example, the
bones in the appendages of a human, dog, bird, and wha le all share the same overall construction (Figure) resulting from
their origin in the appendages of a common ancestor. Over time, evolution led to changes in the shapes and sizes of these bones in
different species, but they have maintained the same over all layout. Scientists call these synonymous parts homologous structures.
Figure: The similar construction of these appendages indicates that these organisms share a common ancestor. (Credit:
“homologous structures” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Some structures exist in organisms that have no appa rent function at all and appear to be residual parts from a past common
ancestor. These unused structures without function are called vestigial structures. Other examples of vestigial structures are wings
on flightless birds, leaves on some cacti, and hind leg bo nes in whales.
Another evidence of evolution is the convergence of form in organisms that share similar environments. For exa mple, species of
unrelated animals, such as the arctic fox and ptarmig an, living in the arctic region have been selected f or seasonal white phenotypes
during winter to blend with the snow and ice (Figure). These similarities occur not because of common ances try, but because
of similar selection pressures—the benefits of not being se en by predators.

21.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70766
Figure: The white winter coat of the (a) arctic fox and th e (b) ptarmigan’s plumage are adaptations to their en vironments.
(Credit: “winter coats” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Figure a: modification of work by Keith M orehouse)
Embryology, the study of the development of the anatomy of an organism to its adult form, also provides evidence o f relatedness
between now widely divergent groups of organisms. Mutation al tweaking in the embryo can have such magnified con sequences in
the adult that embryo formation tends to be conserv ed. As a result, structures that are absent in some group s often appear in their
embryonic forms and disappear by the time the adult or juvenile form is reached. For example, all vertebra te embryos, including
humans, exhibit gill slits and tails at some point in t heir early development. These disappear in the adult s of terrestrial groups but
are maintained in adult forms of aquatic groups suc h as fish and some amphibians. Great ape embryos, incl uding humans, have a
tail structure during their development that is lost b y the time of birth.
Biogeography
The geographic distribution of organisms (referred to as biogeography) on the planet follows patterns that are best explai ned by
evolution in conjunction with the movement of tecton ic plates over geological time. Broad groups that ev olved before the breakup
of the supercontinent Pangaea (about 200 million years ago) are distributed world wide. Groups that evolved since the breakup
appear uniquely in regions of the planet, such as th e unique flora and fauna of northern continents tha t formed from the
supercontinent Laurasia and of the southern continen ts that formed from the supercontinent Gondwana. The presence of members
of the plant family Proteaceae in Australia, southern Africa, and South America is best explained by their pre sence prior to the
southern supercontinent Gondwana breaking up.
The great diversification of marsupials in Australia and the absence of other mammals reflect Australia’s long isolation. Australia
has an abundance of endemic species—species found n owhere else—which is typical of islands whose isolation b y expanses of
water prevents species from migrating. Over time, these species diverge evolutionarily into new species that l ook very different
from their ancestors that may exist on the mainland. The marsupials of Australia, the finches on the Galápago s, and many species
on the Hawaiian Islands are all unique to their one p oint of origin, yet they display distant relationsh ips to ancestral species on
mainlands.
Molecular Biology
Like anatomical structures, the structures of the mo lecules of life reflect descent with modification. Evi dence of a common ancestor
for all of life is reflected in the universality of DNA as the genetic material and in the near universali ty of the genetic code and the
machinery of DNA replication and expression. Fundament al divisions in life between the three domains are ref lected in major
structural differences in otherwise conservative stru ctures such as the components of ribosomes and the st ructures of membranes.
In general, the relatedness of groups of organisms is reflected in the similarity of their DNA sequences—ex actly the pattern that
would be expected from descent and diversification from a c ommon ancestor.
DNA sequences have also shed light on some of the mecha nisms of evolution. For example, it is clear that the evolution of new
functions for proteins commonly occurs after gene d uplication events that allow the free modification of one copy by mutation,
selection, or drift (changes in a population’s gene pool resulting from chance), while the second copy co ntinues to produce a
functional protein.
Misconceptions of Evolution
Although the theory of evolution generated some cont roversy when it was first proposed, it was almost univ ersally accepted by
biologists, particularly younger biologists, within 20 years after the publication of On the Origin of Species. Nevertheless, the

21.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70766theory of evolution is a difficult concept, and misconc eptions about how it works abound.
Evolution Is Just a Theory
Critics of the theory of evolution dismiss its importance by purposefully confounding the everyday usage of the word “theory”
with the way scientists use the word. In science, a “theo ry” is understood to be a body of thoroughly tested and verified
explanations for a set of observations of the natural world. Scientists have a theory of the atom, a theory of gravity, and the theory
of relativity, each of which describes understood fa cts about the world. In the same way, the theory of e volution describes facts
about the living world. As such, a theory in science ha s survived significant efforts to discredit it by sc ientists. In contrast, a
“theory” in common vernacular is a word meaning a gu ess or suggested explanation; this meaning is more a kin to the scientific
concept of “hypothesis.” When critics of evolution s ay evolution is “just a theory,” they are implying t hat there is little evidence
supporting it and that it is still in the process of being rigorously tested. This is a mischaracterization.
Individuals Evolve
Evolution is the change in the genetic composition of a popul ation over time, specifically over generations, res ulting from
differential reproduction of individuals with certain alleles. Individuals do change over their lifetime, ob viously, but this is called
development and involves changes programmed by the s et of genes the individual acquired at birth in coord ination with the
individual’s environment. When thinking about the ev olution of a characteristic, it is probably best to t hink about the change of the
average value of the characteristic in the populatio n over time. For example, when natural selection lead s to a beak size change in
medium-ground finches in the Galápagos, this does no t mean that individual beaks on living finches are changing. Instead, it means
that if one measures the average beak size among al l individuals in the population at one time and the n measures the average beak
size in the population several years later, the aver age value will be different as a result of evolution. Although some individuals
may survive from the first time to the second, they wi ll still have the same beak size; however, there will b e many new individuals
that contribute to the shift in average beak size.
Evolution Explains the Origin of Life
It is a common misunderstanding that evolution includ es an explanation of life’s origins. The theory does not try to explain the
origin of life. The theory of evolution explains ho w populations change over time and how life diversifies. It does not shed light on
the beginnings of life including the origins of the first cells, which is how life is defined. The mechan isms of the origin of life on
Earth are a particularly difficult problem because it occ urred a very long time ago, and presumably, it just occurr ed once.
However, once a mechanism of inheritance was in place i n the form of a molecule like DNA either within a cell or pre-cell, these
entities would be subject to the principle of natural selection. More effective reproducers would increase in frequency at the
expense of inefficient reproducers. So while evolution does not explain the origin of life, it may have som ething to say about some
of the processes operating once pre-living entities a cquired certain properties.
Organisms Evolve on Purpose
Statements such as “organisms evolve in response to a change in an environment” are quite common, but su ch statements can lead
to two types of misunderstandings. First, the stateme nt must not be understood to mean that individual or ganisms evolve. The
statement is shorthand for “a population evolves in response to a changing environment.” However, a second m isunderstanding
may arise by interpreting the statement to mean that evolution is somehow intentional. A changed environment results in some
individuals in the population, those with particular phenotypes, benefiting and therefore producing propor tionately more offspring
than other phenotypes. This results in a change in the p opulation if the characteristics are genetically deter mined.
It is also important to understand that the variation that natural selection works on is already in a pop ulation and does not arise in
response to an environmental change. For example, applying ant ibiotics to a population of bacteria will, over time, select a
population of bacteria that are resistant to antibiot ics. The resistance, which is caused by a gene, did no t arise by mutation because
of the application of the antibiotic. The gene for re sistance was already present in the gene pool of the ba cteria, likely at a low
frequency. The antibiotic, which kills the bacterial ce lls without the resistance gene, strongly selects indivi duals that are resistant,
since these would be the only ones that survived and divided. Experiments have demonstrated that mutatio ns for antibiotic
resistance do not arise as a result of antibiotics.

21.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70766In a larger sense, evolution is not goal-directed. Spec ies do not become “better” over time; they simply tra ck their changing
environment with adaptations that maximize their rep roduction in a particular environment at a particul ar time. Evolution has no
goal of making faster, bigger, more complex, or even smarter species, despite the commonness of this kind o f language in popular
discourse. What characteristics evolve in a species ar e a function of the variation present and the enviro nment, both of which are
constantly changing in a non-directional way. What t rait is fit in one environment at one time may well be fatal at some point in the
future. This holds equally well for a species of insect as i t does the human species.
Summary
Evolution is the process of adaptation through muta tion which allows more desirable characteristics to b e passed to the next
generation. Over time, organisms evolve more characte ristics that are beneficial to their survival. For livi ng organisms to adapt and
change to environmental pressures, genetic variation m ust be present. With genetic variation, individuals hav e differences in form
and function that allow some to survive certain cond itions better than others. These organisms pass their favorable traits to their
offspring. Eventually, environments change, and what wa s once a desirable, advantageous trait may become an undesirable trait
and organisms may further evolve. Evolution may be convergent with similar traits evolving in multiple s pecies or divergent with
diverse traits evolving in multiple species that came from a common ancestor. Evidence of evolution can be observed by means of
DNA code and the fossil record, and also by the existence of hom ologous and vestigial structures.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 23, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
21.1: Evidence of Evolution is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

21.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076721.2: Formation of New Species
Although all life on earth shares various genetic simi larities, only certain organisms combine genetic info rmation by sexual
reproduction and have offspring that can then succes sfully reproduce. Scientists call such organisms members of the same
biological species.
Species Concepts
It turns out that scientists don’t always agree on t he definition of a species. The different ideas about what does and does not
constitute a species are referred to as species concepts. There are around twenty-six different species conc epts, but four are the
most accepted. The biological species concept states that if two organisms are able to successfully breed and produce viable, fertile
offspring, then they are the same species. When populat ions of organisms cease to successfully breed (calle d reproductive
isolation) they are then considered separate species. The b iological species concept works well for scientists s tudying living
creatures that have regular breeding patterns, such as insects or mammals. The morphological species concept states that if two
organisms are morphologically similar enough, then the y are the same species. There is no guideline about how similar counts as
similar enough, so it is up to the researcher to make t he judgment call. This concept works well for organis ms that don’t breed
regularly (such as fungi) or that are no longer livi ng. The genetic species concept states that if two organisms are genetically
similar enough, then they are the same species. Again, there is no rule about how genetically similar the y need to be, so each
discipline determines its own limits. This concept works well for organisms that are very tiny, have unusual re production strategies,
and are not morphologically distinct (such as bacteri a). The evolutionary species concept states that if two organisms’
evolutionary paths are similar enough, then they are the same species. This concept works well for long-dea d organisms because
fossils cannot breed, often are lacking impressions of soft t issues, and usually don’t have enough DNA left to work with.
Species and the Ability to Reproduce
A species is a group of individual organisms that interbreed and produce fertile, viable offspring. According to this definition, one
species is distinguished from another when, in nature, it is not possible for matings between individuals fr om each species to
produce fertile offspring.
Members of the same species share both external and inter nal characteristics, which develop from their DNA. The cl oser
relationship two organisms share, the more DNA they have in common, just like people and their families. Peopl e’s DNA is likely
to be more like their father or mother’s DNA than the ir cousin or grandparent’s DNA. Organisms of the same spec ies have the
highest level of DNA alignment and therefore share characte ristics and behaviors that lead to successful reproduction.
Species’ appearance can be misleading in suggesting an ability or inability to mate. For example, even t hough domestic dogs
(Canis lupus familiaris) display phenotypic differences, such as size, build, and coat, most dogs can interbreed and produce viable
puppies that can mature and sexually reproduce (Figure).
Figure: The (a) poodle and (b) cocker spaniel can reproduce to produce a breed known as (c) the cockapoo. (cred it a:
modification of work by Sally Eller, Tom Reese; cred it b: modification of work by Jeremy McWilliams; cred it c: modification of
work by Kathleen Conklin. This image by OpenStax is l icensed under CC BY 4.0)
In other cases, individuals may appear similar althou gh they are not members of the same species. For exam ple, even though bald
eagles (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) and African fish eagles (Haliaeetus vocifer) are both birds and eagles, each belongs to a separate
species group (Figure). If humans were to artificial ly intervene and fertilize the egg of a bald eagle with the sperm of an

21.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70767African fish eagle and a chick did hatch, that offsp ring, called a hybrid (a cross between two species), would probably be infertile
—unable to successfully reproduce after it reached m aturity. Different species may have different genes tha t are active in
development; therefore, it may not be possible to de velop a viable offspring with two different sets of di rections. Thus, even though
hybridization may take place, the two species still remain separate.
Figure: The (a) African fish eagle is similar in appearance t o the (b) bald eagle, but the two birds are members o f different
species. (credit a: modification of work by Nigel Wed ge; credit b: modification of work by U.S. Fish and W ildlife Service. This
image by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Populations of species share a gene pool: a collection of all the variants of genes in the s pecies. Again, the basis for any changes in
a group or population of organisms must be genetic f or this is the only way to share and pass on traits. Wh en variations occur
within a species, they can only be passed to the next generation along two main pathways: asexual reproduction or sexual
reproduction. The change will be passed on asexually simply if th e reproducing cell possesses the changed trait. For the changed
trait to be passed on by sexual reproduction, a game te, such as a sperm or egg cell, must possess the cha nged trait. In other words,
sexually-reproducing organisms can experience sever al genetic changes in their body cells, but if these cha nges do not occur in a
sperm or egg cell, the changed trait will never reach the next generation. Only heritable traits can evolve. Therefore, reproduction
plays a paramount role for genetic change to take ro ot in a population or species. In short, organisms must be able to reproduce
with each other to pass new traits to offspring.
Speciation
The biological definition of species, which works for sex ually reproducing organisms, is a group of actually or potentially
interbreeding individuals. There are exceptions to th is rule. Many species are similar enough that hybrid of fspring are possible and
may often occur in nature, but for the majority of s pecies, this rule generally holds. In fact, the pre sence in nature of hybrids
between similar species suggests that they may have descen ded from a single interbreeding species, and the spe ciation process may
not yet be completed.
Given the extraordinary diversity of life on the pla net, there must be mechanisms for speciation: the formation of two species from
one original species. Darwin envisioned this process as a bra nching event and diagrammed the process in the only illust ration found
in On the Origin of Species (Figure a). Compare this illustration to the diagram o f elephant evolution (Figure b), which
shows that as one species changes over time, it branche s to form more than one new species, repeatedly, as long as the population
survives or until the organism becomes extinct.

21.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70767
Figure: The only illustration in Darwin’s On the Origin of Sp ecies is (a) a diagram showing speciation events leading to
biological diversity. The diagram shows similarities to phylogenetic charts that are drawn today to illustrat e the relationships of
species. (b) Modern elephants evolved from the Palaeoma stodon, a species that lived in Egypt 35–50 million ye ars ago. (credit: this
image by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
For speciation to occur, two new populations must be for med from one original population and they must evol ve in such a way that
it becomes impossible for individuals from the two new populations to interbreed. Biologists have proposed mec hanisms by which
this could occur that fall into two broad categories. Allopatric speciation (allo- = “other”; -patric = “homeland”) involves
geographic separation of populations from a parent spe cies and subsequent evolution. Sympatric speciation (sym- = “same”; patric = “homeland”) involves speciation occurring within a parent species remaining in one location.
Biologists think of speciation events as the splitti ng of one ancestral species into two descendant speci es. There is no reason why
there might not be more than two species formed at o ne time except that it is less likely and multiple e vents can be conceptualized
as single splits occurring close in time.
Allopatric Speciation
A geographically continuous population has a gene p ool that is relatively homogeneous. Gene flow, the movement of alleles across
the range of the species, is relatively free because individuals can move and then mate with individuals in their new location. Thus,
the frequency of an allele at one end of a distribu tion will be similar to the frequency of the allele at the other end. When
populations become geographically discontinuous, th at free-flow of alleles is prevented. When that separa tion lasts for a period of
time, the two populations are able to evolve along dif ferent trajectories. Thus, their allele frequencies a t numerous genetic loci
gradually become more and more different as new alle les independently arise by mutation in each populati on. Typically,
environmental conditions, such as climate, resources, pre dators, and competitors for the two populations will diff er causing natural
selection to favor divergent adaptations in each group.
Isolation of populations leading to allopatric spec iation can occur in a variety of ways: a river formin g a new branch, erosion
forming a new valley, a group of organisms traveling to a new location without the ability to return, or seeds floating o ver the ocean
to an island. The nature of the geographic separation necessary to isolate populations depends entirely o n the biology of the
organism and its potential for dispersal. If two flying insect populations took up residence in separate near by valleys, chances are,
individuals from each population would fly back and f orth continuing gene flow. However, if two rodent popul ations became
divided by the formation of a new lake, continued gene f low would be unlikely; therefore, speciation would be more likely.
Biologists group allopatric processes into two categ ories: dispersal and vicariance. Dispersal is when a few members of a species
move to a new geographical area, and vicariance is when a natural situation arises to physically divide organi sms.
Scientists have documented numerous cases of allopatr ic speciation taking place. For example, along the wes t coast of the United
States, two separate sub-species of spotted owls exist. The northern spotted owl has genetic and phenotypic differences from its
close relative: the Mexican spotted owl, which lives in t he south (Figure).

21.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70767
Figure: The northern spotted owl and the Mexican spotted owl inhabit geographically separate locations with diffe rent
climates and ecosystems. The owl is an example of allopa tric speciation. (credit “northern spotted owl”: modi fication of work by
John and Karen Hollingsworth; credit “Mexican spotted owl”: modification of work by Bill Radke. “spotted o wls” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Additionally, scientists have found that the further the distance between two groups that once were the same species, the more
likely it is that speciation will occur. This seems log ical because as the distance increases, the various envi ronmental factors would
likely have less in common than locations in close p roximity. Consider the two owls: in the north, the clim ate is cooler than in the
south; the types of organisms in each ecosystem differ, as do their behaviors and habits; also, the hunting hab its and prey choices of
the southern owls vary from the northern owls. These v ariances can lead to evolved differences in the owls, and speciation likely
will occur.
Adaptive Radiation
In some cases, a population of one species disperse s throughout an area, and each finds a distinct niche or isolated habitat. Over
time, the varied demands of their new lifestyles lead to multiple speciation events originating from a si ngle species. This is called
adaptive radiation because many adaptations evolve from a single point of origin; thus, causing the species to radiate int o several
new ones. Island archipelagos like the Hawaiian Islands p rovide an ideal context for adaptive radiation even ts because water
surrounds each island which leads to geographical isolat ion for many organisms. The Hawaiian honeycreeper illustr ates one
example of adaptive radiation. From a single species, called the founder species, numerous species have evolve d, including the six
shown in Figure.
Figure: The honeycreeper birds illustrate adaptive radiation. From one original species of bird, multiple others ev olved, each
with its own distinctive characteristics. (credit: “hon eycreepers” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Notice the differences in the species’ beaks. Evolution in response to natural selection based on specific food sources in each new
habitat led to the evolution of a different beak sui ted to the specific food source. The seed-eating bir d has a thicker, stronger beak
which is suited to break hard nuts. The nectar-eating birds have long beaks to dip into flowers to reach the nectar. The insect-eating
birds have beaks like swords, appropriate for stabbing and impaling insects. Darwin’s finches are another e xample of adaptive
radiation in an archipelago.

21.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70767Sympatric Speciation
Can divergence occur if no physical barriers are in place to separate individuals who continue to live and reproduce in the same
habitat? The answer is yes. The process of speciation within the same space is called sympatric speciation; the prefix “sym” means
same, so “sympatric” means “same homeland” in contra st to “allopatric” meaning “other homeland.” A numbe r of mechanisms for
sympatric speciation have been proposed and studied.
One form of sympatric speciation can begin with a seri ous chromosomal error during cell division. In a no rmal cell division event
chromosomes replicate, pair up, and then separate so t hat each new cell has the same number of chromosomes. Ho wever,
sometimes the pairs separate and the end cell product has too many or too few individual chromosomes in a co ndition called
aneuploidy (Figure).
Figure: Aneuploidy results when the gametes have too many or too few chromosomes due to nondisjunction during meiosi s.
In the example shown here, the resulting offspring wil l have 2n+1 or 2n-1 chromosomes. (credit: “Aneuploidy ” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Polyploidy is a condition in which a cell or organism has an e xtra set, or sets, of chromosomes. Scientists have iden tified two main
types of polyploidy that can lead to reproductive is olation of an individual in the polyploidy state. R eproductive isolation is the
inability to interbreed. In some cases, a polyploid i ndividual will have two or more complete sets of chrom osomes from its own
species in a condition called autopolyploidy (Figure). The prefix “auto-” means “self,” so the term means multiple
chromosomes from one’s own species. Polyploidy results from an error in meiosis in which all of the chromoso mes move into one
cell instead of separating.
Figure: Autopolyploidy results when mitosis is not followed by cytokinesis. (credit: “Autopolyploidy” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
For example, if a plant species with 2 n = 6 produces autopolyploid gametes that are also di ploid (2 n = 6, when they should be n =
3), the gametes now have twice as many chromosomes as they should have. These new gametes will be incompati ble with the
normal gametes produced by this plant species. However, t hey could either self-pollinate or reproduce with ot her autopolyploid

21.2.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70767plants with gametes having the same diploid number. I n this way, sympatric speciation can occur quickly by f orming offspring with
4n called a tetraploid. These individuals would immediat ely be able to reproduce only with those of this new ki nd and not those of
the ancestral species.
The other form of polyploidy occurs when individuals of two different species reproduce to form a viable o ffspring called an
allopolyploid. The prefix “allo-” means “other” (recall from all opatric): therefore, an allopolyploid occurs when game tes from two
different species combine. Figure illustrates one possi ble way an allopolyploid can form. Notice how it takes two
generations, or two reproductive acts, before the viable fert ile hybrid results.
Figure: Alloploidy results when two species mate to produce vi able offspring. In the example shown, a normal gamete from
one species fuses with a polyploid gamete from another. Two matings are necessary to produce viable offspring. (credit:
“Alloploidy” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
The cultivated forms of wheat, cotton, and tobacco pla nts are all allopolyploids. Although polyploidy occurs occasionally in
animals, it takes place most commonly in plants. (Anima ls with any of the types of chromosomal aberrations des cribed here are
unlikely to survive and produce normal offspring.) Sc ientists have discovered more than half of all plant s pecies studied relate back
to a species that evolved through polyploidy. With suc h a high rate of polyploidy in plants, some scienti sts hypothesize that this
mechanism takes place more as an adaptation than as an er ror.
Reproductive Isolation
Given enough time, the genetic and phenotypic diverge nce between populations will affect characters that in fluence reproduction:
if individuals of the two populations were to be broug ht together, mating would be less likely, but if mati ng occurred, offspring
would be non-viable or infertile. Many types of diver ging characters may affect the reproductive isolatio n, the ability to interbreed,
of the two populations.
Reproductive isolation can take place in a variety of ways. Scientists orga nize them into two groups: prezygotic barriers and
postzygotic barriers. Recall that a zygote is a fertilized egg: the first cell of the develop ment of an organism that reproduces
sexually. Therefore, a prezygotic barrier is a mecha nism that blocks reproduction from taking place; thi s includes barriers that
prevent fertilization when organisms attempt reprodu ction. A postzygotic barrier occurs after zygote form ation; this includes
organisms that don’t survive the embryonic stage and th ose that are born sterile.
Some types of prezygotic barriers prevent reproduction entirely. Many organisms only reproduce at certain t imes of the year, often
just annually. Differences in breeding schedules, calle d temporal isolation, can act as a form of reproductive isolation. For
example, two species of frogs inhabit the same area, but one reproduces from January to March, whereas the other reproduces from
March to May (Figure).

21.2.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70767
Figure: These two related frog species exhibit temporal repro ductive isolation. (a) Rana aurora breeds earlier in the year
than (b) Rana boylii. (credit a: modification of work by Mark R. Jenning s, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by Alessandro
Catenazzi. “frog reproductive isolation” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In some cases, populations of a species move or are move d to a new habitat and take up residence in a place that no longer overlaps
with the other populations of the same species. This si tuation is called habitat isolation. Reproduction with the parent species
ceases, and a new group exists that is now reproducti vely and genetically independent. For example, a crick et population that was
divided after a flood could no longer interact with each other. Over time, the forces of natural selecti on, mutation, and genetic drift
will likely result in the divergence of the two groups.
Behavioral isolation occurs when the presence or absence of a specific b ehavior prevents reproduction from taking place. For
example, male fireflies use specific light patterns to attract females. Various species of fireflies di splay their lights differently. If a
male of one species tried to attract the female of an other, she would not recognize the light pattern and would not mate with the
male.
Other prezygotic barriers work when differences in the ir gamete cells (eggs and sperm) prevent fertilizati on from taking place; this
is called a gametic barrier. Similarly, in some cases closely related organisms try to mate, but their reproductive structures simpl y
do not fit together. For example, damselfly males of d ifferent species have differently shaped reproductiv e organs. If one species
tries to mate with the female of another, their body part s simply do not fit together. (Figure).
Figure: The shape of the male reproductive organ varies amon g male damselfly species, and is only compatible with t he
female of that species. Reproductive organ incompatib ility keeps the species reproductively isolated. (credi t: “damselfly
reproductive organ” by OpenStax is licensed under CC B Y 4.0)
In plants, certain structures aimed to attract one t ype of pollinator simultaneously prevent a differen t pollinator from accessing the
pollen. The tunnel through which an animal must access nectar can vary widely in length and diameter, which prevents the plant
from being cross-pollinated with a different species (Figure).
Figure: Some flowers have evolved to attract certain pollin ators. The (a) wide foxglove flower is adapted for po llination by
bees, while the (b) long, tube-shaped trumpet creeper flower is adapted for pollination by hummingbirds. (credit: “pollination” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
When fertilization takes place and a zygote forms, postzygotic barriers can prevent reproduction. Hybrid individuals in many cases
cannot form normally in the womb and simply do not su rvive past the embryonic stages. This is called hybrid inviability because
the hybrid organisms simply are not viable. In anothe r postzygotic situation, reproduction leads to the bir th and growth of a hybrid
that is sterile and unable to reproduce offspring of thei r own; this is called hybrid sterility.

21.2.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70767Habitat Influence on Speciation
Sympatric speciation may also take place in ways other than polyploidy. For example, consider a species of fish that lives in a lake.
As the population grows, competition for food also grows. Un der pressure to find food, suppose that a group of th ese fish had the
genetic flexibility to discover and feed off anothe r resource that was unused by the other fish. What if t his new food source was
found at a different depth of the lake? Over time, t hose feeding on the second food source would interact more with each other than
the other fish; therefore, they would breed together as well. The offspring of these fish would likely beha ve as their parents: feeding
and living in the same area and keeping them separat e from the original population. If this group of fish continued to remain
separate from the first population, eventually sympa tric speciation might occur as more genetic differen ces accumulated between
them.
This scenario does play out in nature, as do others th at lead to reproductive isolation. One such place is Lake Victoria in Africa,
famous for its sympatric speciation of cichlid fish. R esearchers have found hundreds of sympatric speciatio n events in these fish,
which have not only happened in great number, but al so over a short period of time. Figure shows this type of speciation
among a cichlid fish population in Nicaragua. In thi s locale, two types of cichlids live in the same geogr aphic location but have
come to have different morphologies that allow them to ea t various food sources.
Figure: Cichlid fish from Lake Apoyeque, Nicaragua, show evi dence of sympatric speciation. Lake Apoyeque, a crate r
lake, is 1800 years old, but genetic evidence indicat es that the lake was populated only 100 years ago by a single population of
cichlid fish. Nevertheless, two populations with distinc t morphologies and diets now exist in the lake, and sci entists believe these
populations may be in an early stage of speciation. (c redit: “Cichlid fish” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Summary
Speciation occurs along two main pathways: geographic sep aration (allopatric speciation) and through mechani sms that occur
within a shared habitat (sympatric speciation). Both p athways isolate a population reproductively in some form. Mechanisms of
reproductive isolation act as barriers between closely related species, enabling them to diverge and exist as genetically independent
species. Prezygotic barriers block reproduction prio r to the formation of a zygote, whereas postzygotic b arriers block reproduction
after fertilization occurs. For a new species to develo p, something must cause a breach in the reproductive barriers. Sympatric
speciation can occur through errors in meiosis that form gametes with extra chromosomes (polyploidy). Auto polyploidy occurs
within a single species, whereas allopolyploidy occurs bet ween closely related species.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 23, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
21.2: Formation of New Species is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

21.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076821.3: Speciation
Speciation occurs over a span of evolutionary time, s o when a new species arises, there is a transition perio d during which the
closely related species continue to interact.
Reconnection
After speciation, two species may recombine or even cont inue interacting indefinitely. Individual organisms wi ll mate with any
nearby individual with whom they are capable of breed ing. An area where two closely related species continue to interact and
reproduce, forming hybrids, is called a hybrid zone. Over time, the hybrid zone may change depending on the fitness of the
hybrids and the reproductive barriers (Figure). If t he hybrids are less fit than the parents, reinforcem ent of speciation occurs,
and the species continue to diverge until they can n o longer mate and produce viable offspring. If repro ductive barriers weaken,
fusion occurs and the two species become one. Barrie rs remain the same if hybrids are fit and reproducti ve: stability may occur and
hybridization continues.
Figure: After speciation has occurred, the two separate but c losely related species may continue to produce offsprin g in an
area called the hybrid zone. Reinforcement, fusion, or stability may result, depending on reproductive ba rriers and the relative
fitness of the hybrids. (credit: “speciation diagram” b y OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
If two species eat a different diet but one of the foo d sources is eliminated and both species are forced t o eat the same foods,
what change in the hybrid zone is most likely to occur?
Answer
Fusion is most likely to occur because the two species wi ll interact more and similar traits in food acquisi tion will be
selected.
Hybrids can be either less fit than the parents, more f it, or about the same. Usually, hybrids tend to be less fit; therefore, such
reproduction diminishes over time, nudging the two s pecies to diverge further in a process called reinforcement. This term is used
because the low success of the hybrids reinforces the original speciation. If the hybrids are as fit or m ore fit than the parents, the
two species may fuse back into one species (Figure). Scie ntists have also observed that sometimes two species wil l remain
separate but also continue to interact to produce s ome hybrid individuals; this is classified as stability because no real net change is
taking place.
Varying Rates of Speciation
Scientists around the world study speciation, documen ting observations both of living organisms and those found in the fossil
record. As their ideas take shape and as research rev eals new details about how life evolves, they develop models to help explain
rates of speciation. In terms of how quickly speciati on occurs, two patterns are currently observed: gradua l speciation model and
punctuated equilibrium model.Exercise

21.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70768In the gradual speciation model, species diverge gradually over time in smal l steps. In the punctuated equilibrium model, a new
species undergoes changes quickly from the parent spe cies and then remains largely unchanged for long pe riods of time afterward
(Figure). This early change model is called punctuat ed equilibrium because it begins with a punctuated or periodic change
and then remains in balance afterward. While punctuate d equilibrium suggests a faster tempo, it does not nece ssarily exclude
gradualism.
Figure: In (a) gradual speciation, species diverge at a slow, steady pace as traits change incrementally. In (b) pun ctuated
equilibrium, species diverge quickly and then remain unchanged for long periods of time. (credit: “gradua l speciation and
punctuated equilibrium” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
The primary influencing factor on changes in specia tion rate is environmental conditions. Under some cond itions, selection occurs
quickly or radically. Consider a species of snails th at had been living with the same basic form for many thousands of years. Layers
of their fossils would appear similar for a long time. When a change in the environment takes place—such as a drop in the water
level—a small number of organisms are separated from the rest in a brief period of time, essentially formi ng one large and one tiny
population. The tiny population faces new environment al conditions. Because its gene pool quickly became s o small, any variation
that surfaces and that aids in surviving the new conditions be comes the predominant form.
Summary
Speciation is not a precise division: overlap between clo sely related species can occur in areas called hybrid zones. Organisms
reproduce with other similar organisms. The fitness of these hybrid offspring can affect the evolutionary path of the two species.
Scientists propose two models for the rate of speciatio n: one model illustrates how a species can change slo wly over time; the other
model demonstrates how change can occur quickly from a parent generation to a new species. Both models cont inue to follow the
patterns of natural selection.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
21.3: Speciation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
18.3: Reconnection and Rates of Speciation by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
22: Evolution in Action
All life on Earth is related. Evolutionary theory stat es that humans, beetles, plants, and bacteria all share a common ancestor, but
that millions of years of evolution have shaped each of these organisms into the forms seen today. Scienti sts consider evolution a
key concept to understanding life. Natural selection i s one of the most dominant evolutionary forces. Natur al selection acts to
promote traits and behaviors that increase an organi sm’s chances of survival and reproduction while elimina ting those traits and
behaviors that are to the organism’s detriment. But n atural selection can only, as its name implies, sel ect—it cannot create. The
introduction of novel traits and behaviors falls on the shoulders of another evolutionary force—mutatio n. Mutation and other
sources of variation among individuals, as well as th e evolutionary forces that act upon them, alter popul ations and species. This
combination of processes has led to the world of life we see t oday.
22.1: Population Evolution
22.2: Population Genetics
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Thumbnail: Directional selection in peppered moths. (CC BY 4.0 / cropped from original; OpenStax).
22: Evolution in Action is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

22.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7076922.1: Population Evolution
The mechanisms of inheritance, or genetics, were not unde rstood at the time Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wa llace were
developing their idea of natural selection. This lac k of understanding was a stumbling block to understan ding many aspects of
evolution. In fact, the predominant (and incorrect) genetic theory of the time, blending inheritance, m ade it difficult to understand
how natural selection might operate. Darwin and Wallac e were unaware of the genetics work by Austrian monk Greg or Mendel,
which was published in 1866, not long after the publica tion of Darwin’s book On the Origin of Species. Mendel’s work was
rediscovered in the early twentieth century at which t ime geneticists were rapidly coming to an understandin g of the basics of
inheritance. Over the next few decades, genetics and evo lution were integrated into what became known as the modern synthesis
—the coherent understanding of the relationship betwe en natural selection and genetics that took shape by the 1940s and is
generally accepted today. In sum, the modern synthesis describes how evolutionary processes, such as natural selection, can affect a
population’s genetic makeup, and, in turn, how this c an result in the gradual evolution of populations and species. The theory also
connects this change of a population over time, calle d microevolution, with the processes that gave rise to new species and higher
taxonomic groups with widely divergent characters, calle d macroevolution.
Evolution and Flu Vaccines
Every fall, the media starts reporting on flu vacci nations and potential outbreaks. Scientists, health expe rts, and institutions
determine recommendations for different parts of the population, predict optimal production and inocula tion schedules, create
vaccines, and set up clinics to provide inoculations. You may think of the annual flu shot as a lot of med ia hype, an important
health protection, or just a briefly uncomfortable pri ck in your arm. But do you think of it in terms of evolut ion?
The media hype of annual flu shots is scientifically grounded in our understanding of evolution. Each ye ar, scientists across the
globe strive to predict the flu strains that they a nticipate being most widespread and harmful in the co ming year. This knowledge is
based on how flu strains have evolved over time and over the past few flu seasons. Scientists then work to cr eate the most effective
vaccine to combat those selected strains. Hundreds of millions of doses are produced in a short period in order to provide
vaccinations to key populations at the optimal time.
Because viruses, like the flu, evolve very quickly (esp ecially in evolutionary time), this poses quite a c hallenge. Viruses mutate and
replicate at a fast rate, so the vaccine developed t o protect against last year’s flu strain may not provi de the protection needed
against the coming year’s strain. The evolution of the se viruses means continued adaptions to ensure surviv al, including adaptations
to survive previous vaccines.
Population Genetics
Recall that a gene for a particular character may have several alleles, or variants, that code for different traits associa ted with that
character. For example, in the ABO blood type system in humans, three alleles determine the particular bloo d-type protein on the
surface of red blood cells. Each individual in a po pulation of diploid organisms can only carry two all eles for a particular gene, but
more than two may be present in the individuals that make up the population. Mendel followed alleles as the y were inherited from
parent to offspring. In the early twentieth century, b iologists in a field of study known as population geneti cs began to study how
selective forces change a population through changes in all ele and genotypic frequencies.
The allele frequency (or gene frequency) is the rate at which a specific allele appears within a population. Until now we have
discussed evolution as a change in the characterist ics of a population of organisms, but behind that p henotypic change is genetic
change. In population genetics, the term evolution is defined as a change in the frequency of an allele i n a population. Using the
ABO blood type system as an example, the frequency of one of the alleles, I, is the number of copies of that allele divided by all
the copies of the ABO gene in the population. For exam ple, a study in Jordan found a frequency of I to be 26.1 percent (Hanania,
Hassawi, & Irshaid, 2007). The I and I alleles made up 13.4 percent and 60.5 percent of t he alleles respectively, and all of the
frequencies added up to 100 percent. A change in this freque ncy over time would constitute evolution in the populatio n.
The allele frequency within a given population can c hange depending on environmental factors; therefore, certain alleles become
more widespread than others during the process of nat ural selection. Natural selection can alter the popu lation’s genetic makeup;
for example, if a given allele confers a phenotype that allows an individual to better survive or have more offspring. Because many
of those offspring will also carry the beneficial all ele, and often the corresponding phenotype, they will have more offspring ofA
A
B 0

22.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70769their own that also carry the allele, thus, perpetua ting the cycle. Over time, the allele will spread thro ughout the population. Some
alleles will quickly become fixed in this way, meaning that every individual of the po pulation will carry the allele, while
detrimental mutations may be swiftly eliminated if de rived from a dominant allele from the gene pool. The gene pool is the sum of
all the alleles in a population.
Sometimes, allele frequencies within a population chang e randomly with no advantage to the population over existing allele
frequencies. This phenomenon is called genetic drift. Natural selection and genetic drift usually occur si multaneously in
populations and are not isolated events. It is hard to determine which process dominates because it is oft en nearly impossible to
determine the cause of change in allele frequencies at each occurrence. An event that initiates an allele frequency change in an
isolated part of the population, which is not typical of the original population, is called the founder ef fect. Natural selection,
random drift, and founder effects can lead to significant changes in the genome of a popu lation.
Hardy-Weinberg Principle of Equilibrium
In the early twentieth century, English mathematician Godfrey Hardy and German physician Wilhelm Weinberg st ated the principle
of equilibrium to describe the genetic makeup of a population. The theory, which later became known as the Hardy-Weinberg
principle of equilibrium, states that a population’s allele and genotype freq uencies are inherently stable— unless some kind of
evolutionary force is acting upon the population, n either the allele nor the genotypic frequencies woul d change. The HardyWeinberg principle assumes conditions with no mutations, migration, emigration, or selective pressure for or against genotype,
plus an infinite population. While no population can satisfy those conditions, the principle offers a useful model against which to
compare real population changes.
Working under this theory, population geneticists rep resent different alleles as different variables in th eir mathematical models. The
variable p represents the dominant allele in the population whil e the variable q represents the recessive allele. For example, when
looking at Mendel’s peas, the variable p represents th e frequency of y alleles that confer the color yell ow and the variable q
represents the frequency of y alleles that confer th e color green. If these are the only two possible all eles for a given locus in the
population, p + q = 1. In other words, all the p alleles and all the q all eles make up all of the alleles for that locus that are found in
the population.
But what ultimately interests most biologists is not the frequencies of different alleles, but the frequen cies of the resulting
genotypes, known as the population’s genetic structur e, from which scientists can surmise the distribution o f phenotypes. If the
phenotype is observed, only the genotype of the homo zygous recessive alleles can be known; the calculatio ns provide an estimate
of the remaining genotypes. Since each individual carr ies two alleles per gene, if the allele frequencies (p and q) are known,
predicting the frequencies of these genotypes is a si mple mathematical calculation to determine the prob ability of getting these
genotypes if two alleles are drawn at random from the gene pool. So in the above scenario, an individual pe a plant could be pp
(YY), and thus produce yellow peas; pq (Yy), also yellow; or qq (yy), and thus producing green peas (Figure). I n other
words, the frequency of pp individuals is simply p; the frequency of pq individuals is 2pq; and the frequen cy of qq individuals is
q. And, again, if p and q are the only two possible alle les for a given trait in the population, these genot ype frequencies will sum to
one: p + 2pq + q = 1.2
2 2

22.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70769
Figure: When populations are in the Hardy-Weinberg equilibr ium, the allelic frequency is stable from generation to
generation and the distribution of alleles can be det ermined from the Hardy-Weinberg equation. If the al lelic frequency measured in
the field differs from the predicted value, scientists can make inferences about what evolutionary forces ar e at play. (credit: “HardyWeinberg equilibrium” by OpenStax is licensed under C C BY 4.0)
In plants, violet flower color (V) is dominant over white (v). If p = 0.8 and q = 0.2 in a population of 500 p lants, how many
individuals would you expect to be homozygous dominan t (VV), heterozygous (Vv), and homozygous recessive (vv)? How
many plants would you expect to have violet flowers, and how many would have white flowers?
Answer
The expected distribution is 320 VV, 160Vv, and 20 vv p lants. Plants with VV or Vv genotypes would have violet flowers,
and plants with the vv genotype would have white flowers, so a total of 480 plants would be expected to have violet
flowers, and 20 plants would have white flowers.
In theory, if a population is at equilibrium—that is, there are no evolutionary forces acting upon it—ge neration after generation
would have the same gene pool and genetic structure, a nd these equations would all hold true all of the tim e. Of course, even Hardy
and Weinberg recognized that no natural population is immune to evolution. Populations in nature are con stantly changing in
genetic makeup due to drift, mutation, possibly migra tion, and selection. As a result, the only way to determi ne the exact
distribution of phenotypes in a population is to go o ut and count them. But the Hardy-Weinberg principle g ives scientists a
mathematical baseline of a non-evolving population to which they can compare evolving populations and t hereby infer what
evolutionary forces might be at play. If the freque ncies of alleles or genotypes deviate from the value expected from the HardyWeinberg equation, then the population is evolving.
Summary
The modern synthesis of evolutionary theory grew out o f the cohesion of Darwin’s, Wallace’s, and Mendel’s th oughts on evolution
and heredity, along with the more modern study of pop ulation genetics. It describes the evolution of popula tions and species, from
small-scale changes among individuals to large-scale changes over paleontological time periods. To under stand how organisms
evolve, scientists can track populations’ allele fre quencies over time. If they differ from generation t o generation, scientists can
conclude that the population is not in Hardy-Weinberg equi librium, and is thus evolving.Exercise

22.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70769References
Hanania, S., Hassawi, D., and Irshaid, N. 2007. “Allele Frequen cy and Molecular Genotypes of ABO Blood Group System in a
Jordanian Population,” Journal of Medical Sciences 7: 51-58, doi:10.3923/jms.2007.51.58.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
22.1: Population Evolution is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19.1: Population Evolution by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0.

22.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7077022.2: Population Genetics
Individuals of a population often display different phenotypes, or express different alleles of a particu lar gene, referred to as
polymorphisms. Populations with two or more variations of particula r characteristics are called polymorphic. The distribution of
phenotypes among individuals, known as the populatio n variation, is influenced by a number of factors, including the population’s
genetic structure and the environment (Figure). Under standing the sources of phenotypic variation in a po pulation is
important for determining how a population will evolve in response to different evolutionary pressures.
Figure: The distribution of phenotypes in this litter of kitt ens illustrates population variation. (credit: Pieter L anser. “cats in a
basket” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Genetic Variance
Natural selection and some of the other evolutionary forces can only act on heritable traits, namely an organism’s genetic code.
Because alleles are passed from parent to offspring, t hose that confer beneficial traits or behaviors may be selected for, while
deleterious alleles may be selected against. Acquired traits, for the most part, are not heritable. For example, if an athlete works
out in the gym every day, building up muscle strength, the athlete’s offspring will not necessarily grow up to be a bodybuilder. If
there is a genetic basis for the ability to run fast, on the other hand, this may be passed to a child.
Heritability is the fraction of phenotype variation that can be attributed to genetic differences, or genetic varia nce, among
individuals in a population. The greater the heredita bility of a population’s phenotypic variation, the more susceptible it is to the
evolutionary forces that act on heritable variation.
The diversity of alleles and genotypes within a popu lation is called genetic variance. When scientists are involved in the breeding
of a species, such as with animals in zoos and nature preserves, they try to increase a population’s genetic variance to preserve as
much of the phenotypic diversity as they can. This al so helps reduce the risks associated with inbreeding, the mating of closely
related individuals, which can have the undesirable effect of bringing together deleterious recessive m utations that can cause
abnormalities and susceptibility to disease. For example, a disease that is caused by a rare, recessive allele might exist in a
population, but it will only manifest itself when an i ndividual carries two copies of the allele. Because t he allele is rare in a normal,
healthy population with unrestricted habitat, the cha nce that two carriers will mate is low, and even then, only 25 percent of their
offspring will inherit the disease allele from both parents. While it is likely to happen at some point, it will not happen frequently
enough for natural selection to be able to swiftly el iminate the allele from the population, and as a res ult, the allele will be
maintained at low levels in the gene pool. However, if a family of carriers begins to interbreed with each other, this will
dramatically increase the likelihood of two carriers mating and eventually producing diseased offspring, a phenomenon known as
inbreeding depression.
Changes in allele frequencies that are identified in a po pulation can shed light on how it is evolving. In additio n to natural selection,
there are other evolutionary forces that could be in play: genetic drift, gene flow, mutation, nonrandom mating, and environmental
variances.
Genetic Drift
The theory of natural selection stems from the observ ation that some individuals in a population are more likely to survive longer
and have more offspring than others; thus, they will pa ss on more of their genes to the next generation. A b ig, powerful male
gorilla, for example, is much more likely than a smal ler, weaker one to become the population’s silverback, t he pack’s leader who
mates far more than the other males of the group. The pack leader will father more offspring, who share hal f of his genes, and are
likely to also grow bigger and stronger like their fa ther. Over time, the genes for bigger size will incre ase in frequency in the

22.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70770population, and the population will, as a result, grow larger on average. That is, this would occur if this p articular selection
pressure, or driving selective force, were the only one acting on the population. In other examples, bette r camouflage or a stronger
resistance to drought might pose a selection pressure.
Another way a population’s allele and genotype freque ncies can change is genetic drift (Figure), which is simply the effect
of chance. By chance, some individuals will have mor e offspring than others—not due to an advantage conf erred by some
genetically-encoded trait, but just because one male happened to be in the right place at the right tim e (when the receptive female
walked by) or because the other one happened to be in t he wrong place at the wrong time (when a fox was hunting).
Figure: Genetic drift in a population can lead to the elim ination of an allele from a population by chance. I n this example,
rabbits with the brown coat color allele (B) are dom inant over rabbits with the white coat color allele (b). In the first generation, the
two alleles occur with equal frequency in the popula tion, resulting in p and q values of.5. Only half of the individuals reproduce,
resulting in a second generation with p and q values o f.7 and.3, respectively. Only two individuals in th e second generation
reproduce, and by chance these individuals are homozy gous dominant for brown coat color. As a result, in th e third generation the
recessive b allele is lost. (credit: “genetic drift in fur color” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Do you think genetic drift would happen more quickly on an island or on the mainland? Small populations are more
susceptible to the forces of genetic drift. Large p opulations, on the other hand, are
buffered against the effects of chance. If one indi vidual of a population of 10 individuals
happens to die at a young age before it leaves any offspring to the next generation, all of
its genes—1/10 of the population’s gene pool—will be suddenly lost. In a population of
100, that’s only 1 percent of the overall gene pool; therefore, it is much less impactful on
the population’s genetic structure.
Genetic drift can also be magnified by natural event s, such as a natural disaster that kills—at random—a la rge portion of the
population. Known as the bottleneck effect, it results in a large portion of the genome sudde nly being wiped out (Figure). In
one fell swoop, the genetic structure of the survivors becomes the genetic structure of the entire populatio n, which may be very
different from the pre-disaster population.

22.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70770
Figure: A chance event or catastrophe can reduce the geneti c variability within a population. (credit: “the bo ttleneck effect”
by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Another scenario in which populations might experience a strong influence of genetic drift is if some portion of the population
leaves to start a new population in a new location or if a population gets divided by a physical barrier o f some kind. In this
situation, those individuals are unlikely to be repr esentative of the entire population, which results in the founder effect. The
founder effect occurs when the genetic structure cha nges to match that of the new population’s founding fathers and mothers. The
founder effect is believed to have been a key factor in the genetic history of the Afrikaner population of Dutch settlers in South
Africa, as evidenced by mutations that are common in Afrikaners but rare in most other populations. This i s likely due to the fact
that a higher-than-normal proportion of the foundin g colonists carried these mutations. As a result, the po pulation expresses
unusually high incidences of Huntington’s disease (HD) and Fanconi anemia (FA), a genetic disorder known to ca use blood
marrow and congenital abnormalities—even cancer (Tippin g et al., 2001).
Watch this short video to learn more about the founder and bottleneck effects.
Source URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hEYV9WEvwaI&feature=youtu.be"
Scientific Method Practice: Testing the Bottleneck Effect
Question: How do natural disasters affect the genetic struc ture of a population?
Background: When much of a population is suddenly wip ed out by an earthquake or hurricane, the individual s that survive the
event are usually a random sampling of the original g roup. As a result, the genetic makeup of the populat ion can change
dramatically. This phenomenon is known as the bottleneck effect.
Hypothesis: Repeated natural disasters will yield diff erent population genetic structures; therefore, each time this experiment is run,
the results will vary.
Test the hypothesis: Count out the original populati on using different colored beads. For example, red, blue, and yellow beads
might represent red, blue, and yellow individuals. Afte r recording the number of each individual in the or iginal population, place
them all in a bottle with a narrow neck that will only allow a few beads out at a time. Then, pour 1/3 of th e bottle’s contents into a

22.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70770bowl. This represents the surviving individuals after a natural disaster kills a majority of the population. Count the number of the
different colored beads in the bowl, and record it. T hen, place all of the beads back in the bottle and repeat the experiment four
more times.
Analyze the data: Compare the five populations that resulted from the experiment. Do the populations all c ontain the same number
of different colored beads, or do they vary? Remember, the se populations all came from the same exact parent popula tion.
Form a conclusion: Most likely, the five resulting pop ulations will differ quite dramatically. This is beca use natural disasters are not
selective—they kill and spare individuals at random. Now think about how this might affect a real populati on. What happens when
a hurricane hits the Mississippi Gulf Coast? How do the seabirds that live on the beach fare?
Gene Flow
Another important evolutionary force is gene flow: the flow of alleles in and out of a population due to the migration of individuals
or gametes (Figure). While some populations are fai rly stable, others experience more flux. Many plants, fo r example, send
their pollen far and wide, by wind or by bird, to polli nate other populations of the same species some dista nce away. Even a
population that may initially appear to be stable, s uch as a pride of lions, can experience its fair sha re of immigration and
emigration as developing males leave their mothers to seek out a new pride with genetically unrelated females. This variable flow
of individuals in and out of the group not only chan ges the gene structure of the population, but it ca n also introduce new genetic
variation to populations in different geological loca tions and habitats.
Figure: Gene flow can occur when an individual travels from one geographic location to another. (credit: “Gene flow” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Mutation
Mutations are changes to an organism’s DNA and are an importan t driver of diversity in populations. Species evolve be cause of
the accumulation of mutations that occur over time. The appearance of new mutations is the most common way to introduce novel
genotypic and phenotypic variance. Some mutations ar e unfavorable or harmful and are quickly eliminated from the population by
natural selection. Others are beneficial and will spre ad through the population. Whether or not a mutatio n is beneficial or harmful is
determined by whether it helps an organism survive t o sexual maturity and reproduce. Some mutations do no t do anything and can
linger, unaffected by natural selection, in the genome. Som e can have a dramatic effect on a gene and the resulting phenotype.
Nonrandom Mating
There are many reasons nonrandom mating occurs. One reason is simple mate choice; for example, female peahens may prefer
peacocks with bigger, brighter tails. Traits that lea d to more matings for an individual become selected for by natural selection. One
common form of mate choice, called assortative mating, is an individual’s preference to mate with partners who are
phenotypically similar to themselves.
Another cause of nonrandom mating is physical locati on. This is especially true in large populations sprea d over large geographic
distances where not all individuals will have equal a ccess to one another. Some might be miles apart throug h woods or over rough
terrain, while others might live immediately nearby.
Environmental Variance
Genes are not the only players involved in determinin g population variation. Phenotypes are also influence d by other factors, such
as the environment (Figure). A beachgoer is likely to have darker skin than a city dweller, for example, due to regular
exposure to the sun, an environmental factor. Some maj or characteristics, such as sex, are determined by the environment for some
species. For example, some turtles and other reptiles have temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD). T SD means that

22.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70770individuals develop into males if their eggs are inc ubated within a certain temperature range, or female s at a different temperature
range.
Figure: The sex of the American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) is determined by the temperature at which the eggs are
incubated. Eggs incubated at 30°C produce females, an d eggs incubated at 33°C produce males. (credit: Stev e Hillebrand, USFWS.
“Alligator mississippiens” by OpenStax is licensed under C C BY 4.0)
Geographic separation between populations can lead to differences in the phenotypic variation between those populations. Such
geographical variation is seen between most populati ons and can be significant. One type of geographic va riation, called a cline,
can be seen as populations of a given species vary gr adually across an ecological gradient. Species of warm -blooded animals, for
example, tend to have larger bodies in the cooler c limates closer to the earth’s poles, allowing them to better conserve heat. This is
considered a latitudinal cline. Alternatively, flowering plants tend to bloom at di fferent times depending on where they are along
the slope of a mountain, known as an altitudinal cline.
If there is gene flow between the populations, the ind ividuals will likely show gradual differences in pheno type along the cline.
Restricted gene flow, on the other hand, can lead to abr upt differences, even speciation.
Summary
Both genetic and environmental factors can cause phe notypic variation in a population. Different alleles can confer different
phenotypes, and different environments can also cau se individuals to look or act differently. Only those differences encoded in an
individual’s genes, however, can be passed to its offspri ng and, thus, be a target of natural selection. Natur al selection works by
selecting for alleles that confer beneficial traits or behaviors while selecting against those for delete rious qualities. Genetic drift
stems from the chance occurrence that some individua ls in the germline have more offspring than others. When individuals leave or
join the population, allele frequencies can change as a result of gene flow. Mutations to an individual ’s DNA may introduce new
variation into a population. Allele frequencies can als o be altered when individuals do not randomly mate with oth ers in the group.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Tipping, A.J., et al. 2001. “Molecular and Genealogical Ev idence for a Founder Effect in Fanconi Anemia Families o f the Afrikaner
Population of South Africa,” PNAS 98, no. 10: 5734-5739, doi: 10.1073/pnas.091402398.
22.2: Population Genetics is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

22.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7077122.3: Adaptive Evolution
Natural selection only acts on the population’s herit able traits: selecting for beneficial alleles and th us increasing their frequency in
the population, while selecting against deleterious a lleles and thereby decreasing their frequency—a pro cess known as adaptive
evolution. Natural selection does not act on individual alleles, however, but on entire organisms. An individual may carry a very
beneficial genotype with a resulting phenotype that, for example, increases the ability to reproduce (fecundity), but if that same
individual also carries an allele that results in a fatal childhood disease, that fecundity phenotype wil l not be passed on to the next
generation because the individual will not live to r each reproductive age. Natural selection acts at the level of the individual; it
selects for individuals with greater contributions t o the gene pool of the next generation, known as an o rganism’s evolutionary
(Darwinian) fitness.
Fitness is often quantifiable and is measured by scienti sts in the field. However, it is not the absolute fitnes s of an individual that
counts, but rather how it compares to the other organisms in the population. This concept, called relative fitness, allows
researchers to determine which individuals are contri buting additional offspring to the next generation, and thus, how the
population might evolve.
There are several ways selection can affect population variation: stabilizing selection, directional selec tion, diversifying selection,
frequency-dependent selection, and sexual selection. As natural selection influences the allele frequencie s in a population,
individuals can either become more or less genetical ly similar and the phenotypes displayed can become more similar or more
disparate.
Stabilizing Selection
If natural selection favors an average phenotype, se lecting against extreme variation, the population wi ll undergo stabilizing
selection (Figure). In a population of mice that live in the woods, for example, natural selection is likely to fa vor individuals
that best blend in with the forest floor and are less likely to be spotted by predators. Assuming the groun d is a fairly consistent
shade of brown, those mice whose fur is most closely ma tched to that color will be most likely to survive a nd reproduce, passing on
their genes for their brown coat. Mice that carry al leles that make them a bit lighter or a bit darker wi ll stand out against the ground
and be more likely to fall victim to predation. As a result of this selection, the population’s genetic variance wi ll decrease.
Directional Selection
When the environment changes, populations will often un dergo directional selection (Figure), which selects for phenotypes
at one end of the spectrum of existing variation. A c lassic example of this type of selection is the evol ution of the peppered moth in
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century England. Prior to the Industrial Revolution, the moths were predominate ly light in color, which
allowed them to blend in with the light-colored trees and lichens in their environment. But as soot began spewing from factories,
the trees became darkened, and the light-colored moth s became easier for predatory birds to spot. Over time, the frequency of the
melanic form of the moth increased because they had a higher survival rate in habitats affected by air pollution because their darker
coloration blended with the sooty trees. Similarly, th e hypothetical mouse population may evolve to take on a different coloration if
something were to cause the forest floor where they liv e to change color. The result of this type of selection is a shift in the
population’s genetic variance toward the new, fit phenot ype.
Diversifying Selection
Sometimes two or more distinct phenotypes can each hav e their advantages and be selected for by natural se lection, while the
intermediate phenotypes are, on average, less fit. Kno wn as diversifying selection (Figure), this is seen in many populations
of animals that have multiple male forms. Large, domin ant alpha males obtain mates by brute force, while sm all males can sneak in
for furtive copulations with the females in an alpha male’s territory. In this case, both the alpha male s and the “sneaking” males will
be selected for, but medium-sized males, which can’t overtake the alpha males and are too big to sneak co pulations, are selected
against. Diversifying selection can also occur when env ironmental changes favor individuals on either end o f the phenotypic
spectrum. Imagine a population of mice living at the beach where there is light-colored sand intersperse d with patches of tall grass.
In this scenario, light-colored mice that blend in wi th the sand would be favored, as well as dark-colored m ice that can hide in the
grass. Medium-colored mice, on the other hand, would n ot blend in with either the grass or the sand, and wou ld thus be more likely
to be eaten by predators. The result of this type of sele ction is increased genetic variance as the population becomes more diverse.

22.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70771
Figure: Different types of natural selection can impact the distribution of phenotypes within a population. In (a) stabilizing
selection, an average phenotype is favored. In (b) di rectional selection, a change in the environment shif ts the spectrum of
phenotypes observed. In (c) diversifying selection, two or more extreme phenotypes are selected for, while t he average phenotype
is selected against. (credit: “types of selection” by Op enStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In recent years, factories have become cleaner, and less soot is released into the environment. What impa ct do you think this
has had on the distribution of moth color in the populatio n?
Answer
Moths have shifted to a lighter color.
Frequency-dependent Selection
Another type of selection, called frequency-dependent selection, favors phenotypes that are either common (positive frequencydependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dependent selection). An interesting example of this type of selection i s seen
in a unique group of lizards of the Pacific Northwest. Male common side-blotched lizards come in three thr oat-color patterns:
orange, blue, and yellow. Each of these forms has a di fferent reproductive strategy: orange males are the strongest and can fight
other males for access to their females; blue males are medium-sized and form strong pair bonds with their mates; and yellow
males (Figure) are the smallest, and look a bit like females, which allows them to sneak copulations. Like a game of rockpaper-scissors, orange beats blue, blue beats yellow, an d yellow beats orange in the competition for females. That is, the big, strong
orange males can fight off the blue males to mate wit h the blue’s pair-bonded females, the blue males are s uccessful at guarding
their mates against yellow sneaker males, and the ye llow males can sneak copulations from the potential m ates of the large,
polygynous orange males.Exercise

22.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70771
Figure: A yellow-throated side-blotched lizard is smaller tha n either the blue-throated or orange-throated males and appears
a bit like the females of the species, allowing it to sneak copulations. (credit: “tinyfroglet”/Flickr. “tin yfroglet” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In this scenario, orange males will be favored by nat ural selection when the population is dominated by b lue males, blue males will
thrive when the population is mostly yellow males, and yellow males will be selected for when orange males are the most
populous. As a result, populations of side-blotched liza rds cycle in the distribution of these phenotypes—in one generation, orange
might be predominant, and then yellow males will begin to rise in frequency. Once yellow males make up a maj ority of the
population, blue males will be selected for. Finally, when blue males become common, orange males will once again be f avored.
Negative frequency-dependent selection serves to incr ease the population’s genetic variance by selecting for rare phenotypes,
whereas positive frequency-dependent selection usually de creases genetic variance by selecting for common phenotyp es.
Sexual Selection
Males and females of certain species are often quite d ifferent from one another in ways beyond the reproduc tive organs. Males are
often larger, for example, and display many elaborate colors and adornments, like the peacock’s tail, while females tend to be
smaller and duller in decoration. Such differences are known as sexual dimorphisms (Figure), which arise from the fact that
in many populations, particularly animal population s, there is more variance in the reproductive success o f the males than there is
of the females. That is, some males—often the bigger, stronger, or more decorated males—get the vast major ity of the total
matings, while others receive none. This can occur be cause the males are better at fighting off other ma les, or because females will
choose to mate with the bigger or more decorated mal es. In either case, this variation in reproductive s uccess generates a strong
selection pressure among males to get those matings, resulting in the evolution of bigger body size and e laborate ornaments to get
the females’ attention. Females, on the other hand, ten d to get a handful of selected matings; therefore, th ey are more likely to
select more desirable males.
Sexual dimorphism varies widely among species, of cour se, and some species are even sex-role reversed. In su ch cases, females
tend to have a greater variance in their reproducti ve success than males and are correspondingly selected for the bigger body size
and elaborate traits usually characteristic of males.
Figure: Sexual dimorphism is observed in (a) peacocks and peahe ns, (b) Argiope appensa spiders (the female spider is the
large one), and in (c) wood ducks. (credit “spiders”: modification of work by “Sanba38”/Wikimedia Commons; credit “duck”:
modification of work by Kevin Cole. “sexual dimorphi sm” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
The selection pressures on males and females to obtain matings is known as sexual selection; it can result in the development of
secondary sexual characteristics that do not benefit the individual’s likelihood of survival but help to maximize its reproductive

22.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70771success. Sexual selection can be so strong that it sele cts for traits that are actually detrimental to the individual’s survival. Think,
once again, about the peacock’s tail. While it is be autiful and the male with the largest, most colorful tail is more likely to win the
female, it is not the most practical appendage. In ad dition to being more visible to predators, it makes t he males slower in their
attempted escapes. There is some evidence that this risk, in fact, is why females like the big tails in the first place. The speculation
is that large tails carry risk, and only the best mal es survive that risk: the bigger the tail, the more fit the male. This idea is known as
the handicap principle.
The good genes hypothesis states that males develop these impressive ornaments t o show off their efficient metabolism or their
ability to fight disease. Females then choose males with the most impressive traits because it signals their gen etic superiority, which
they will then pass on to their offspring. Though it might be argued that females should not be picky b ecause it will likely reduce
their number of offspring, if better males father mo re fit offspring, it may be beneficial. Fewer, healthie r offspring may increase the
chances of survival more than many, weaker offspring. In 1915, biologist Ronald Fisher proposed another
model of sexual selection: the Fisherian runaway model, which suggests that selection
of certain traits is a result of sexual preference.
In both the handicap principle and the good genes hy pothesis, the trait is said to be an honest signal of the males’ quality, thus
giving females a way to find the fittest mates— males tha t will pass the best genes to their offspring.
No Perfect Organism
Natural selection is a driving force in evolution and can generate populations that are better adapted t o survive and successfully
reproduce in their environments. But natural selectio n cannot produce the perfect organism. Natural selec tion can only select on
existing variation in the population; it does not cre ate anything from scratch. Thus, it is limited by a po pulation’s existing genetic
variance and whatever new alleles arise through mutation and gene flow.
Natural selection is also limited because it works at the level of individuals, not alleles, and some allele s are linked due to their
physical proximity in the genome, making them more l ikely to be passed on together (linkage disequilibrium). Any given
individual may carry some beneficial alleles and so me unfavorable alleles. It is the net effect of the se alleles, or the organism’s
fitness, upon which natural selection can act. As a resu lt, good alleles can be lost if they are carried by individuals that also have
several overwhelmingly bad alleles; likewise, bad alle les can be kept if they are carried by individuals t hat have enough good
alleles to result in an overall fitness benefit.
Furthermore, natural selection can be constrained by t he relationships between different polymorphisms. One m orph may confer a
higher fitness than another, but may not increase i n frequency due to the fact that going from the less beneficial to the more
beneficial trait would require going through a less b eneficial phenotype. Think back to the mice that liv e at the beach. Some are
light-colored and blend in with the sand, while others are dark and blend in with the patches of grass. The dark-colored mice may
be, overall, more fit than the light-colored mice, and at first glance, one might expect the light-colored mice be selected for a darker
coloration. But remember that the intermediate phen otype, a medium-colored coat, is very bad for the mice —they cannot blend in
with either the sand or the grass and are more likely to be eaten by predators. As a result, the light-co lored mice would not be
selected for a dark coloration because those individu als that began moving in that direction (began bein g selected for a darker coat)
would be less fit than those that stayed light.
Finally, it is important to understand that not all evo lution is adaptive. While natural selection selects the fittest indiv iduals and
often results in a more fit population overall, othe r forces of evolution, including genetic drift and ge ne flow, often do the opposite:
introducing deleterious alleles to the population’s gene pool. Evolution has no purpose—it is not chang ing a population into a
preconceived ideal. It is simply the sum of the vari ous forces described in this chapter and how they inf luence the genetic and
phenotypic variance of a population.
Summary
Because natural selection acts to increase the frequ ency of beneficial alleles and traits while decreasin g the frequency of deleterious
qualities, it is adaptive evolution. Natural selecti on acts at the level of the individual, selecting f or those that have a higher overall
fitness compared to the rest of the population. If t he fit phenotypes are those that are similar, natur al selection will result in

22.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70771stabilizing selection, and an overall decrease in the population’s variation. Directional selection works t o shift a population’s
variance toward a new, fit phenotype, as environmenta l conditions change. In contrast, diversifying selecti on results in increased
genetic variance by selecting for two or more distinct p henotypes.
Other types of selection include frequency-dependent selection, in which individuals with either common (p ositive frequencydependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dep endent selection) are selected for. Finally, sexual se lection results from the fact
that one sex has more variance in the reproductive success than the other. As a result, males and females e xperience different
selective pressures, which can often lead to the evolutio n of phenotypic differences, or sexual dimorphisms, between the two.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
22.3: Adaptive Evolution is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
19.3: Adaptive Evolution by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
23: Evolutionary Relationships
Figure: The life of a bee is very different from the life o f a flower, but the two organisms are related. Both a re members the
domain Eukarya and have cells containing many similar organelles, genes, and proteins. (credit: modificatio n of work by John
Beetham. “bee and Echinacea” by OpenStax is licensed u nder CC BY 4.0)
This bee and Echinacea flower (Figure) could not look more different, yet t hey are related, as are all living organisms on
Earth. By following pathways of similarities and changes —both visible and genetic—scientists seek to map the e volutionary past
of how life developed from single-celled organisms t o the tremendous collection of creatures that have germinated, crawled,
floated, swam, flown, and walked on this planet.
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Thumbnail: Clades Amniota and Vertebrata. (CC BY 4.0; OpenStax).
23: Evolutionary Relationships is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

23.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7089823.1: Organizing Life on Earth
In scientific terms, the evolutionary history and re lationship of an organism or group of organisms is ca lled its phylogeny. A
phylogeny describes the relationships of an organism, such as from which organisms it is thought to have ev olved, to which species
it is most closely related, and so forth. Phylogenetic relationships provide information on shared ancestr y but not necessarily on
how organisms are similar or different.
Phylogenetic Trees
Scientists use a tool called a phylogenetic tree to show the evolutionary pathways and connections amon g organisms. A
phylogenetic tree is a diagram used to reflect evol utionary relationships among organisms or groups of organisms. Scientists
consider phylogenetic trees to be a hypothesis of the evolutionary past since one cannot go back to confir m the proposed
relationships. In other words, a “tree of life” can be co nstructed to illustrate when different organisms evol ved and to show the
relationships among different organisms (Figure).
Unlike a taxonomic classification diagram, a phylogenetic tree can be read like a map of evo lutionary history. Many phylogenetic
trees have a single lineage at the base representing a common ancestor. Scientists call such trees rooted, which means there is a
single ancestral lineage (typically drawn from the b ottom or left) to which all organisms represented in the diagram relate. Notice
in the rooted phylogenetic tree that the three doma ins— Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya—diverge from a s ingle point and branch
off. The small branch that plants and animals (includi ng humans) occupy in this diagram shows how recent and m inuscule these
groups are compared with other organisms. Unrooted trees don’t show a common ancestor but do show relationships among
species.
Figure: Both of these phylogenetic trees show the relationship of the three domains of life—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya
—but the (a) rooted tree attempts to identify when v arious species diverged from a common ancestor while th e (b) unrooted tree
does not. (credit a: modification of work by Eric Ga ba. “three domains of life” by OpenStax is licensed un der CC BY 4.0)
In a rooted tree, the branching indicates evolutiona ry relationships (Figure). The point where a split occur s, called a branch
point, represents where a single lineage evolved into a di stinct new one. A lineage that evolved early from the root and remains
unbranched is called a basal taxon. When two lineages stem from the same branch point, they are called sister taxa. A branch with
more than two lineages is called a polytomy and serves to illustrate where scientists have not def initively determined all of the
relationships. It is important to note that although si ster taxa and polytomy do share an ancestor, it doe s not mean that the groups of
organisms split or evolved from each other. Organisms in two taxa may have split apart at a specific branch point, but neither taxa
gave rise to the other.
Figure: The root of a phylogenetic tree indicates that an a ncestral lineage gave rise to all organisms on the tree. A branch
point indicates where two lineages diverged. A lineag e that evolved early and remains unbranched is a basal taxon. When two
lineages stem from the same branch point, they are siste r taxa. A branch with more than two lineages is a pol ytomy. (credit: “rooted
phylogenetic tree” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)

23.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70898The diagrams above can serve as a pathway to understa nding evolutionary history. The pathway can be traced from the origin of
life to any individual species by navigating through the evolutionary branches between the two points. Also, by starting with a
single species and tracing back towards the “trunk” of the tree, one can discover that species’ ancestors, as well as where lineages
share a common ancestry. In addition, the tree can be us ed to study entire groups of organisms.
Another point to mention on phylogenetic tree struct ure is that rotation at branch points does not change the information. For
example, if a branch point was rotated and the taxon order changed, this would not alter the information b ecause the evolution of
each taxon from the branch point was independent of the ot her.
Many disciplines within the study of biology contribut e to understanding how past and present life evolved over time; these
disciplines together contribute to building, updatin g, and maintaining the “tree of life.” Information i s used to organize and classify
organisms based on evolutionary relationships in a sc ientific field called systematics. Data may be collec ted from fossils, from
studying the structure of body parts or molecules use d by an organism, and by DNA analysis. By combining da ta from many
sources, scientists can put together the phylogeny o f an organism; since phylogenetic trees are hypothe ses, they will continue to
change as new types of life are discovered and new informat ion is learned.
Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees
It may be easy to assume that more closely related or ganisms look more alike, and while this is often the c ase, it is not always true.
If two closely related lineages evolved under signific antly varied surroundings or after the evolution of a major new adaptation, it is
possible for the two groups to appear more different than other groups that are not as closely related. Fo r example, the phylogenetic
tree in Figure shows that lizards and rabbits both hav e amniotic eggs, whereas frogs do not; yet lizards an d frogs appear more
similar than lizards and rabbits.
Figure: This ladder-like phylogenetic tree of vertebrates is rooted by an organism that lacked a vertebral column. At each
branch point, organisms with different characters are placed in different groups based on the characteristic s they share. (credit:
“ladder-like phylogenetic tree” by OpenStax is license d under CC BY 4.0)
Another aspect of phylogenetic trees is that, unless ot herwise indicated, the branches do not account for leng th of time, only the
evolutionary order. In other words, the length of a br anch does not typically mean more time passed, nor d oes a short branch mean
less time passed— unless specified on the diagram. For example, in Figure, the tree does not indicate how m uch time passed
between the evolution of amniotic eggs and hair. What the tree does show is the order in which things took place. Again using
Figure, the tree shows that the oldest trait is the v ertebral column, followed by hinged jaws, and so forth. R emember that any
phylogenetic tree is a part of the greater whole, and like a real tree, it does not grow in only one dire ction after a new branch
develops. So, for the organisms in Figure, just becau se a vertebral column evolved does not mean that in vertebrate evolution
ceased, it only means that a new branch formed. Also, gr oups that are not closely related, but evolve under similar conditions, may
appear more phenotypically similar to each other than to a close relative.
The Levels of Classification
Taxonomy (which literally means “arrangement law”) is the scien ce of classifying organisms to construct internationa lly shared
classification systems with each organism placed into more and more inclusive groupings. Think about how a grocery store is
organized. One large space is divided into departments, s uch as produce, dairy, and meats. Then each department further divides
into aisles, then each aisle into categories and bra nds, and then finally a single product. This organiz ation from larger to smaller,
more specific categories is called a hierarchical sys tem.
The taxonomic classification system (also called the Linnaean system after its inventor, Carl Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist,
zoologist, and physician) uses a hierarchical model. Moving from the point of origin, the groups become mo re specific, until one

23.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70898branch ends as a single species. For example, after the common beginning of all life, scientists divide o rganisms into three large
categories called a domain: Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Within each domain i s a second category called a kingdom. After
kingdoms, the subsequent categories of increasing specif icity are: phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species (Figure
Figure: The taxonomic classification system uses a hierarchical model to organize living organisms into increasingly
specific categories. The common dog, Canis lupus familiaris, is a subspecies of Canis lupus, which also includes the wolf and
dingo. (credit “dog”: modification of work by Jannek e Vreugdenhil. “dog” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
The kingdom Animalia stems from the Eukarya domain. For the common dog, th e classification levels would be as shown in
Figure. Therefore, the full name of an organism tech nically has eight terms. For the dog, it is: Eukarya, Ani malia, Chordata,
Mammalia, Carnivora, Canidae, Canis, and lupus. Notice that each name is capitalized except for sp ecies, and the genus and
species names are italicized. Scientists generally ref er to an organism only by its genus and species, whi ch is its two-word scientific
name, in what is called binomial nomenclature. Therefore, the scientific name of the dog is Canis lupus. The name at each level is
also called a taxon. In other words, dogs are in order Carnivora. Carnivo ra is the name of the taxon at the order level; Can idae is
the taxon at the family level, and so forth. Organis ms also have a common name that people typically us e, in this case, dog. Note
that the dog is additionally a subspecies: the “ familiaris ” in Canis lupus familiaris. Subspecies are members of the same species
that are capable of mating and reproducing viable o ffspring, but they are considered separate subspecie s due to geographic or
behavioral isolation or other factors.
Figure shows how the levels move toward specificity with other organisms. Notice how the dog shares a domain wit h the
widest diversity of organisms, including plants and butterflies. At each sublevel, the organisms become m ore similar because they
are more closely related. Historically, scientists cla ssified organisms using characteristics, but as DNA techn ology developed, more
precise phylogenies have been determined.

23.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70898
Figure: At each sublevel in the taxonomic classification system, organisms become more similar. Dogs and wolves are the
same species because they can breed and produce viable offspring, but they are different enough to be classif ied as different
subspecies. (credit “plant”: modification of work by “ berduchwal”/Flickr; credit “insect”: modification of work by Jon Sullivan;
credit “fish”: modification of work by Christian Mehl führer; credit “rabbit”: modification of work by Ai dan Wojtas; credit “cat”:
modification of work by Jonathan Lidbeck; credit “fo x”: modification of work by Kevin Bacher, NPS; credi t “jackal”: modification
of work by Thomas A. Hermann, NBII, USGS; credit “wolf ”: modification of work by Robert Dewar; credit “do g”: modification of
work by “digital_image_fan”/Flickr. “taxonomic grou ps” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
At what levels are cats and dogs considered to be part of th e same group?
Answer
Cats and dogs are part of the same group at five leve ls: both are in the domain Eukarya, the kingdom Animal ia, the phylum
Chordata, the class Mammalia, and the order Carnivora.
Recent genetic analysis and other advancements have found that some earlier phylogenetic classification s do not align with the
evolutionary past; therefore, changes and updates mu st be made as new discoveries occur. Recall that phylogen etic trees are
hypotheses and are modified as data becomes available. In addition, classification historically has focused on grouping organisms
mainly by shared characteristics and does not necessar ily illustrate how the various groups relate to each o ther from an
evolutionary perspective. For example, despite the fac t that a hippopotamus resembles a pig more than a whal e, the hippopotamus
may be the closest living relative of the whale.
Summary
Scientists continually gain new information that help s understand the evolutionary history of life on Ear th. Each group of
organisms went through its own evolutionary journey, cal led its phylogeny. Each organism shares relatedness with others, and
based on morphologic and genetic evidence, scientists attempt to map the evolutionary pathways of all life on Earth. Historically,Exercise

23.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70898organisms were organized into a taxonomic classificatio n system. However, today many scientists build phylogenet ic trees to
illustrate evolutionary relationships.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
20.1: Organizing Life on Earth by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0.

23.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7089923.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
Scientists must collect accurate information that al lows them to make evolutionary connections among org anisms. Similar to
detective work, scientists must use evidence to uncove r the facts. In the case of phylogeny, evolutionary investigations focus on
two types of evidence: morphologic (form and function) a nd genetic.
Two Options for Similarities
In general, organisms that share similar physical fe atures and genomes tend to be more closely related t han those that do not. Such
features that overlap both morphologically (in form) and genetically are referred to as homologous structures; they stem from
developmental similarities that are based on evoluti on. For example, the bones in the wings of bats and bi rds have homologous
structures (Figure).
Figure: Bat and bird wings are homologous structures, indicati ng that bats and birds share a common evolutionary past.
(credit a: modification of work by Steve Hillebrand, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by U.S. DOI BLM. “homologous
structures” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Notice it is not simply a single bone, but rather a gro uping of several bones arranged in a similar way. The more complex the
feature, the more likely any kind of overlap is due to a common evolutionary past. Imagine two people fro m different countries
both inventing a car with all the same parts and in exactly the same arrangement without any previous or shared knowledge. That
outcome would be highly improbable. However, if two peop le both invented a hammer, it would be reasonable to c onclude that
both could have the original idea without the help o f the other. The same relationship between complexity and shared evolutionary
history is true for homologous structures in organisms.
Misleading Appearances
Some organisms may be very closely related, even thoug h a minor genetic change caused a major morphologic al difference to
make them look quite different. Similarly, unrelated organisms may be distantly related, but appear very much alike. This usually
happens because both organisms were in common adaptat ions that evolved within similar environmental condit ions. When similar
characteristics occur because of environmental const raints and not due to a close evolutionary relationsh ip, it is called an analogy
or homoplasy. For example, insects use wings to fly like bats and bir ds, but the wing structure and embryonic origin is com pletely
different. These are called analogous structures (Figure).
Similar traits can be either homologous or analogous. Homologous structures share a similar embryonic origin; analogous organs
have a similar function. For example, the bones in the front flipper of a whale are homologous to the bones in the human arm.
These structures are not analogous. The wings of a butt erfly and the wings of a bird are analogous but not h omologous. Some
structures are both analogous and homologous: the wi ngs of a bird and the wings of a bat are both homolog ous and analogous.
Scientists must determine which type of similarity a featu re exhibits to decipher the phylogeny of the organisms being studied.

23.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70899
Figure: The (c) wing of a honeybee is similar in shape to a (b) bird wing and (a) bat wing, and it serves the same function.
However, the honeybee wing is not composed of bones an d has a distinctly different structure and embryonic o rigin. These wing
types (insect versus bat and bird) illustrate an analogy —similar structures that do not share an evolutionary h istory. (credit a:
modification of work by Steve Hillebrand, USFWS; cred it b: modification of work by U.S. DOI BLM; credit c: modification of
work by Jon Sullivan. “analogy” by OpenStax is license d under CC BY 4.0)
Molecular Comparisons
With the advancement of DNA technology, the area of m olecular systematics, which describes the use of inform ation on the
molecular level including DNA analysis, has blossomed. New computer programs not only confirm many earlier classified
organisms, but also uncover previously made errors. As wi th physical characteristics, even the DNA sequence can be tricky to read
in some cases. For some situations, two very closely rel ated organisms can appear unrelated if a mutation o ccurred that caused a
shift in the genetic code. An insertion or deletion mutation would move each nucleotide base over one pla ce, causing two similar
codes to appear unrelated.
Sometimes two segments of DNA code in distantly related org anisms randomly share a high percentage of bases in the same
locations, causing these organisms to appear closely re lated when they are not. For both of these situations, c omputer technologies
have been developed to help identify the actual rel ationships, and, ultimately, the coupled use of both morphologic and molecular
information is more effective in determining phylogeny.
Why Does Phylogeny Matter?
Evolutionary biologists could list many reasons why u nderstanding phylogeny is important to everyday life in human society. For
botanists, phylogeny acts as a guide to discovering new plants that can be used to benefit people. Think of all the ways humans use
plants—food, medicine, and clothing are a few exampl es. If a plant contains a compound that is effective in treating cancer,
scientists might want to examine all of the relatives of that plant for other useful drugs.
A research team in China identified a segment of DNA t hought to be common to some medicinal plants in the family Fabaceae (the
legume family) and worked to identify which species h ad this segment (Figure). After testing plant species in this family, the
team found a DNA marker (a known location on a chromoso me that enabled them to identify the species) presen t. Then, using the
DNA to uncover phylogenetic relationships, the team c ould identify whether a newly discovered plant was in this family and assess
its potential medicinal properties.

23.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70899
Figure: Dalbergia sissoo (D. sissoo) is in the Fabaceae, or legume family. Scientists found that D. sissoo shares a DNA
marker with species within the Fabaceae family that ha ve antifungal properties. Subsequently, D. sissoo was shown to have
fungicidal activity, supporting the idea that DNA ma rkers can be used to screen for plants with potential m edicinal properties.
(credit: “ Dalbergia sissoo ” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Building Phylogenetic Trees
How do scientists construct phylogenetic trees? After the homologous and analogous traits are sorted, scientists o ften organize the
homologous traits using a system called cladistics. This system sorts organisms into clades: groups of organisms that descended
from a single ancestor. For example, in Figure, all o f the organisms in the orange region evolved from a s ingle ancestor that
had amniotic eggs. Consequently, all of these organisms a lso have amniotic eggs and make a single clade, also ca lled a
monophyletic group. Clades must include all of the descendants from a branch po int.
Figure: Lizards, rabbits, and humans all descend from a common ancestor that had an amniotic egg. Thus, lizards, rab bits,
and humans all belong to the clade Amniota. Vertebra ta is a larger clade that also includes fish and lampre y. (credit:”monophyletic
groups” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Which animals in this figure belong to a clade that in cludes animals with hair? Which evolved first, hair or the amniotic egg?
Answer
Rabbits and humans belong in the clade that include s animals with hair. The amniotic egg evolved before hair because the
Amniota clade is larger than the clade that encompasses animal s with hair.
Clades can vary in size depending on which branch po int is being referenced. The important factor is tha t all of the organisms in
the clade or monophyletic group stem from a single po int on the tree. This can be remembered because mon ophyletic breaks down
into “mono,” meaning one, and “phyletic,” meaning evo lutionary relationship. Figure shows various examples of clades.
Notice how each clade comes from a single point, whereas th e non-clade groups show branches that do not share a single point.Exercise

23.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70899
Figure: All the organisms within a clade stem from a single po int on the tree. A clade may contain multiple group s, as in the
case of animals, fungi and plants, or a single group, a s in the case of flagellates. Groups that diverge at a different branch point, or
that do not include all groups in a single branch poi nt, are not considered clades. (credit: “clades” by Op enStax is licensed under
CC BY 4.0)
Groups that do not include all organisms that descend ed from a single ancestor have different names. A paraphyletic group
includes the most recent common ancestor, but not al l of its descendants (Figure). A polyphyletic group includes unrelated
organisms descended from more than one ancestor.
Figure: A visual representation of monophyletic, polyphyleti c, and paraphyletic groups. (Credit: 1999 by Addison Wesley
Longman)
Shared Characteristics
Organisms evolve from common ancestors and then dive rsify. Scientists use the phrase “descent with modifica tion” because even
though related organisms have many of the same char acteristics and genetic codes, changes occur. This pattern repeats over and
over as one goes through the phylogenetic tree of life:
1. A change in the genetic makeup of an organism leads to a new trait which becomes prevalent in the group.
2. Many organisms descend from this point and have this trai t.
3. New variations continue to arise: some are adaptive and persist, leading to new traits.
4. With new traits, a new branch point is determined (go bac k to step 1 and repeat).
If a characteristic is found in the ancestor of a g roup, it is considered a shared ancestral character because all of the organisms in
the taxon or clade have that trait. The vertebrate i n Figure is a shared ancestral character. Now consider t he amniotic egg
characteristic in the same figure. Only some of the o rganisms in Figure have this trait, and to those that do, it is called a
shared derived character because this trait derived at some point but does not inclu de all of the ancestors in the tree.
The tricky aspect to shared ancestral and shared deri ved characters is the fact that these terms are relat ive. The same trait can be
considered one or the other depending on the partic ular diagram being used. Returning to Figure, note t hat the amniotic egg
is a shared ancestral character for the Amniota clade, while having hair is a shared derived character for so me organisms in this
group. These terms help scientists distinguish between cl ades in the building of phylogenetic trees.

23.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70899Choosing the Right Relationships
Imagine being the person responsible for organizing all of the items in a department store properly—an o verwhelming task.
Organizing the evolutionary relationships of all life on Earth proves much more difficult: scientists must span enormous blocks of
time and work with information from long-extinct orga nisms. Trying to decipher the proper connections, espec ially given the
presence of homologies and analogies, makes the task of building an accurate tree of life extraordinari ly difficult. Add to that the
advancement of DNA technology, which now provides large quantities of genetic sequences to be used and anal yzed. Taxonomy is
a subjective discipline: many organisms have more tha n one connection to each other, so each taxonomist will decide the order of
connections.
To aid in the tremendous task of describing phylogen ies accurately, scientists often use a concept called maximum parsimony,
which means that events occurred in the simplest, mos t obvious way. For example, if a group of people enter ed a forest preserve to
go hiking, based on the principle of maximum parsimo ny, one could predict that most of the people would hike on established trails
rather than forge new ones.
For scientists deciphering evolutionary pathways, the same idea is used: the pathway of evolution probably includes the fewest
major events that coincide with the evidence at hand. Starting with all of the homologous traits in a group of organisms, scientists
look for the most obvious and simple order of evolutionary events that led to the occurrence of those traits.
These tools and concepts are only a few of the strateg ies scientists use to tackle the task of revealing th e evolutionary history of life
on Earth. Recently, newer technologies have uncovere d surprising discoveries with unexpected relationshi ps, such as the fact that
people seem to be more closely related to fungi than fungi are to plants. Sound unbelievable? As the info rmation about DNA
sequences grows, scientists will become closer to mappin g the evolutionary history of all life on Earth.
Summary
To build phylogenetic trees, scientists must collect ac curate information that allows them to make evolutiona ry connections
between organisms. Using morphologic and molecular dat a, scientists work to identify homologous characteristi cs and genes.
Similarities between organisms can stem either from shar ed evolutionary history (homologies) or from separat e evolutionary paths
(analogies). Newer technologies can be used to help dis tinguish homologies from analogies. After homologous i nformation is
identified, scientists use cladistics to organize the se events as a means to determine an evolutionary ti meline. Scientists apply the
concept of maximum parsimony, which states that the o rder of events probably occurred in the most obvious and simple way with
the least amount of steps. For evolutionary events, th is would be the path with the least number of major d ivergences that correlate
with the evidence.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
20.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0.

23.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7090023.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
The concepts of phylogenetic modeling are constantly changing. It is one of the most dynamic fields of stu dy in all of biology.
Over the last several decades, new research has challen ged scientists’ ideas about how organisms are related. New models of these
relationships have been proposed for consideration by the scientific community.
Many phylogenetic trees have been shown as models of t he evolutionary relationship among species. Phylogen etic trees originated
with Charles Darwin, who sketched the first phylogenetic t ree in 1837 (Figure a), which served as a pattern for s ubsequent
studies for more than a century. The concept of a phy logenetic tree with a single trunk representing a co mmon ancestor, with the
branches representing the divergence of species fro m this ancestor, fits well with the structure of many common trees, such as the
oak (Figure b). However, evidence from modern DNA sequenc e analysis and newly developed computer algorithms has
caused skepticism about the validity of the standard tree model in the scientific community.
Figure: The (a) concept of the “tree of life” goes back to an 1837 sketch by Charles Darwin. Like an (b) oak tre e, the “tree of
life” has a single trunk and many branches. (credit b: modification of work by “Amada44″/Wikimedia Common s. “tree of life” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Limitations to the Classic Model
Classical thinking about prokaryotic evolution, inclu ded in the classic tree model, is that species evolv e clonally. That is, they
produce offspring themselves with only random mutati ons causing the descent into the variety of modern-d ay and extinct species
known to science. This view is somewhat complicated in eu karyotes that reproduce sexually, but the laws of Mende lian genetics
explain the variation in offspring, again, to be a r esult of a mutation within the species. The concept o f genes being transferred
between unrelated species was not considered as a possibi lity until relatively recently. Horizontal gene transfer (HGT), also
known as lateral gene transfer, is the transfer of genes between unrelated species. HGT has been shown to be an ever-present
phenomenon, with many evolutionists postulating a major role for this process in evolution, thus complicating the simple tree
model. Genes have been shown to be passed between species which are only distantly related using standard phylog eny, thus
adding a layer of complexity to the understanding of phy logenetic relationships.
The various ways that HGT occurs in prokaryotes is impo rtant to understanding phylogenies. Although at present HGT is not
viewed as important to eukaryotic evolution, HGT does occur in this domain as well. Finally, as an example of the ultimate gene
transfer, theories of genome fusion between symbiotic or endosymbiotic organisms have been proposed to ex plain an event of great
importance—the evolution of the first eukaryotic cell, without which humans could not have come into existence.
Horizontal Gene Transfer
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is the introduction of genetic material from one species to another species b y mechanisms other
than the vertical transmission from parent(s) to off spring. These transfers allow even distantly related sp ecies to share genes,
influencing their phenotypes. It is thought that HGT i s more prevalent in prokaryotes, but that only about 2% of the prokaryotic
genome may be transferred by this process. Some resea rchers believe such estimates are premature: the actu al importance of HGT
to evolutionary processes must be viewed as a work in p rogress. As the phenomenon is investigated more thoroug hly, it may be
revealed to be more common. Many scientists believe th at HGT and mutation appear to be (especially in prokar yotes) a significant
source of genetic variation, which is the raw material for the process of natural selection. These transfers may occur between any
two species that share an intimate relationship (Table).

23.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70900Table: Summary of Mechanisms of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic HGT
Mechanism Mode of Transmission Example
Prokaryotes transformation DNA uptake many prokaryotes
transduction bacteriophage (virus) bacteria
conjugation pilus many prokaryotes
gene transfer agents phage-like particles purple non- sulfur bacteria
Eukaryotes from food organisms unknown aphid
jumping genes transposons rice and millet plants
epiphytes/parasites unknown yew tree fungi
from viral infections
HGT in Prokaryotes
The mechanism of HGT has been shown to be quite common in the prokaryotic domains of Bacteria and Archaea, si gnificantly
changing the way their evolution is viewed. The major ity of evolutionary models, such as in the Endosymbiont Theory, propose
that eukaryotes descended from multiple prokaryotes, which makes HGT all the more important to understandi ng the phylogenetic
relationships of all extant and extinct species.
The fact that genes are transferred among common ba cteria is well known to microbiology students. These ge ne transfers between
species are the major mechanism whereby bacteria acq uire resistance to antibiotics. Classically, this type of transfer has been
thought to occur by three different mechanisms:
1. Transformation: naked DNA is taken up by a bacteria
2. Transduction: genes are transferred using a virus
3. Conjugation: the use of a hollow tube called a pilus to transfer genes between organisms
More recently, a fourth mechanism of gene transfer bet ween prokaryotes has been discovered. Small, virus-lik e particles called
gene transfer agents (GTAs) transfer random genomic segments from one speci es of prokaryote to another. GTAs have been
shown to be responsible for genetic changes, sometimes a t a very high frequency compared to other evolution ary processes. The
first GTA was characterized in 1974 using purple, non -sulfur bacteria. These GTAs, which are thought to be ba cteriophages that
lost the ability to reproduce on their own, carry ran dom pieces of DNA from one organism to another. The ab ility of GTAs to act
with high frequency has been demonstrated in controll ed studies using marine bacteria. Gene transfer events in marine prokaryotes,
either by GTAs or by viruses, have been estimated to be as high as 10 per year in the Mediterranean Sea alone. GTAs and viruses
are thought to be efficient HGT vehicles with a major impact on prokaryotic evolution.
As a consequence of this modern DNA analysis, the idea t hat eukaryotes evolved directly from Archaea has fal len out of favor.
While eukaryotes share many features that are absent in bacteria, such as the TATA box (found in the prom oter region of many
genes), the discovery that some eukaryotic genes were mo re homologous with bacterial DNA than Archaea DNA made th is idea
less tenable. Furthermore, the fusion of genomes from Ar chaea and Bacteria by endosymbiosis has been proposed as the ultimate
event in eukaryotic evolution.
HGT in Eukaryotes
Although it is easy to see how prokaryotes exchange ge netic material by HGT, it was initially thought that th is process was absent
in eukaryotes. After all, prokaryotes are but single c ells exposed directly to their environment, whereas t he sex cells of multicellular
organisms are usually sequestered in protected parts of the body. It follows from this idea that the gene tr ansfers between
multicellular eukaryotes should be more difficult. I ndeed, it is thought that this process is rarer in eu karyotes and has a much
smaller evolutionary impact than in prokaryotes. In spite of this fact, HGT between distantly related organ isms has been
demonstrated in several eukaryotic species, and it is pos sible that more examples will be discovered in the future.13

23.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70900In plants, gene transfer has been observed in speci es that cannot cross-pollinate by normal means. Transp osons or “jumping genes”
have been shown to transfer between rice and millet pla nt species. Furthermore, fungal species feeding on yew t rees, from which
the anti-cancer drug TAXOL® is derived from the bark, h ave acquired the ability to make taxol themselves, a clear example of
gene transfer.
In animals, a particularly interesting example of HGT o ccurs within the aphid species (Figure). Aphids are in sects that vary
in color based on carotenoid content. Carotenoids ar e pigments made by a variety of plants, fungi, and mic robes, and they serve a
variety of functions in animals, who obtain these ch emicals from their food. Humans require carotenoids to synthesize vitamin A,
and we obtain them by eating orange fruits and veget ables such as carrots, apricots, mangoes, and sweet pot atoes. On the other
hand, aphids have acquired the ability to make carot enoids on their own. According to DNA analysis, this ab ility is due to the
transfer of fungal genes into the insect by HGT, presum ably as the insect consumed fungi for food. A caroteno id enzyme called a
desaturase is responsible for the red coloration seen in certain aphids, and it has been further shown th at when this gene is
inactivated by mutation, the aphids revert back to thei r more common green color (Figure).
Figure: (a) Red aphids get their color from red carotenoid pigment. Genes necessary to make this pigment are presen t in
certain fungi, and scientists speculate that aphids acqu ired these genes through HGT after consuming fungi for food. If genes for
making carotenoids are inactivated by mutation, the aphids revert back to (b) their green color. Red col oration makes the aphids a
lot more conspicuous to predators, but evidence suggests that red aphids are more resistant to insecticides than green ones. Thus,
red aphids may be more fit to survive in some environm ents than green ones. (credit a: modification of work by Benny Mazur;
credit b: modification of work by Mick Talbot. “aph ids” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Genome Fusion and the Evolution of Eukaryotes
Scientists believe the ultimate in HGT occurs through genome fusion between different species of prokaryotes when two symbiotic
organisms become endosymbiotic. This occurs when one sp ecies is taken inside the cytoplasm of another spec ies, which ultimately
results in a genome consisting of genes from both the e ndosymbiont and the host. This mechanism is an aspec t of the
Endosymbiont Theory, which is accepted by a majority of biologists as the mechanism whereby eukaryotic cel ls obtained their
mitochondria and chloroplasts. However, the role of endos ymbiosis in the development of the nucleus is more c ontroversial.
Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA are thought to be of dif ferent (separate) evolutionary origin, with the mitoc hondrial DNA being
derived from the circular genomes of bacteria that we re engulfed by ancient prokaryotic cells. Mitochondr ial DNA can be regarded
as the smallest chromosome. Interestingly enough, mito chondrial DNA is inherited only from the mother. The m itochondrial DNA
degrades in sperm when the sperm degrades in the fert ilized egg or in other instances when the mitochondri a located in the
flagellum of the sperm fails to enter the egg.
Within the past decade, the process of genome fusion by endosymbiosis has been proposed by James Lake of the UCLA/NASA
Astrobiology Institute to be responsible for the evolu tion of the first eukaryotic cells (Figure a). Using DNA analysis and a
new mathematical algorithm called conditioned reconst ruction (CR), his laboratory proposed that eukaryoti c cells developed from
an endosymbiotic gene fusion between two species, one an Archaea and the other a Bacteria. As mentioned, some eukaryotic genes
resemble those of Archaea, whereas others resemble tho se from Bacteria. An endosymbiotic fusion event, such a s Lake has
proposed, would clearly explain this observation. On the other hand, this work is new and the CR algorithm is r elatively
unsubstantiated, which causes many scientists to resist this hypothesis.
More recent work by Lake (Figure b) proposes that gram- negative bacteria, which are unique within their domai n in that they
contain two lipid bilayer membranes, indeed resulted from an endosymbiotic fusion of archaeal and bacte rial species. The double
membrane would be a direct result of the endosymbiosis, with the endosymbiont picking up the second membran e from the host as

23.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70900it was internalized. This mechanism has also been use d to explain the double membranes found in mitochon dria and chloroplasts.
Lake’s work is not without skepticism, and the ideas are still debated within the biological science community. In addition to
Lake’s hypothesis, there are several other competin g theories as to the origin of eukaryotes. How did the eukaryotic nucleus
evolve? One theory is that the prokaryotic cells prod uced an additional membrane that surrounded the bac terial chromosome. Some
bacteria have the DNA enclosed by two membranes; howeve r, there is no evidence of a nucleolus or nuclear po res. Other
proteobacteria also have membrane-bound chromosomes. I f the eukaryotic nucleus evolved this way, we would exp ect one of the
two types of prokaryotes to be more closely related to eukar yotes.
Figure: The theory that mitochondria and chloroplasts are en dosymbiotic in origin is now widely accepted. More
controversial is the proposal that (a) the eukaryotic nucleus resulted from the fusion of archaeal and bacte rial genomes, and that (b)
Gram-negative bacteria, which have two membranes, re sulted from the fusion of Archaea and Gram-positive ba cteria, each of
which has a single membrane. (credit: “endosymbiosis” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
The nucleus-first hypothesis proposes that the nucleus evolved in prokaryotes fi rst (Figure a), followed by a later fusion of
the new eukaryote with bacteria that became mitochond ria. The mitochondria-first hypothesis proposes that mitochondria were
first established in a prokaryotic host (Figure b), wh ich subsequently acquired a nucleus, by fusion or ot her mechanisms, to
become the first eukaryotic cell. The eukaryote-first hypothesis proposes that prokaryotes actually evolved from eu karyotes by
losing genes and complexity (Figure c). All of these hy potheses are testable. Only time and more experiment ation will
determine which hypothesis is best supported by data.

23.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70900
Figure: Three alternate hypotheses of eukaryotic and prokary otic evolution are (a) the nucleus-first hypothesis, (b) the
mitochondrion-first hypothesis, and (c) the eukaryote- first hypothesis. (credit: “Three alternate hypotheses” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Web and Network Models
The recognition of the importance of HGT, especially i n the evolution of prokaryotes, has caused some to pr opose abandoning the
classic “tree of life” model. In 1999, W. Ford Doolitt le proposed a phylogenetic model that resembles a web or a network more
than a tree. The hypothesis is that eukaryotes evolv ed not from a single prokaryotic ancestor, but from a pool of many species that
were sharing genes by HGT mechanisms. As shown in Figure a, some individual prokaryotes were responsible for
transferring the bacteria that caused mitochondrial d evelopment to the new eukaryotes, whereas other species tr ansferred the
bacteria that gave rise to chloroplasts. This model is often called the “ web of life. ” In an effort to save the tree analogy, some have
proposed using the Ficus tree (Figure b) with its multiple trunks as a phyloge netic to represent a diminished evolutionary role
for HGT.
Figure: In the (a) phylogenetic model proposed by W. Ford Do olittle, the “tree of life” arose from a community o f ancestral
cells, has multiple trunks, and has connections between branches where horizontal gene transfer has occurred. Visually, this concept
is better represented by (b) the multi-trunked Ficus than by the single trunk of the oak similar to the t ree drawn by Darwin (Figure
). (credit b: modification of work by “psyberartist”/ Flickr. “Doolittle, the “tree of life”” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY
4.0)
Ring of Life Models
Others have proposed abandoning any tree-like model o f phylogeny in favor of a ring structure, the so-call ed “ring of life ” (Figure
); a phylogenetic model where all three domains of l ife evolved from a pool of primitive prokaryotes. L ake, again using the
conditioned reconstruction algorithm, proposes a rin g-like model in which species of all three domains—Ar chaea, Bacteria, and

23.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70900Eukarya—evolved from a single pool of gene-swapping p rokaryotes. His laboratory proposes that this structur e is the best fit for
data from extensive DNA analyses performed in his labo ratory and that the ring model is the only one that adequately takes HGT
and genomic fusion into account. However, other phylogenet icists remain highly skeptical of this model.
Figure: According to the “ring of life” phylogenetic model, the three domains of life evolved from a pool of p rimitive
prokaryotes. (credit: “ring of life” by OpenStax is l icensed under CC BY 4.0)
In summary, the “ tree of life ” model proposed by Darwin must be modified to include HGT. Does this mean abandoning the tree
model completely? Even Lake argues that all attempt s should be made to discover some modification of the tree model to allow it
to accurately fit his data, and only the inability to do so will sway people toward his ring proposal.
This doesn’t mean a tree, web, or a ring will correlate completely to an accurate description of phylogenet ic relationships of life. A
consequence of the new thinking about phylogenetic m odels is the idea that Darwin’s original conception of the phylogenetic tree
is too simple, but made sense based on what was known at the time. However, the search for a more useful mode l moves on: each
model serving as hypotheses to be tested with the pos sibility of developing new models. This is how science advances. These
models are used as visualizations to help construct hypothetical evolutionary relationships and underst and the massive amount of
data being analyzed.
Summary
The phylogenetic tree, first used by Darwin, is the c lassic “tree of life” model describing phylogenetic relationships among species,
and the most common model used today. New ideas about HGT and genome fusion have caused some to suggest revisi ng the
model to resemble webs or rings.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
24: Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure: The (a) deer tick carries the bacterium that produc es Lyme disease in humans, often evident in (b) a sympto matic
bull’s eye rash. The (c) white-footed mouse is one well -known host to deer ticks carrying the Lyme disease bac terium. (credit a:
modification of work by Scott Bauer, USDA ARS; credi t b: modification of work by James Gathany, CDC; cred it c: modification
of work by Rob Ireton. “Lyme disease” by OpenStax is l icensed under CC BY 4.0)
Why study ecology? Perhaps you are interested in lea rning about the natural world and how living things h ave adapted to the
physical conditions of their environment. Or, perhaps you’re a future physician seeking to understand the connection between
human health and ecology.
Humans are a part of the ecological landscape, and h uman health is one important part of human interact ion with our physical and
living environment. Lyme disease, for instance, serves as one modern-day example of the connection between our health and the
natural world (Figure). More formally known as Lyme bor reliosis, Lyme disease is a bacterial infection that can be transmitted
to humans when they are bitten by the deer tick (Ixodes scapularis), which is the primary vector for this disease. However, not all
deer ticks carry the bacteria that will cause Lyme di sease in humans, and I. scapularis can have other hosts besides deer. In fact, it
turns out that the probability of infection depends on the type of host upon which the tick develops: a higher proportion of ticks that
live on white-footed mice carry the bacterium than d o ticks that live on deer. Knowledge about the environ ments and population
densities in which the host species is abundant would hel p a physician or an epidemiologist better understan d how Lyme disease is
transmitted and how its incidence could be reduced.
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
24.2: Biogeography
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate Change
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Thumbnail: The Earth seen from Apollo 17. (Public Domain; NASA/ Apollo 17 crew via Wikimedia Commons).
24: Ecology and the Biosphere is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

24.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7090124.1: The Scope of Ecology
Ecology is the study of the interactions of living organism s with their environment. One core goal of ecology is to understand the
distribution and abundance of living things in the physical environment. Attainment of this goal require s the integration of
scientific disciplines inside and outside of biology, such as biochemistry, physiology, evolution, biodiversi ty, molecular biology,
geology, and climatology. Some ecological research al so applies aspects of chemistry and physics, and it f requently uses
mathematical models.
Levels of Ecological Study
When a discipline such as biology is studied, it is often helpful to subdivide it into smaller, related areas. For instance, cell
biologists interested in cell signaling need to und erstand the chemistry of the signal molecules (which ar e usually proteins) as well
as the result of cell signaling. Ecologists interes ted in the factors that influence the survival of an endangered species might use
mathematical models to predict how current conservatio n efforts affect endangered organisms. To produce a sound set of
management options, a conservation biologist needs to collect accurate data, including current population size, factors affecting
reproduction (like physiology and behavior), habitat requirements (such as plants and soils), and potential human influences on the
endangered population and its habitat (which might be derived through studies in sociology and urban eco logy). Within the
discipline of ecology, researchers work at four spec ific levels, sometimes discretely and sometimes with ov erlap: organism,
population, community, and ecosystem (Figure).
Figure: Ecologists study within several biological levels of or ganization. (credit “organisms”: modification of work by
“Crystl”/Flickr; credit “ecosystems”: modification of wo rk by Tom Carlisle, US Fish and Wildlife Service Headq uarters; credit
“biosphere”: NASA. “levels of organization” by OpenSta x is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Organismal Ecology
Researchers studying ecology at the organismal level are interested in the adaptations that enable indi viduals to live in specific
habitats. These adaptations can be morphological, physi ological, and behavioral. For instance, the Karner blue butterfly (Lycaeides
melissa samuelis) (Figure) is considered a specialist because the fem ales preferentially oviposit (that is, lay eggs) on wi ld
lupine. This preferential adaptation means that the Karner blue butterfly is highly dependent on the pre sence of wild lupine plants
for its continued survival.
Figure: The Karner blue butterfly (Lycaeides melissa samuelis) is a rare butterfly that lives only in open areas wi th few trees
or shrubs, such as pine barrens and oak savannas. It can o nly lay its eggs on lupine plants. (credit: modificati on of work by J & K
Hollingsworth, USFWS. “Lycaeides melissa samuelis” by Open Stax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)

24.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70901After hatching, the larval caterpillars emerge and s pend four to six weeks feeding solely on wild lupine (Figure). The
caterpillars pupate (undergo metamorphosis) and emerge as butterflies after about four weeks. The adult bu tterflies feed on the
nectar of flowers of wild lupine and other plant specie s. A researcher interested in studying Karner blue butte rflies at the
organismal level might, in addition to asking question s about egg laying, ask questions about the butterfli es’ preferred temperature
(a physiological question) or the behavior of the caterpillars when they are at different larval stages (a behavioral question).
Figure: The wild lupine (Lupinus perennis) is the host plant for the Karner blue butterfly. (c redit: “Lupinus perennis” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Population Ecology
A population is a group of interbreeding organisms that are mem bers of the same species living in the same area at t he same time.
(Organisms that are all members of the same species a re called conspecifics.) A population is identified, in part, by where it lives.
Its area may have natural or artificial boundaries: natural boundaries might be rivers, mountains, or d eserts, while examples of
artificial boundaries include mowed grass, manmade stru ctures, or roads. The study of population ecology foc uses on the number
of individuals in an area and how and why population size changes over time. Population ecologists are parti cularly interested in
counting the Karner blue butterfly, for example, beca use it is classified as federally endangered. However, t he distribution and
density of this species is highly influenced by the distribution and abundance of wild lupine. Researche rs might ask questions about
the factors leading to the decline of wild lupine an d how these affect Karner blue butterflies. For exampl e, ecologists know that
wild lupine thrives in open areas where trees and shrub s are largely absent. In natural settings, intermittent wildfires regularly
remove trees and shrubs, helping to maintain the op en areas that wild lupine requires. Mathematical model s can be used to
understand how wildfire suppression by humans has led to the decline of this important plant for the Karner blue b utterfly.
Community Ecology
A biological community consists of the different species within an area, ty pically a three-dimensional space, and the interact ions
within and among these species. Community ecologists are interested in the processes driving these inte ractions and their
consequences. Questions about conspecific interactions often focus on competition among members of the sam e species for a
limited resource. Ecologists also study interactions amon g various species; members of different species are c alled heterospecifics.
Examples of heterospecific interactions include pred ation, parasitism, herbivory, competition, and pollin ation. These interactions
can have regulating effects on population sizes and can i mpact ecological and evolutionary processes affecting dive rsity.
For example, Karner blue butterfly larvae form mutuali stic relationships with ants. A mutualism is a form of a long-term
relationship that has coevolved between two species and from which each species benefits. For mutualism to ex ist between
individual organisms, each species must receive some be nefit from the other as a consequence of the relatio nship. Researchers have
shown that there is an increase in the probability of survival when Karner blue butterfly larvae (caterpil lars) are tended by ants.
This might be because the larvae spend less time in e ach life stage when tended by ants, which provides an advantage for the
larvae. Meanwhile, the Karner blue butterfly larvae secr ete a carbohydrate-rich substance that is an importa nt energy source for the
ants. Both the Karner blue larvae and the ants benefit from their interaction.

24.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70901Ecosystem Ecology
Ecosystem ecology is an extension of organismal, popula tion, and community ecology. The ecosystem is composed of all the
biotic components (living things) in an area along with the abiotic components (non-living things) of that area. Some of t he abiotic
components include air, water, and soil. Ecosystem bi ologists ask questions about how nutrients and energ y are stored and how
they move among organisms and the surrounding atmosphe re, soil, and water.
The Karner blue butterflies and the wild lupine live i n an oak-pine barren habitat. This habitat is charact erized by natural
disturbance and nutrient-poor soils that are low in n itrogen. The availability of nutrients is an importa nt factor in the distribution of
the plants that live in this habitat. Researchers inte rested in ecosystem ecology could ask questions about the importance of limited
resources and the movement of resources, such as nutrients, though the biotic and abiotic portions of the ecosyste m.
Career Connection: Ecologist
A career in ecology contributes to many facets of hu man society. Understanding ecological issues can help so ciety meet the basic
human needs of food, shelter, and health care. Ecolog ists can conduct their research in the laboratory and outside in natural
environments (Figure). These natural environments ca n be as close to home as the stream running through y our campus or as
far away as the hydrothermal vents at the bottom of t he Pacific Ocean. Ecologists manage natural resources such as white-tailed
deer populations (Odocoileus virginianus) for hunting or aspen (Populus spp.) timber stands for paper production. Ecologists also
work as educators who teach children and adults at va rious institutions including universities, high school s, museums, and nature
centers. Ecologists may also work in advisory positions a ssisting local, state, and federal policymakers to dev elop laws that are
ecologically sound, or they may develop those polici es and legislation themselves. Becoming an ecologist requires an
undergraduate degree, usually in a natural science. The undergraduate degree is often followed by speciali zed training or an
advanced degree, depending on the area of ecology se lected. Ecologists should also have a broad backgroun d in the physical
sciences, as well as a sound foundation in mathematics an d statistics.
Figure: This landscape ecologist is releasing a black-footed fe rret into its native habitat as part of a study. (cred it: USFWS
Mountain Prairie Region, NPS. “ecologist” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Summary
Ecology is the study of the interactions of living things with their environment. Ecologists ask question s across four levels of
biological organization—organismal, population, comm unity, and ecosystem. At the organismal level, ecolog ists study individual
organisms and how they interact with their environments. At the population and community levels, ecologists exp lore, respectively,
how a population of organisms changes over time and the ways in which that population interacts with other species in the
community. Ecologists studying an ecosystem examine the living species (the biotic components) of the e cosystem as well as the
nonliving portions (the abiotic components), such as ai r, water, and soil, of the environment.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
24.1: The Scope of Ecology is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

24.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7090224.2: Biogeography
Many forces influence the communities of living orga nisms present in different parts of the biosphere (all of the parts of Earth
inhabited by life). The biosphere extends into the atmosphere (several kilometers above Earth) and int o the depths of the oceans.
Despite its apparent vastness to an individual human, the biosphere occupies only a minute space when compa red to the known
universe. Many abiotic forces influence where life can exist and the types of organisms found in different parts of the biosphere.
The abiotic factors influence the distribution of bio mes: large areas of land with similar climate, flora, an d fauna.
Biogeography
Biogeography is the study of the geographic distribution of livin g things and the abiotic factors that affect their d istribution.
Abiotic factors such as temperature and rainfall vary b ased mainly on latitude and elevation. As these abiot ic factors change, the
composition of plant and animal communities also cha nges. For example, if you were to begin a journey at th e equator and walk
north, you would notice gradual changes in plant comm unities. At the beginning of your journey, you would see tropical wet forests
with broad-leaved evergreen trees, which are characte ristic of plant communities found near the equator. As you continued to travel
north, you would see these broad-leaved evergreen pla nts eventually give rise to seasonally dry forests with scattered trees. You
would also begin to notice changes in temperature and m oisture. At about 30 degrees north, these forests would give way to deserts,
which are characterized by low precipitation.
Moving farther north, you would see that deserts are re placed by grasslands or prairies. Eventually, grassla nds are replaced by
deciduous temperate forests. These deciduous forests gi ve way to the boreal forests found in the subarctic, the area south of the
Arctic Circle. Finally, you would reach the Arctic tundra, which is found at the most northern latitudes. This tre k north reveals
gradual changes in both climate and the types of or ganisms that have adapted to environmental factors asso ciated with ecosystems
found at different latitudes. However, different ecosyste ms exist at the same latitude due in part to abiotic factors such as jet
streams, the Gulf Stream, and ocean currents. If you we re to hike up a mountain, the changes you would see in the vegetation
would parallel those as you move to higher latitudes.
Ecologists who study biogeography examine patterns of species distribution. No species exists everywhere; for ex ample, the Venus
flytrap is endemic to a small area in North and South Carolina. An endemic species is one that is naturally found only in a sp ecific
geographic area that is usually restricted in size. Other species are generalists: species that live in a wide variety of geographic
areas; the raccoon, for example, is native to most of North a nd Central America.
Species distribution patterns are based on biotic and abiotic factors and their influences during the ve ry long periods of time
required for species evolution; therefore, early studi es of biogeography were closely linked to the emerge nce of evolutionary
thinking in the eighteenth century. Some of the most distinctive assemblages of plants and animals occur i n regions that have been
physically separated for millions of years by geogr aphic barriers. Biologists estimate that Australia, f or example, has between
600,000 and 700,000 species of plants and animals. App roximately 3/4 of living plant and mammal species a re endemic species
found solely in Australia (Figure).
Figure: Australia is home to many endemic species. The (a) wal laby (Wallabia bicolor), a medium-sized member of the
kangaroo family, is a pouched mammal, or marsupial. T he (b) echidna (Tachyglossus aculeatus) is an egg-laying mammal. (credit
a: modification of work by Derrick Coetzee; credit b: modification of work by Allan Whittome. “endemic species” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Sometimes ecologists discover unique patterns of spec ies distribution by determining where species are not found. Hawaii, for
example, has no native land species of reptiles or am phibians and has only one native terrestrial mammal, the hoary bat. Most of

24.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70902New Guinea, as another example, lacks placental mammals.
Plants can be endemic or generalists: endemic plants are found only on specific regions of the Earth, while generalists are found in
many regions. Isolated landmasses—such as Australia, Hawai i, and Madagascar—often have large numbers of endemic plant
species. Some of these plants are endangered due to human activity. The forest gardenia (Gardenia brighamii), for instance, is
endemic to Hawaii; only an estimated 15–20 trees are thought to exist (Figure).
Figure: Listed as federally endangered, the forest gardenia i s a small tree with distinctive flowers. It is found onl y in five of
the Hawaiian Islands in small populations consisting of a few individual specimens. (credit: Forest & Kim Starr. “forest gardenia”
by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Energy Sources
Energy from the sun is captured by green plants, algae, cyanobacteria, and photosynthetic protists. These organisms convert solar
energy into the chemical energy needed by all living things. Light availability can be an important force directly affecting the
evolution of adaptations in photosynthesizers. For in stance, plants in the understory of a temperate forest are shaded when the trees
above them in the canopy completely leaf out in the late spring. Not surprisingly, understory plants ha ve adaptations to successfully
capture available light. One such adaptation is the ra pid growth of spring ephemeral plants such as the spri ng beauty (Figure
). These spring flowers achieve much of their growth an d finish their life cycle (reproduce) early in the se ason before the trees
in the canopy develop leaves.
Figure: The spring beauty is an ephemeral spring plant that f lowers early in the spring to avoid competing with la rger forest
trees for sunlight. (credit: John Beetham. “spring beau ty” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In aquatic ecosystems, the availability of light may b e limited because sunlight is absorbed by water, pla nts, suspended particles,
and resident microorganisms. Toward the bottom of a la ke, pond, or ocean, there is a zone that light cannot reach. Photosynthesis
cannot take place there and, as a result, a number of adaptations have evolved that enable living things t o survive without light. For
instance, aquatic plants have photosynthetic tissue ne ar the surface of the water; for example, think of th e broad, floating leaves of
a water lily—water lilies cannot survive without light. In environments such as hydrothermal vents, some bacteria extract energy
from inorganic chemicals because there is no light for ph otosynthesis.
The availability of nutrients in aquatic systems is also an important aspect of en ergy or photosynthesis. Many organisms sink to
the bottom of the ocean when they die in the open wat er; when this occurs, the energy found in that living o rganism is sequestered
for some time unless ocean upwelling occurs. Ocean upwelling is the rising of deep ocean wa ters that occurs when prevailing
winds blow along surface waters near a coastline (Figur e). As the wind pushes ocean waters offshore, water from t he bottom
of the ocean moves up to replace this water. As a resul t, the nutrients once contained in dead organisms be come available for reuse
by other living organisms.

24.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70902
Figure: Ocean upwelling is an important process that recycles nutrients and energy in the ocean. As wind (green arr ows)
pushes offshore, it causes water from the ocean bottom (red arrows) to move to the surface, bringing up nutri ents from the ocean
depths. (credit: “Ocean upwelling” by OpenStax is lice nsed under CC BY 4.0)
In freshwater systems, the recycling of nutrients occu rs in response to air temperature changes. The nutrie nts at the bottom of lakes
are recycled twice each year: in the spring and fall turnover. The spring and fall turnover is a seasonal process that recycles
nutrients and oxygen from the bottom of a freshwater ecosystem to the top of a body of water (Figure). Thes e turnovers are
caused by the formation of a thermocline: a layer of water with a temperature that is signific antly different from that of the
surrounding layers. In wintertime, the surface of lake s found in many northern regions is frozen. However, t he water under the ice
is slightly warmer, and the water at the bottom of th e lake is warmer yet at 4 °C to 5 °C (39.2 °F to 41 °F). Water is densest at 4 °C;
therefore, the deepest water is also the densest. The de epest water is oxygen-poor because the decomposition o f organic material at
the bottom of the lake uses up available oxygen tha t cannot be replaced by means of oxygen diffusion i nto the water due to the
surface ice layer.
Figure: The spring and fall turnovers are important processes i n freshwater lakes that act to move the nutrients and oxygen at
the bottom of deep lakes to the top. Turnover occurs because water has a maximum density at 4 °C. Surface w ater temperature
changes as the seasons progress, and denser water sinks. (cre dit: “Turnover” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In springtime, air temperatures increase, and surface ice melts. When the temperature of the surface water begins to reach 4 °C, the
water becomes heavier and sinks to the bottom. The wate r at the bottom of the lake is then displaced by the heavier surface water
and, thus, rises to the top. As that water rises to the top, the sediments and nutrients from the lake bottom a re brought along with it.
During the summer months, the lake water stratifies, or forms l ayers, with the warmest water at the lake surface.
As air temperatures drop in the fall, the temperature of the lake water cools to 4 °C; therefore, this ca uses fall turnover as the heavy
cold water sinks and displaces the water at the bottom. The oxygen-rich water at the surface of the lake t hen moves to the bottom of
the lake, while the nutrients at the bottom of the l ake rise to the surface (Figure). During the winter, t he oxygen at the bottom
of the lake is used by decomposers and other organisms re quiring oxygen, such as fish.
Temperature
Temperature affects the physiology of living things as well as the density and state of water. Temperature exerts an impo rtant
influence on living things because few living things c an survive at temperatures below 0 °C (32 °F) due to metabolic constraints. It
is also rare for living things to survive at temper atures exceeding 45 °C (113 °F); this is a reflection of evolutionary response to
typical temperatures. Enzymes are most efficient wit hin a narrow and specific range of temperatures; enz yme degradation can
occur at higher temperatures. Therefore, organisms e ither must maintain an internal temperature or they must inhabit an
environment that will keep the body within a temperat ure range that supports metabolism. Some animals have ad apted to enable

24.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70902their bodies to survive significant temperature fluct uations, such as seen in hibernation or reptilian to rpor. Similarly, some bacteria
are adapted to surviving in extremely hot temperatu res such as geysers. Such bacteria are examples of extre mophiles: organisms
that thrive in extreme environments.
Temperature can limit the distribution of living th ings. Animals faced with temperature fluctuations may re spond with adaptations,
such as migration, in order to survive. Migration, the movement from one place to another, is an ada ptation found in many
animals, including many that inhabit seasonally cold climates. Migration solves problems related to tempe rature, locating food, and
finding a mate. In migration, for instance, the Arctic Tern (Sterna paradisaea) makes a 40,000 km (24,000 mi) round trip flight
each year between its feeding grounds in the souther n hemisphere and its breeding grounds in the Arctic Oce an. Monarch
butterflies (Danaus plexippus) live in the eastern United States in the warmer month s and migrate to Mexico and the southern
United States in the wintertime. Some species of mammals also make migratory forays. Reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) travel about
5,000 km (3,100 mi) each year to find food. Amphibians and reptiles are more limited in their distribution because they lack
migratory ability. Not all animals that can migrate do so: migration carries risk and comes at a high energy cost.
Some animals hibernate or estivate to survive hostile t emperatures. Hibernation enables animals to survive cold conditions, and
estivation allows animals to survive the hostile con ditions of a hot, dry climate. Animals that hibernat e or estivate enter a state
known as torpor: a condition in which their metabolic rate is signif icantly lowered. This enables the animal to wait until i ts
environment better supports its survival. Some amphi bians, such as the wood frog (Rana sylvatica), have an antifreeze-like
chemical in their cells, which retains the cells’ integrity and prevents them from bursting.
Water
Water is required by all living things because it is cri tical for cellular processes. Since terrestrial organism s lose water to the
environment by simple diffusion, they have evolved many ad aptations to retain water.
Plants have a number of interesting features on their leave s, such as leaf hairs and a waxy cuticle, that serve to decr ease the rate
of water loss via transpiration.
Freshwater organisms are surrounded by water and are constant ly in danger of having water rush into their cells becaus e of
osmosis. Many adaptations of organisms living in freshwater environments have evolved to ensure that solute concentr ations in
their bodies remain within appropriate levels. One such ad aptation is the excretion of dilute urine.
Marine organisms are surrounded by water with a higher s olute concentration than the organism and, thus, are in dan ger of
losing water to the environment because of osmosis. These organisms have morphological and physiological adapt ations to
retain water and release solutes into the environment. For example, Marine iguanas (Amblyrhynchus cristatus), sneeze out water
vapor that is high in salt in order to maintain solute conce ntrations within an acceptable range while swimming in the o cean and
eating marine plants.
Inorganic Nutrients and Soil
Inorganic nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, are important in the distribution and abundance of living things. Plants
obtain these inorganic nutrients from the soil when wa ter moves into the plant through the roots. Therefore, soil structure (particle
size of soil components), soil pH, and soil nutrient co ntent play an important role in the distribution of plants. Animals obtain
inorganic nutrients from the food they consume. Theref ore, animal distributions are related to the distributi on of what they eat. In
some cases, animals will follow their food resource as it mo ves through the environment.
Other Aquatic Factors
Some abiotic factors, such as oxygen, are important in aquatic ecosystems as well as terre strial environments. Terrestrial animals
obtain oxygen from the air they breathe. Oxygen avail ability can be an issue for organisms living at very high elevations, however,
where there are fewer molecules of oxygen in the air. In aquatic systems, the concentration of dissolved oxygen is related to water
temperature and the speed at which the water moves. Co ld water has more dissolved oxygen than warmer water. In addition,
salinity, current, and tide can be important abiotic fa ctors in aquatic ecosystems.
Other Terrestrial Factors
Wind can be an important abiotic factor because it infl uences the rate of evaporation and transpiration. The physical force of wind
is also important because it can move soil, water, or other a biotic factors, as well as an ecosystem’s organisms.

24.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70902Fire is another terrestrial factor that can be an impor tant agent of disturbance in terrestrial ecosystems. Some organisms are adapted
to fire and, thus, require the high heat associated wi th fire to complete a part of their life cycle. For example, the jack pine—a
coniferous tree—requires heat from fire for its see d cones to open (Figure). Through the burning of pine needles, fire adds
nitrogen to the soil and limits competition by destroyi ng undergrowth.
Figure: The mature cones of the jack pine (Pinus banksiana) open only when exposed to high temperatures, such as during a
forest fire. A fire is likely to kill most vegetation, so a seedling that germinates after a fire is more lik ely to receive ample sunlight
than one that germinates under normal conditions. (cr edit: USDA. “Pinus banksiana” by OpenStax is licensed und er CC BY 4.0)
Abiotic Factors Influencing Plant Growth
Temperature and moisture are important influences o n plant production (primary productivity) and the amount of organic matter
available as food (net primary productivity). Net primary productivity is an estimation of all o f the organic matter available as
food; it is calculated as the total amount of carbo n fixed per year minus the amount that is oxidized du ring cellular respiration. In
terrestrial environments, net primary productivity is estimated by measuring the aboveground biomass p er unit area, which is the
total mass of living plants, excluding roots. This mean s that a large percentage of plant biomass that exist s underground is not
included in this measurement. Net primary productivi ty is an important variable when considering differe nces in biomes. Very
productive biomes have a high level of aboveground bio mass.
Annual biomass production is directly related to the abiotic components of the environment. Environments with the greatest
amount of biomass have conditions in which photosynthe sis, plant growth, and the resulting net primary product ivity are
optimized. The climate of these areas is warm and wet. Photosynthesis can proceed at a high rate, enzymes can work most
efficiently, and stomata can remain open without the r isk of excessive transpiration; together, these facto rs lead to the maximal
amount of carbon dioxide (CO) moving into the plant, resulting in high biomass production. The abovegro und biomass produces
several important resources for other living things, including habitat and food. Conversely, dry and co ld environments have lower
photosynthetic rates and therefore less biomass. The animal communities living there will also be affected by the decrease in
available food.
Summary
Biogeography is the study of the geographic distribu tion of living things and the abiotic factors that af fect their distribution.
Endemic species are species that are naturally found o nly in a specific geographic area. The distribution of living things is
influenced by several environmental factors that are, in part, controlled by the latitude or elevation a t which an organism is found.
Ocean upwelling and spring and fall turnovers are impo rtant processes regulating the distribution of nutrie nts and other abiotic
factors important in aquatic ecosystems. Energy sourc es, temperature, water, inorganic nutrients, and soil ar e factors limiting the
distribution of living things in terrestrial systems. Ne t primary productivity is a measure of the amount of biomass produced by a
biome.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
24.2: Biogeography is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

24.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7090324.3: Terrestrial Biomes
The Earth’s biomes are categorized into two major groups: terrestrial and aquatic. Terrestrial biomes are based on land, while
aquatic biomes include both ocean and freshwater biom es. The eight major terrestrial biomes on Earth are ea ch distinguished by
characteristic temperatures and amount of precipitat ion. Comparing the annual totals of precipitation and fluctuations in
precipitation from one biome to another provides cl ues as to the importance of abiotic factors in the d istribution of biomes.
Temperature variation on a daily and seasonal basis is also important for predicting the geographic dist ribution of the biome and the
vegetation type in the biome. The distribution of t hese biomes shows that the same biome can occur in ge ographically distinct areas
with similar climates (Figure).
Figure: Each of the world’s major biomes is distinguished by ch aracteristic temperatures and amounts of precipitation. Polar
ice and mountains are also shown. (credit: “biome distr ibution” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Tropical Wet Forest
Tropical wet forests are also referred to as tropical rainforests. This biome is found in equatorial regions (Figure). The
vegetation is characterized by plants with broad lea ves that fall off throughout the year. Unlike the tree s of deciduous forests, the
trees in this biome do not have a seasonal loss of l eaves associated with variations in temperature and su nlight; these forests are
“evergreen” year-round.
The temperature and sunlight profiles of tropical we t forests are very stable in comparison to that of ot her terrestrial biomes, with
the temperatures ranging from 20 °C to 34 °C (68 °F to 93 °F). When one compares the annual temperature variation of tropical
wet forests with that of other forest biomes, the lack of seasonal temperature variation in the tropical we t forest becomes apparent.
This lack of seasonality leads to year-round plant g rowth, rather than the seasonal (spring, summer, and fall) growth seen in other
biomes. In contrast to other ecosystems, tropical eco systems do not have long days and short days during the yearly cycle. Instead,
a constant daily amount of sunlight (11–12 hrs per da y) provides more solar radiation, thereby, a longer period of time for plant
growth.
The annual rainfall in tropical wet forests ranges fro m 125 to 660 cm (50–200 in) with some monthly variati on. While sunlight and
temperature remain fairly consistent, annual rainfall is highly variable. Tropical wet forests have wet mon ths in which there can be
more than 30 cm (11–12 in) of precipitation, as well as dry months in which there is fewer than 10 cm (3.5 in) of rainfall. However,
the driest month of a tropical wet forest still exceeds the annual rainfall of some other biomes, such as deserts.
Tropical wet forests have high net primary productiv ity because the annual temperatures and precipitati on values in these areas are
ideal for plant growth. Therefore, the extensive bioma ss present in the tropical wet forest leads to plant c ommunities with very high
species diversities (Figure). Tropical wet forests hav e more species of trees than any other biome; on avera ge between 100
and 300 species of trees are present in a single he ctare (2.5 acres) of South America. One way to visualize this is to compare the
distinctive horizontal layers within the tropical wet forest biome. On the forest floor is a sparse layer of plants and decaying plant
matter. Above that is an understory of short shrubby foliage. A layer of trees rises above this underst ory and is topped by a closed
upper canopy—the uppermost overhead layer of branche s and leaves. Some additional trees emerge through t his closed upper
canopy. These layers provide diverse and complex ha bitats for the variety of plants, fungi, animals, a nd other organisms within the
tropical wet forests. For instance, epiphytes are plan ts that grow on other plants, which typically are not harmed. Epiphytes are
found throughout tropical wet forest biomes. Many spec ies of animals use the variety of plants and the comp lex structure of the
tropical wet forests for food and shelter. Some organi sms live several meters above ground and have adapt ed to this arboreal
lifestyle.

24.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70903
Figure: Tropical wet forests, such as these forests of Madre de D ios, Peru, near the Amazon River, have high species
diversity. (credit: Roosevelt Garcia. “Tropical wet f orests” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Savannas
Savannas are grasslands with scattered trees, and they are l ocated in Africa, South America, and northern Australia (Figure).
Savannas are hot, tropical areas with temperatures avera ging from 24 °C to 29 °C (75 °F to 84 °F) and an annu al rainfall of 10–40
cm (3.9–15.7 in). Savannas have an extensive dry seaso n; for this reason, forest trees do not grow as well as t hey do in the tropical
wet forest (or other forest biomes). As a result, within t he grasses and forbs (herbaceous flowering plants) that dominate the
savanna, there are relatively few trees (Figure). Sinc e fire is an important source of disturbance in this biome, plants have
evolved well-developed root systems that allow them to qui ckly re-sprout after a fire.
Figure: Savannas, like this one in Taita Hills Wildlife Sanctu ary in Kenya, are dominated by grasses. (credit: Christ opher T.
Cooper. “Savannas” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Subtropical Deserts
Subtropical deserts exist between 15 ° and 30 ° north and south latitud e and are centered on the Tropics of Cancer and Capr icorn
(Figure). This biome is very dry; in some years, evapo ration exceeds precipitation. Subtropical hot deserts can have daytime
soil surface temperatures above 60 °C (140 °F) and ni ghttime temperatures approaching 0 °C (32 °F). In co ld deserts, temperatures
can be as high as 25 °C and can drop below -30 °C (-2 2 °F). Subtropical deserts are characterized by low annua l precipitation of
fewer than 30 cm (12 in) with little monthly variatio n and lack of predictability in rainfall. In some c ases, the annual rainfall can be
as low as 2 cm (0.8 in) in subtropical deserts located in ce ntral Australia (“the Outback”) and northern Africa.
The vegetation and low animal diversity of this biome are closely related to this low and unpredictable pr ecipitation. Very dry
deserts lack perennial vegetation that lives from on e year to the next; instead, many plants are annual s that grow quickly and
reproduce when rainfall does occur, then they die. Ma ny other plants in these areas are characterized by having a number of
adaptations that conserve water, such as deep roots, reduced foliage, and water-storing stems (Figure). Seed plants in the
desert produce seeds that can be in dormancy for ext ended periods between rains. Adaptations in desert anima ls include nocturnal
behavior and burrowing.

24.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70903
Figure: To reduce water loss, many desert plants have tiny lea ves or no leaves at all. The leaves of ocotillo (Fouquieria
splendens), shown here in the Sonora Desert near Gila Bend, Ar izona, appear only after rainfall, and then are shed. (credit:
“Subtropical deserts” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Chaparral
The chaparral is also called the scrub forest and is found in California, along the Mediterranean Se a, and along the southern coast
of Australia (Figure). The annual rainfall in this bi ome ranges from 65 cm to 75 cm (25.6–29.5 in), and th e majority of the
rain falls in the winter. Summers are very dry and man y chaparral plants are dormant during the summertim e. The chaparral
vegetation, shown in Figure, is dominated by shrubs an d is adapted to periodic fires, with some plants prod ucing seeds that
only germinate after a hot fire. The ashes left behin d after a fire are rich in nutrients like nitrogen that fertilize the soil and promote
plant regrowth.
Figure: The chaparral is dominated by shrubs. (credit: Miguel Vieira. “chaparral” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Temperate Grasslands
Temperate grasslands are found throughout central North America, where the y are also known as prairies; they are also in
Eurasia, where they are known as steppes (Figure). Tempe rate grasslands have pronounced annual fluctuations in
temperature with hot summers and cold winters. The annual temperature variation produces specific growing seaso ns for plants.
Plant growth is possible when temperatures are warm eno ugh to sustain plant growth and when ample water is ava ilable, which
occurs in the spring, summer, and fall. During much of the winter, temperatures are low, and water, which is st ored in the form of
ice, is not available for plant growth.
Annual precipitation ranges from 25 cm to 75 cm (9.8– 29.5 in). Because of relatively lower annual precipit ation in temperate
grasslands, there are few trees except for those foun d growing along rivers or streams. The dominant vege tation tends to consist of
grasses and some prairies sustain populations of gra zing animals Figure. The vegetation is very dense an d the soils are fertile
because the subsurface of the soil is packed with the roots and rhizomes (underground stems) of these grasses. The roots and
rhizomes act to anchor plants into the ground and reple nish the organic material (humus) in the soil when they die and decay.

24.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70903
Figure: The American bison (Bison bison), more commonly called the buffalo, is a grazing ma mmal that once populated
American prairies in huge numbers. (credit: Jack Dykin ga, USDA Agricultural Research Service. “Temperate gra sslands” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Fires, mainly caused by lightning, are a natural distu rbance in temperate grasslands. When fire is suppressed in temperate
grasslands, the vegetation eventually converts to sc rub and dense forests. Often, the restoration or mana gement of temperate
grasslands requires the use of controlled burns to supp ress the growth of trees and maintain the grasses.
Temperate Forests
Temperate forests are the most common biome in eastern North America, We stern Europe, Eastern Asia, Chile, and New Zealand
(Figure). This biome is found throughout mid-latitude regions. Temperatures range between -30 °C and 30 °C (-22 °F to 86
°F) and drop to below freezing on an annual basis. Th ese temperatures mean that temperate forests have de fined growing seasons
during the spring, summer, and early fall. Precipitati on is relatively constant throughout the year and ra nges between 75 cm and
150 cm (29.5–59 in).
Because of the moderate annual rainfall and tempera tures, deciduous trees are the dominant plant in thi s biome (Figure).
Deciduous trees lose their leaves each fall and remain leafless in the winter. Thus, no photosynthesis occurs in the deci duous trees
during the dormant winter period. Each spring, new lea ves appear as the temperature increases. Because of the dormant period, the
net primary productivity of temperate forests is le ss than that of tropical wet forests. In addition, tempe rate forests show less
diversity of tree species than tropical wet forest biomes.
Figure: Deciduous trees are the dominant plant in the temper ate forest. (credit: Oliver Herold. “Temperate forest s” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
The trees of the temperate forests leaf out and shade much of the ground; however, this biome is more open than tropical wet
forests because trees in the temperate forests do n ot grow as tall as the trees in tropical wet forests. The soils of the temperate
forests are rich in inorganic and organic nutrients. This is due to the thick layer of leaf litter on f orest floors. As this leaf litter
decays, nutrients are returned to the soil. The leaf litter also protects soil from erosion, insulates the ground, and provides habitats
for invertebrates (such as the pill bug or roly-poly, Armadillidium vulgare) and their predators, such as the red-backed salam ander
(Plethodon cinereus).
Boreal Forests
The boreal forest, also known as taiga or coniferous forest, is found south of the Arctic Circle and across most of Canada, Alaska,
Russia, and northern Europe (Figure). This biome has c old, dry winters and short, cool, wet summers. The ann ual
precipitation is from 40 cm to 100 cm (15.7–39 in) a nd usually takes the form of snow. Little evaporation occurs because of the
cold temperatures.
The long and cold winters in the boreal forest have le d to the predominance of cold-tolerant cone-bearing plants. These are
evergreen coniferous trees like pines, spruce, and fir, which ret ain their needle-shaped leaves year-round. Evergreen trees can

24.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70903photosynthesize earlier in the spring than deciduous trees because less energy from the sun is required t o warm a needle-like leaf
than a broad leaf. This benefits evergreen trees, whi ch grow faster than deciduous trees in the boreal fo rest. In addition, soils in
boreal forest regions tend to be acidic with little available nitrogen. Leaves are a nitrogen-rich stru cture and deciduous trees must
produce a new set of these nitrogen-rich structures eac h year. Therefore, coniferous trees that retain nitrog en-rich needles may have
a competitive advantage over the broad-leafed deciduo us trees.
The net primary productivity of boreal forests is lowe r than that of temperate forests and tropical wet fore sts. The aboveground
biomass of boreal forests is high because these slow-g rowing tree species are long-lived and accumulate sta nding biomass over
time. Plant species diversity is less than that seen in te mperate forests and tropical wet forests. Boreal forests lack the pronounced
elements of the layered forest structure seen in tr opical wet forests. The structure of a boreal forest is o ften only a tree layer and a
ground layer (Figure). When conifer needles are dro pped, they decompose more slowly than broad leaves; therefore, fewer
nutrients are returned to the soil to fuel plant growth.
Figure: The boreal forest (taiga) has low lying plants and co nifer trees. (credit: L.B. Brubaker. “boreal forest” by OpenStax
is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Arctic Tundra
The Arctic tundra lies north of the subarctic boreal forest and is loc ated throughout the Arctic regions of the northern h emisphere
(Figure). The average winter temperature is -34 °C (-34 °F) and the average summer temperature is from 3 °C to 12 °C (37
°F–52 °F). Plants in the arctic tundra have a very shor t growing season of approximately 10–12 weeks. However, dur ing this time,
there are almost 24 hours of daylight and plant growth is rapid. The annual precipitation of the Arctic tun dra is very low with little
annual variation in precipitation. And, as in the boreal fo rests, there is little evaporation due to the cold temp eratures.
Plants in the Arctic tundra are generally low to the gr ound (Figure). There is little species diversity, low ne t primary
productivity, and low aboveground biomass. The soils of the Arctic tundra may remain in a perennially fro zen state referred to as
permafrost. The permafrost makes it impossible for roots to penetrate deep into the soil and slows the d ecay of organic matter,
which inhibits the release of nutrients from organic matter. During the growing season, the ground of the Arc tic tundra can be
completely covered with plants or lichens.
Figure: Low-growing plants such as shrub willow dominate the t undra landscape, shown here in the Arctic National Wi ldlife
Refuge. (credit: USFWS Arctic National Wildlife Refug e. “Arctic tundra” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Summary
The Earth has terrestrial biomes and aquatic biomes. Aquatic biomes include both freshwater and marine env ironments. There are
eight major terrestrial biomes: tropical wet forests, savannas, subtropical deserts, chaparral, temperate grasslands, temperate forests,
boreal forests, and Arctic tundra. The same biome can occur in different geographic locations with simila r climates. Temperature
and precipitation, and variations in both, are key ab iotic factors that shape the composition of animal and plant communities in
terrestrial biomes. Some biomes, such as temperate gra sslands and temperate forests, have distinct seasons, with cold weather and

24.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70903hot weather alternating throughout the year. In warm, moist biomes, such as the tropical wet forest, net prima ry productivity is
high, as warm temperatures, abundant water, and a year- round growing season fuel plant growth. Other biomes, s uch as deserts and
tundra, have low primary productivity due to extreme tem peratures and a shortage of available water.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 25, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

24.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7090424.4: Aquatic Biomes
Abiotic Factors Influencing Aquatic Biomes
Like terrestrial biomes, aquatic biomes are influen ced by a series of abiotic factors. The aquatic medium —water— has different
physical and chemical properties than air, however. E ven if the water in a pond or other body of water is p erfectly clear (there are
no suspended particles), water, on its own, absorbs light. As one descends into a deep body of water, there will eventually be a
depth which the sunlight cannot reach. While there ar e some abiotic and biotic factors in a terrestrial e cosystem that might obscure
light (like fog, dust, or insect swarms), usually thes e are not permanent features of the environment. Th e importance of light in
aquatic biomes is central to the communities of organ isms found in both freshwater and marine ecosystems. In freshwater systems,
stratification due to differences in density is perhaps the most cri tical abiotic factor and is related to the energy a spects of light.
The thermal properties of water (rates of heating and cooling) are significant to the function of marine systems an d have major
impacts on global climate and weather patterns. Marine systems are also influenced by large-scale physical water movements, such
as currents; these are less important in most freshwater lakes.
The ocean is categorized into several areas or zones (Figure). All of the ocean’s open water is referred to a s the pelagic
realm (or zone). The benthic realm (or zone) extends along the ocean bottom from the sh oreline to the deepest parts of the ocean
floor. Within the pelagic realm is the photic zone, which is the portion of the ocean that light can p enetrate (approximately 200 m
or 650 ft). At depths greater than 200 m, light canno t penetrate; thus, this is referred to as the aphotic zone. The majority of the
ocean is aphotic and lacks sufficient light for phot osynthesis. The deepest part of the ocean, the Challe nger Deep (in the Mariana
Trench, located in the western Pacific Ocean), is about 11,000 m (about 6.8 mi) deep. To give some perspectiv e on the depth of this
trench, the ocean is, on average, 4267 m or 14,000 ft dee p. These realms and zones are relevant to freshwater lakes a s well.
Figure: The ocean is divided into different zones based on wa ter depth and distance from the shoreline. (credit: “ Ocean
zones” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Marine Biomes
The ocean is the largest marine biome. It is a continuous body of saltwater that is relatively uniform in chemical c omposition; it is
a weak solution of mineral salts and decayed biologi cal matter. Within the ocean, coral reefs are the second kind of marine biome.
Estuaries, coastal areas where salt water and fresh water mix, form a th ird unique marine biome.
Ocean
The physical diversity of the ocean is a significant influence on plants, animals, and other organisms. T he ocean is categorized into
different zones based on how far light reaches into th e water. Each zone has a distinct group of species ada pted to the biotic and
abiotic conditions particular to that zone.
The intertidal zone, which is the zone between high and low tide, is the o ceanic region that is closest to land (Figure).
Generally, most people think of this portion of the o cean as a sandy beach. In some cases, the intertidal zone is indeed a sandy

24.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70904beach, but it can also be rocky or muddy. The interti dal zone is an extremely variable environment becau se of tides. Organisms are
exposed to air and sunlight at low tide and are under water most of the time, especially during high tide. Therefore, living things
that thrive in the intertidal zone are adapted to b eing dry for long periods of time. The shore of the intertidal zone is also repeatedly
struck by waves, and the organisms found there are adapt ed to withstand damage from the pounding action of t he waves (Figure
). The exoskeletons of shoreline crustaceans (such a s the shore crab, Carcinus maenas) are tough and protect them from
desiccation (drying out) and wave damage. Another conse quence of the pounding waves is that few algae and pl ants establish
themselves in the constantly moving rocks, sand, or mud.
Figure: Sea urchins, mussel shells, and starfish are often found i n the intertidal zone, shown here in Kachemak Bay, A laska.
(credit: NOAA. “seastars” by OpenStax is licensed under C C BY 4.0)
The neritic zone (Figure) extends from the intertidal zone to depths of about 200 m (or 650 ft) at the edge of the conti nental
shelf. Since light can penetrate this depth, photosynt hesis can occur in the neritic zone. The water here c ontains silt and is welloxygenated, low in pressure, and stable in temperature. Phytoplankton and floating Sargassum (a type of free-floating marine
seaweed) provide a habitat for some sea life found i n the neritic zone. Zooplankton, protists, small fishes, and shrimp are found in
the neritic zone and are the base of the food chain for m ost of the world’s fisheries.
Beyond the neritic zone is the open ocean area known as the oceanic zone (Figure). Within the oceanic zone, there is thermal
stratification where warm and cold waters mix because o f ocean currents. Abundant plankton serves as the bas e of the food chain
for larger animals such as whales and dolphins. Nutrients are scarce and this is a relatively less productive pa rt of the marine
biome. When photosynthetic organisms and the protist s and animals that feed on them die, their bodies fall to the bottom of the
ocean where they remain; unlike freshwater lakes, the op en ocean lacks a process for bringing the organic nut rients back up to the
surface. The majority of organisms in the aphotic z one include sea cucumbers (phylum Echinodermata) an d other organisms that
survive on the nutrients contained in the dead bodies o f organisms in the photic zone.
Beneath the pelagic zone is the benthic realm, the deepwater region beyond the continental shelf (Figure). The bottom of the
benthic realm is comprised of sand, silt, and dead or ganisms. Temperature decreases, remaining above fre ezing, as water depth
increases. This is a nutrient-rich portion of the oc ean because of the dead organisms that fall from the upper layers of the ocean.
Because of this high level of nutrients, a diversity o f fungi, sponges, sea anemones, marine worms, sea stars, fishes, and bacteria
exist.
The deepest part of the ocean is the abyssal zone, which is at depths of 4000 m or greater. The abyssa l zone (Figure) is very
cold and has very high pressure, high oxygen content, and low nutrient content. There are a variety of inve rtebrates and fishes
found in this zone, but the abyssal zone does not ha ve plants because of the lack of light. Hydrothermal vents are found primarily
in the abyssal zone; chemosynthetic bacteria utilize the hydrogen sulfide and other mi nerals emitted from the vents. These
chemosynthetic bacteria use hydrogen sulfide as an energy so urce and serve as the base of the food chain found in the abyssal zone.
Coral Reefs
Coral reefs are ocean ridges formed by marine invertebrates liv ing in warm shallow waters within the photic zone of th e ocean.
They are found within 30˚ north and south of the equ ator. The Great Barrier Reef is a well-known reef system located several miles
off the northeastern coast of Australia. Other coral re ef systems are fringing islands, which are directly ad jacent to land, or atolls,
which are circular reef systems surrounding a former l andmass that is now underwater. The coral organisms (me mbers of phylum
Cnidaria) are colonies of saltwater polyps that secr ete a calcium carbonate skeleton. These calcium-rich skeletons slowly
accumulate, forming the underwater reef (Figure). Cor als found in shallower waters (at a depth of approxima tely 60 m or
about 200 ft) have a mutualistic relationship with pho tosynthetic unicellular algae. The relationship pro vides corals with the
majority of the nutrition and the energy they requi re. The waters in which these corals live are nutrition ally poor and, without this

24.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70904mutualism, it would not be possible for large corals t o grow. Some corals living in deeper and colder water do not have a
mutualistic relationship with algae; these corals attain e nergy and nutrients using stinging cells on their tenta cles to capture prey.
It is estimated that more than 4,000 fish species inh abit coral reefs. These fishes can feed on coral, th e cryptofauna (invertebrates
found within the calcium carbonate substrate of the coral reefs), or the seaweed and algae that are associ ated with the coral. In
addition, some fish species inhabit the boundaries of a coral reef; these species include predators, her bivores, or planktivores.
Predators are animal species that hunt and are carnivores or “flesh-eaters.” Herbivores eat plant material, and planktivores eat
plankton.
Figure: Coral reefs are formed by the calcium carbonate skel etons of coral organisms, which are marine invertebrat es in the
phylum Cnidaria. (credit: Terry Hughes. “Coral reefs” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Evolution Connection – Global Decline of Coral Reefs
It takes a long time to build a coral reef. The ani mals that create coral reefs have evolved over milli ons of years, continuing to
slowly deposit the calcium carbonate that forms their characteristic ocean homes. Bathed in warm tropical wa ters, the coral animals
and their symbiotic algal partners evolved to survive at the upper limit of ocean water temperature.
Together, climate change and human activity pose dua l threats to the long-term survival of the world’s cor al reefs. As global
warming due to fossil fuel emissions raises ocean tem peratures, coral reefs are suffering. The excessive war mth causes the reefs to
expel their symbiotic, food-producing algae, resulting in a phenomenon known as bleaching. When bleaching occurs, the reefs lose
much of their characteristic color as the algae and the cor al animals die if the loss of the symbiotic zooxanthel lae is prolonged.
Rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide further t hreaten the corals in other ways; as CO dissolves in ocean waters, it lowers
the pH and increases ocean acidity. As acidity increases, it interferes with the calcifica tion that normally occurs as coral animals
build their calcium carbonate homes.
When a coral reef begins to die, species diversity plum mets as animals lose food and shelter. Coral reefs are also economically
important tourist destinations, so the decline of cora l reefs poses a serious threat to coastal economies.
Human population growth has damaged corals in other ways, too. As human coastal populations increase, the runoff of sediment
and agricultural chemicals has increased, too, causi ng some of the once-clear tropical waters to become cloudy. At the same time,
overfishing of popular fish species has allowed the predat or species that eat corals to go unchecked.
Although a rise in global temperatures of 1–2˚C (a c onservative scientific projection) in the coming deca des may not seem large, it
is very significant to this biome. When change occur s rapidly, species can become extinct before evoluti on leads to new
adaptations. Many scientists believe that global warm ing, with its rapid (in terms of evolutionary time) and inexorable increases in
temperature, is tipping the balance beyond the point at whi ch many of the world’s coral reefs can recover.
Estuaries: Where the Ocean Meets Fresh Water
Estuaries are biomes that occur where a source of fresh water, suc h as a river, meets the ocean. Therefore, both fresh water and salt
water are found in the same vicinity; mixing results in a diluted (brackish) saltwater. Estuaries form protected areas where many of
the young offspring of crustaceans, mollusks, and fish begin their lives. Salinity is a very imp ortant factor that influences the
organisms and the adaptations of the organisms found in estuaries. The salinity of estuaries varies and is ba sed on the rate of flow2

24.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70904of its freshwater sources. Once or twice a day, high tides bring salt water into the estuary. Low tides occurri ng at the same
frequency reverse the current of salt water.
The short-term and rapid variation in salinity due to the mixing of fresh water and salt water is a diff icult physiological challenge
for the plants and animals that inhabit estuaries. Many estuarine plant species are halophytes: plants that can tolerate salty
conditions. Halophytic plants are adapted to deal with the salinity resulting from saltwater on their roots or from sea spray. In some
halophytes, filters in the roots remove the salt from the water that the plant absorbs. Other plants are able to pump oxygen into their
roots. Animals, such as mussels and clams (phylum Mollusc a), have developed behavioral adaptations that expe nd a lot of energy
to function in this rapidly changing environment. W hen these animals are exposed to low salinity, they st op feeding, close their
shells, and switch from aerobic respiration (in which t hey use gills) to anaerobic respiration (a process t hat does not require
oxygen). When high tide returns to the estuary, the salinity and oxygen content of the water increases and these animals open their
shells, begin feeding, and return to aerobic respiration.
Freshwater Biomes
Freshwater biomes include lakes and ponds (standing water) as well as rivers and streams (flowing water). They also include
wetlands, which will be discussed later. Humans rely on freshwater biomes to provide aquatic resources for drinking wat er, crop
irrigation, sanitation, and industry. These various ro les and human benefits are referred to as ecosystem se rvices. Lakes and ponds
are found in terrestrial landscapes and are, therefore, con nected with abiotic and biotic factors influencing these terrestrial biomes.
Lakes and Ponds
Lakes and ponds can range in area from a few square meters to thousan ds of square kilometers. Temperature is an important
abiotic factor affecting living things found in lak es and ponds. In the summer, thermal stratification of lakes and ponds occurs when
the upper layer of water is warmed by the sun and does not mix with deeper, cooler water. Light can penetrate within the photic
zone of the lake or pond. Phytoplankton (algae and cyanobacteria) are found here and carry out photosynthesis, providing the base
of the food web of lakes and ponds. Zooplankton, such as rotifers and small crustaceans, consume thes e phytoplankton. At the
bottom of lakes and ponds, bacteria in the aphotic zo ne break down dead organisms that sink to the bottom.
Nitrogen and phosphorus are important limiting nutri ents in lakes and ponds. Because of this, they are determining factors in the
amount of phytoplankton growth in lakes and ponds. W hen there is a large input of nitrogen and phosphor us (from sewage and
runoff from fertilized lawns and farms, for example), the growth of algae skyrockets, resulting in a large a ccumulation of algae
called an algal bloom. Algal blooms (Figure) can become so extensive that they reduce light penetration in water. As a result,
the lake or pond becomes aphotic and photosynthetic plants cannot survive. When the algae die and decompose, severe oxygen
depletion of the water occurs. Fishes and other organis ms that require oxygen are then more likely to die, and resulting dead zones
are found across the globe. Lake Erie and the Gulf of Mexico represent freshwater and marine habitats where p hosphorus control
and storm water runoff pose significant environmental ch allenges.
Figure: The uncontrolled growth of algae in this lake has re sulted in an algal bloom. (credit: Jeremy Nettleton. “uncontrolled
growth of algae” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)

24.4.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70904Rivers and Streams
Rivers and streams are continuously moving bodies of water that carry large amounts of water from the source, or headwater, t o a
lake or ocean. The largest rivers include the Nile Ri ver in Africa, the Amazon River in South America, and th e Mississippi River in
North America.
Abiotic features of rivers and streams vary along the length of the river or stream. Streams begin at a point of origin referred to as
source water. The source water is usually cold, low in nutrients, and clear. The channel (the width of the river or stream) is
narrower than at any other place along the length of the river or stream. Because of this, the current is o ften faster here than at any
other point of the river or stream.
The fast-moving water results in minimal silt accumu lation at the bottom of the river or stream; theref ore, the water is clear.
Photosynthesis here is mostly attributed to algae th at are growing on rocks; the swift current inhibits th e growth of phytoplankton.
An additional input of energy can come from leaves o r other organic material that falls into the river o r stream from trees and other
plants that border the water. When the leaves decomp ose, the organic material and nutrients in the leav es are returned to the water.
Plants and animals have adapted to this fast-moving wate r. For instance, leeches (phylum Annelida) have elongate d bodies and
suckers on both ends. These suckers attach to the su bstrate, keeping the leech anchored in place. Freshwate r trout species (phylum
Chordata) are important predators in these fast-moving ri vers and streams.
As the river or stream flows away from the source, the wi dth of the channel gradually widens and the current slows. This slowmoving water, caused by the gradient decrease and th e volume increase as tributaries unite, has more sedimentation.
Phytoplankton can also be suspended in slow-moving water. Therefore, the water will not be as clear as it is nea r the source. The
water is also warmer. Worms (phylum Annelida) and insect s (phylum Arthropoda) can be found burrowing into the mud. The
higher-order predator vertebrates (phylum Chordata) include waterfowl, frogs, and fishes. These predators m ust find food in these
slow-moving, sometimes murky, waters, and, unlike the trou t in the waters at the source, these vertebrates may not be able to use
vision as their primary sense to find food. Instead, they ar e more likely to use taste or chemical cues to find prey.
Wetlands
Wetlands are environments in which the soil is either permane ntly or periodically saturated with water. Wetlands are different from
lakes because wetlands are shallow bodies of water whereas l akes vary in depth. Emergent vegetation consists of we tland plants
that are rooted in the soil but have portions of le aves, stems, and flowers extending above the water’s sur face. There are several
types of wetlands including marshes, swamps, bogs, mud flats, and salt marshes (Figure). The three shared char acteristics
among these types—what makes them wetlands—are their hydro logy, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydric soils.
Figure: Located in southern Florida, Everglades National Park is a vast array of wetland environments, including saw grass
marshes, cypress swamps, and estuarine mangrove forests. Her e, a great egret walks among cypress trees. (credit: NP S.
“Everglades National Park” by OpenStax is licensed und er CC BY 4.0)
Freshwater marshes and swamps are characterized by slow and steady water flow. Bogs develop in depressions where water flow
is low or nonexistent. Bogs usually occur in areas where there is a clay bottom with poor percolation. Percolation is the movement
of water through the pores in the soil or rocks. The water found in a bog is stagnant and oxygen-deplete d because the oxygen that is

24.4.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70904used during the decomposition of organic matter is no t replaced. As the oxygen in the water is depleted, dec omposition slows. This
leads to organic acids and other acids building up an d lowering the pH of the water. At a lower pH, nitrogen be comes unavailable
to plants. This creates a challenge for plants because nitrogen is an important limiting resource. Some type s of bog plants (such as
sundews, pitcher plants, and Venus flytraps) capture in sects and extract nitrogen from their bodies. Bogs h ave low net primary
productivity because the water found in bogs has low levels of nitrogen and oxygen.
Summary
Aquatic ecosystems include both saltwater and freshwater biomes. The abiotic factors important for the struct uring of aquatic
ecosystems can be different than those seen in terre strial systems. Sunlight is a driving force behind the structure of forests and also
is an important factor in bodies of water, especially those that are very deep, because of the role of pho tosynthesis in sustaining
certain organisms. Density and temperature shape the stru cture of aquatic systems. Oceans may be thought of as consisting of
different zones based on water depth and distance fro m the shoreline and light penetrance. Different kinds of organisms are adapted
to the conditions found in each zone. Coral reefs are unique marine ecosystems that are home to a wide var iety of species. Estuaries
are found where rivers meet the ocean; their shallow wa ters provide nourishment and shelter for young crust aceans, mollusks,
fishes, and many other species. Freshwater biomes incl ude lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and wetlands. Bogs ar e an interesting type
of wetland characterized by standing water, lower pH, and a lack of nitrogen.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
24.4: Aquatic Biomes is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

24.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7090524.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate Change
All biomes are universally affected by global conditi ons, such as climate, that ultimately shape each biome ’s environment.
Scientists who study climate have noted a series of ma rked changes that have gradually become increasingl y evident during the last
sixty years. Global climate change is the term used to describe altered global weather p atterns, including a worldwide increase in
temperature, due largely to rising levels of atmospher ic carbon dioxide.
Climate and Weather
A common misconception about global climate change i s that a specific weather event occurring in a partic ular region (for
example, a very cool week in June in central Indiana) is evidence of global climate change. However, a cold we ek in June is a
weather-related event and not a climate-related one. These misconceptions often arise because of confusio n over the terms climate
and weather.
Climate refers to the long-term, predictable atmospheric condi tions of a specific area. The climate of a biome is ch aracterized by
having consistent temperature and annual rainfall r anges. Climate does not address the amount of rain tha t fell on one particular
day in a biome or the colder-than-average temperatu res that occurred on one day. In contrast, weather refers to the conditions of
the atmosphere during a short period of time. Weathe r forecasts are usually made for 48-hour cycles. Long- range weather forecasts
are available but can be unreliable.
To better understand the difference between climate and weather, imagine that you are planning an outdoo r event in northern
Wisconsin. You would be thinking about climate when you plan the event in the summer rather than t he winter because you have
long-term knowledge that any given Saturday in the mo nths of May to August would be a better choice for an outdoor event in
Wisconsin than any given Saturday in January. However, you cannot determine the specific day that the event sh ould be held on
because it is difficult to accurately predict the weath er on a specific day. Climate can be considered “averag e” weather.
Global Climate Change
Climate change can be understood by approaching three a reas of study:
current and past global climate change
causes of past and present-day global climate change
ancient and current results of climate change
It is helpful to keep these three different aspects of climate change clearly separated when consuming med ia reports about global
climate change. It is common for reports and discuss ions about global climate change to confuse the dat a showing that Earth’s
climate is changing with the factors that drive this clim ate change.
Evidence for Global Climate Change
Since scientists cannot go back in time to directly measure climatic variables, such as average tempera ture and precipitation, they
must instead indirectly measure temperature. To do this, scientists rely on historical evidence of Earth’s past climate.
Antarctic ice cores are a key example of such evidence. These ice core s are samples of polar ice obtained by means of dril ls that
reach thousands of meters into ice sheets or high mo untain glaciers. Viewing the ice cores is like travelin g backward through time;
the deeper the sample, the earlier the time period. T rapped within the ice are bubbles of air and other bi ological evidence that can
reveal temperature and carbon dioxide data. Antarctic ice cores have been collected and analyzed to indir ectly estimate the
temperature of the Earth over the past 400,000 years (Figure). The 0 °C on this graph refers to the long- term average.
Temperatures that are greater than 0 °C exceed Eart h’s long-term average temperature. Conversely, tempera tures that are less than 0
°C are less than Earth’s average temperature. This f igure shows that there have been periodic cycles of in creasing and decreasing
temperature.
Before the late 1800s, the Earth has been as much as 9 °C cooler and about 3 °C warmer. Note that the gra ph in Figure shows
that the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxid e has also risen and fallen in periodic cycles; note the relationship between
carbon dioxide concentration and temperature. Figure shows that carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere have historically
cycled between 180 and 300 parts per million (ppm) by vo lume.

24.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70905
Figure: Ice at the Russian V ostok station in East Antarctica wa s laid down over the course of 420,000 years and reach ed a
depth of over 3,000 m. By measuring the amount of CO trapped in the ice, scientists have determined past at mospheric CO
concentrations. Temperatures relative to modern day w ere determined from the amount of deuterium (an isot ope of hydrogen)
present. (credit: “CO and temp” by OpenStax is license d under CC BY 4.0)
Figure does not show the last 2,000 years with enough detail to compare the changes of Earth’s temperatur e during the last
400,000 years with the temperature change that has oc curred in the more recent past. Two significant tempe rature anomalies, or
irregularities, have occurred in the last 2000 years. These are the Medieval Climate Anomaly (or the Medie val Warm Period) and
the Little Ice Age. A third temperature anomaly align s with the Industrial Era. The Medieval Climate Anomaly occurred between
900 and 1300 AD. During this time period, many climate sc ientists think that slightly warmer weather condition s prevailed in many
parts of the world; the higher-than-average temperatu re changes varied between 0.10 °C and 0.20 °C above th e norm. Although
0.10 °C does not seem large enough to produce any n oticeable change, it did free seas of ice. Because o f this warming, the Vikings
were able to colonize Greenland.
The Little Ice Age was a cold period that occurred between 1550 AD and 185 0 AD. During this time, a slight cooling of a little
less than 1 °C was observed in North America, Europe, and possibly other areas of the Earth. This 1 °C change in global
temperature is a seemingly small deviation in tempe rature (as was observed during the Medieval Climate Anomaly); however, it
also resulted in noticeable changes. Historical accounts reveal a time of exceptionally harsh winters with much snow an d frost.
The Industrial Revolution, which began around 1750, was characterized by change s in much of human society. Advances in
agriculture increased the food supply, which improved the standard of living for people in Europe and th e United States. New
technologies were invented and provided jobs and che aper goods. These new technologies were powered using fossil fuels,
especially coal. The Industrial Revolution starting in the early n ineteenth century ushered in the beginning of the I ndustrial Era.
When fossil fuel is burned, carbon dioxide is released. With the beginning of the Industrial E ra, atmospheric carbon dioxide began
to rise (Figure).
Figure: The atmospheric concentration of CO has risen steadily since the beginning of industrialization. (credit: “ CO
1955-2005” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)2 2
2 2

24.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70905Current and Past Drivers of Global Climate Change
Since it is not possible to go back in time to directl y observe and measure climate, scientists use indire ct evidence to determine the
drivers, or factors, that may be responsible for climate c hange. The indirect evidence includes data collecte d using ice cores,
boreholes (a narrow shaft bored into the ground), tre e rings, glacier lengths, pollen remains, and ocean sed iments. The data shows a
correlation between the timing of temperature change s and drivers of climate change: before the Industri al Era (pre-1780), there
were three drivers of climate change that were not re lated to human activity or atmospheric gases. The f irst of these is the
Milankovitch cycles. The Milankovitch cycles describe the effects of sli ght changes in the Earth’s orbit on Earth’s climate. T he
length of the Milankovitch cycles ranges between 19,00 0 and 100,000 years. In other words, one could expect to see some
predictable changes in the Earth’s climate associated with changes in the Earth’s orbit at a minimum of every 1 9,000 years.
The variation in the sun’s intensity is the second natural factor responsible for climate change. Solar intensity is the amount of
solar power or energy the sun emits in a given amount of time. There is a direct relationship between sol ar intensity and
temperature. As solar intensity increases (or decreases), the Earth’s temperature correspondingly increase s (or decreases). Changes
in solar intensity have been proposed as one of several po ssible explanations for the Little Ice Age.
Finally, volcanic eruptions are a third natural driver of climate change. V olc anic eruptions can last a few days, but the solids an d
gases released during an eruption can influence the climate over a period of a few years, causing short- term climate changes. The
gases and solids released by volcanic eruptions can include carbon dioxide, water vapor, sulfur dioxide, h ydrogen sulfide,
hydrogen, and carbon monoxide. Generally, volcanic eru ptions cool the climate. This occurred in 1783 when vo lcanos in Iceland
erupted and caused the release of large volumes of sulfuric oxide. This led to haze-effect cooling, a glo bal phenomenon that occurs
when dust, ash, or other suspended particles block ou t sunlight and trigger lower global temperatures as a result; haze-effect
cooling usually extends for one or more years. In Eu rope and North America, haze-effect cooling produced s ome of the lowest
average winter temperatures on record in 1783 and 1784.
Greenhouse gases are probably the most significant drivers of the c limate. When heat energy from the sun strikes the Ea rth, gases
known as greenhouse gases trap the heat in the atmosp here, as do the glass panes of a greenhouse keep hea t from escaping. The
greenhouse gases that affect Earth include carbon dioxide, methane, water vapor, nitrous oxide, and ozone. Approximately half
of the radiation from the sun passes through these g ases in the atmosphere and strikes the Earth. This rad iation is converted into
thermal radiation on the Earth’s surface, and then a portion of that energy is re-radiated back into th e atmosphere. Greenhouse
gases, however, reflect much of the thermal energy ba ck to the Earth’s surface. The more greenhouse gases there are in the
atmosphere, the more thermal energy is reflected bac k to the Earth’s surface. Greenhouse gases absorb and emi t radiation and are
an important factor in the greenhouse effect: the warming of Earth due to carbon dioxide and oth er greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere.
Evidence supports the relationship between atmospheri c concentrations of carbon dioxide and temperature: as carbon dioxide rises,
global temperature rises. Since 1950, the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide has increased from ab out 280 ppm to 382
ppm in 2006. In 2011, the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration was 392 ppm. However, the planet would not be inhabitable
by current life forms if water vapor did not produce its dr astic greenhouse warming effect.
Scientists look at patterns in data and try to expla in differences or deviations from these patterns. The a tmospheric carbon dioxide
data reveal a historical pattern of carbon dioxide increasing and decreasing, cycling between a low of 180 ppm and a high of 300
ppm. Scientists have concluded that it took around 50,0 00 years for the atmospheric carbon dioxide level t o increase from its low
minimum concentration to its higher maximum concentr ation. However, starting recently, atmospheric carbon d ioxide
concentrations have increased beyond the historical maximum of 300 ppm. The current increases in atmos pheric carbon dioxide
have happened very quickly—in a matter of hundreds of years rather than thousands of years. What is the r eason for this difference
in the rate of change and the amount of increase in carbon dioxide? A key factor that must be recogniz ed when comparing the
historical data and the current data is the presenc e of modern human society; no other driver of climat e change has yielded changes
in atmospheric carbon dioxide levels at this rate or to this magnitude.
Human activity releases carbon dioxide and methane, t wo of the most important greenhouse gases, into the a tmosphere in several
ways. The primary mechanism that releases carbon diox ide is the burning of fossil fuels, such as gasoline, coal, and natural gas
(Figure). Deforestation, cement manufacture, animal ag riculture, the clearing of land, and the burning of forests are other
human activities that release carbon dioxide. Methane (CH) is produced when bacteria break down organic mat ter under4

24.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70905anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic conditions can happe n when organic matter is trapped underwater (such as in rice paddies) or in
the intestines of herbivores. Methane can also be rel eased from natural gas fields and the decomposition t hat occurs in landfills.
Another source of methane is the melting of clathrate s. Clathrates are frozen chunks of ice and methane found at the bo ttom of the
ocean. When the water warms, these chunks of ice melt and methane is released. As the ocean’s water temperatu re increases, the
rate at which clathrates melt is increasing, releasi ng even more methane. This leads to increased level s of methane in the
atmosphere, which further accelerates the rate of glo bal warming. This is an example of the positive feedbac k loop that is leading
to the rapid rate of increase in global temperatures.
Figure: The burning of fossil fuels in industry and by vehicle s releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the
atmosphere. (credit: “Pöllö”/Wikimedia Commons. “Pöllö ” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Documented Results of Climate Change: Past and Present
Scientists have geological evidence of the consequenc es of long-ago climate change. Modern-day phenomena such as retreating
glaciers and melting polar ice cause a continual rise in sea level. Meanwhile, changes in climate can negatively affe ct organisms.
Geological Climate Change
Global warming has been associated with at least one plan et-wide extinction event during the geological past. The Permian
extinction event occurred about 251 million years ago toward t he end of the roughly 50-million-year-long geologic al time span
known as the Permian period. This geologic time period was one of the three warmest periods in Earth’s geologi c history. Scientists
estimate that approximately 70 percent of the terre strial plant and animal species and 84 percent of m arine species became extinct,
vanishing forever near the end of the Permian period. Organisms that had adapted to wet and warm climatic c onditions, such as
annual rainfall of 300–400 cm (118–157 in) and 20 ° C–30 °C (68 °F–86 °F) in the tropical wet forest, may not have been able to
survive the Permian climate change.
Present Climate Change
A number of global events have occurred that may be attributed to climate change during our lifetimes. Gl acier National Park in
Montana is undergoing the retreat of many of its glaciers, a phenomenon known as glac ier recession. In 1850, the area contained
approximately 150 glaciers. By 2010, however, the pa rk contained only about 24 glaciers greater than 25 acres in size. One of these
glaciers is the Grinnell Glacier (Figure) at Mount Gould. Between 1966 and 2005, the size of Grinnell Glacier sh rank by 40
percent. Similarly, the mass of the ice sheets in Greenl and and the Antarctic is decreasing: Greenland lost 15 0–250 km of ice per
year between 2002 and 2006. In addition, the size and th ickness of the Arctic sea ice is decreasing.3

24.5.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70905
Figure: The effect of global warming can be seen in the con tinuing retreat of Grinnel Glacier. The mean annual temperature
in the park has increased 1.33 °C since 1900. The loss o f a glacier results in the loss of summer meltwaters, shar ply reducing
seasonal water supplies and severely affecting local eco systems. (credit: modification of work by USGS. “Grinn el Glacier retreat”
by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
This loss of ice is leading to increases in the global sea level. On average, the sea is rising at a rate of 1.8 mm per year. However,
between 1993 and 2010 the rate of sea level increase r anged between 2.9 and 3.4 mm per year. A variety of fac tors affect the
volume of water in the ocean, including the temperat ure of the water (the density of water is related to its temperature) and the
amount of water found in rivers, lakes, glaciers, pola r ice caps, and sea ice. As glaciers and polar ice caps melt, there is a
significant contribution of liquid water that was previou sly frozen.
In addition to some abiotic conditions changing in r esponse to climate change, many organisms are also b eing affected by the
changes in temperature. Temperature and precipitatio n play key roles in determining the geographic dist ribution and phenology of
plants and animals. (Phenology is the study of the effects of climatic conditions on the timing of periodic lifecycle events, such as
flowering in plants or migration in birds.) Researche rs have shown that 385 plant species in Great Britain are flowering 4.5 days
sooner than was recorded earlier during the previous 4 0 years. In addition, insect-pollinated species were m ore likely to flower
earlier than wind-pollinated species. The impact of changes in flowering dates would be mitigated if the i nsect pollinators emerged
earlier. This mismatched timing of plants and pollinat ors could result in injurious ecosystem effects because, for continued survival,
insect-pollinated plants must flower when their pollinators ar e present.
Summary
The Earth has gone through periodic cycles of increa ses and decreases in temperature. During the past 2000 y ears, the Medieval
Climate Anomaly was a warmer period, while the Little I ce Age was unusually cool. Both of these irregularities can be explained
by natural causes of changes in climate, and, although the temperature changes were small, they had signifi cant effects. Natural
drivers of climate change include Milankovitch cycles, changes in solar activity, and volcanic eruptions. None of these factors,
however, leads to rapid increases in global temperatu re or sustained increases in carbon dioxide. The burn ing of fossil fuels is an
important source of greenhouse gases, which plays a m ajor role in the greenhouse effect. Long ago, global warming resulted in the
Permian extinction: a large-scale extinction event th at is documented in the fossil record. Currently, mode rn-day climate change is
associated with the increased melting of glaciers an d polar ice sheets, resulting in a gradual increase in sea level. Plants and animals
can also be affected by global climate change when t he timing of seasonal events, such as flowering or pol lination, is affected by
global warming.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate Chan ge is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
25: Population and Community Ecology
Figure: Asian carp jump out of the water in response to elect rofishing. The Asian carp in the inset photograph were harvested
from the Little Calumet River in Illinois in May, 20 10, using rotenone, a toxin often used as an insecticid e, in an effort to learn
more about the population of the species. (credit mai n image: modification of work by USGS; credit inset: modification of work by
Lt. David French, USCG. “Asian carp” by OpenStax is li censed under CC BY 4.0)
Imagine sailing down a river in a small motorboat on a weekend afternoon; the water is smooth and you are enjoying the warm
sunshine and cool breeze when suddenly you are hit in the head by a 20-pound silver carp. This is a risk n ow on many rivers and
canal systems in Illinois and Missouri because of the presen ce of Asian carp (Figure).
This fish—actually a group of species including the silver, black, grass, and big head carp—has been farmed a nd eaten in China for
over 1000 years. It is one of the most important aqua culture food resources worldwide. In the United States, however, Asian carp is
considered a dangerous invasive species that disrupt s community structure and composition to the point of threatening native
species.
25.1: Population Demography
25.2: Population Dynamics and Regulation
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
25.5: Human Population Growth
25.6: Community Ecology
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate Causes of Behavior
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Thumbnail: Mimicry in butterflies. (CC BY 4.0; Joron M, Pap a R, Beltrán M, Chamberlain N, Mavárez J, et al. via Wikimedia
Commons).
25: Population and Community Ecology is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

25.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7091525.1: Population Demography
Populations are dynamic entities. Populations consist of all the species living within a specific area, and populations fluctuate
based on a number of factors: seasonal and yearly ch anges in the environment, natural disasters such as for est fires and volcanic
eruptions, and competition for resources between and within species. The statistical study of population dynami cs, demography,
uses a series of mathematical tools to investigate ho w populations respond to changes in their biotic and a biotic environments.
Many of these tools were originally designed to study human populations. For example, life tables, which deta il the life expectancy
of individuals within a population, were initially dev eloped by life insurance companies to set insurance rates. In fact, while the
term “demographics” is commonly used when discussing humans, all living populations can be studied using this approa ch.
Population Size and Density
The study of any population usually begins by deter mining how many individuals of a particular species exist, and how closely
associated they are with each other. Within a particu lar habitat, a population can be characterized by i ts population size (N), the
total number of individuals, and its population density, the number of individuals within a specific area or volume. Population size
and density are the two main characteristics used to describe and understand populations. For example, popu lations with more
individuals may be more stable than smaller populati ons based on their genetic variability, and thus their potential to adapt to the
environment. Alternatively, a member of a population with low population density (more spread out in the h abitat), might have
more difficulty finding a mate to reproduce compare d to a population of higher density. As is shown in Figu re, smaller
organisms tend to be more densely distributed than larger organisms.
Figure: Australian mammals show a typical inverse relationship between population density and body size. (credit:
“population density and body size” by OpenStax is licen sed under CC BY 4.0)
As this graph shows, population density typically decreases with increasing body size. Why do you think this is the case?
Answer
Smaller animals require less food and other resources, so t he environment can support more of them.
Population Research Methods
The most accurate way to determine population size i s to simply count all of the individuals within the habitat. However, this
method is often not logistically or economically fea sible, especially when studying large habitats. Thus, sc ientists usually study
populations by sampling a representative portion of each habitat and using this data to make inferences about the habitat as a
whole. A variety of methods can be used to sample pop ulations to determine their size and density. For immobi le organisms such as
plants, or for very small and slow-moving organisms, a quadrat may be used (Figure). A quadrat is a way of marking o ff
square areas within a habitat, either by staking out an area with sticks and string, or by the use of a wood, p lastic, or metal squareExercise

25.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70915placed on the ground. After setting the quadrats, resea rchers then count the number of individuals that lie within their boundaries.
Multiple quadrat samples are performed throughout the habitat at several random locations. All of this data can then be used to
estimate the population size and population density within the entire habitat. The number and size of qu adrat samples depend on
the type of organisms under study and other factors, including the density of the organism. For example, i f sampling daffodils, a 1
m quadrat might be used whereas with giant redwoods, whic h are larger and live much further apart from each other, a larger
quadrat of 100 m might be employed. This ensures tha t enough individuals of the species are counted to get an accurate sample
that correlates with the habitat, including areas not sampled.
Figure: A scientist uses a quadrat to measure population size an d density. (credit: NPS Sonoran Desert Network. “quadr at
use” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
For mobile organisms, such as mammals, birds, or fish, a technique called mark and recapture is often used. This method
involves marking a sample of captured animals in som e way (such as tags, bands, paint, or other body markings), and then
releasing them back into the environment to allow th em to mix with the rest of the population; later, a n ew sample is collected,
including some individuals that are marked (recaptures) an d some individuals that are unmarked (Figure).
Figure: Mark and recapture is used to measure the population size of mobile animals such as (a) bighorn sheep, (b) th e
California condor, and (c) salmon. (credit a: modifi cation of work by Neal Herbert, NPS; credit b: modif ication of work by Pacific
Southwest Region USFWS; credit c: modification of work by Ingrid Taylar. “mark and recapture” by OpenStax is licensed under
CC BY 4.0)
Using the ratio of marked and unmarked individuals, sci entists determine how many individuals are in the sample. From this,
calculations are used to estimate the total populati on size. This method assumes that the larger the popu lation, the lower the
percentage of tagged organisms that will be recaptur ed since they will have mixed with more untagged indi viduals. For example, if
80 deer are captured, tagged, and released into the forest, and later 100 deer are captured and 20 of t hem are already marked, we
can determine the population size (N) using the following equation:
Using our example, the population size would be estimated at 4 00.
Therefore, there are an estimated 400 total individual s in the original population.2

25.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70915There are some limitations to the mark and recaptur e method. Some animals from the first catch may learn to avoid capture in the
second round, thus inflating population estimates. Alt ernatively, animals may preferentially be retrapped (especially if a food
reward is offered), resulting in an underestimate of p opulation size. Also, some species may be harmed by the marking technique,
reducing their survival. A variety of other techniqu es have been developed, including the electronic tra cking of animals tagged with
radio transmitters and the use of data from commerci al fishing and trapping operations to estimate the siz e and health of
populations and communities.
Species Distribution
In addition to measuring simple density, further inf ormation about a population can be obtained by look ing at the distribution of the
individuals. Species dispersion patterns (or distribution patterns) show the spatial relationship between members of a pop ulation
within a habitat at a particular point in time. In o ther words, they show whether members of the species live close together or far
apart, and what patterns are evident when they are spaced a part.
Individuals in a population can be more or less equa lly spaced apart, dispersed randomly with no predicta ble pattern, or clustered in
groups. These are known as uniform, random, and clumped dispersion patterns, respectively (Figure). Uniform dis persion
is observed in plants that secrete substances inhibitin g the growth of nearby individuals (such as the rele ase of toxic chemicals by
the sage plant Salvia leucophylla, a phenomenon called allelopathy) and in animals lik e the penguin that maintain a defined
territory. An example of random dispersion occurs with dandelion and other plants that have wind-dispersed seeds that germinate
wherever they happen to fall in a favorable environm ent. A clumped dispersion may be seen in plants that drop their seeds straight
to the ground, such as oak trees, or animals that li ve in groups (schools of fish or herds of elephants). Clumped dispersions may
also be a function of habitat heterogeneity. Thus, the dispersion of the individuals within a population p rovides more information
about how they interact with each other than does a s imple density measurement. Just as lower density specie s might have more
difficulty finding a mate, solitary species with a ran dom distribution might have a similar difficulty when compared to social
species clumped together in groups.
Figure: Species may have uniform, random, or clumped distribu tion. Territorial birds such as penguins tend to have u niform
distribution. Plants such as dandelions with wind-dispersed seeds tend to be randomly distributed. Animals such as e lephants that
travel in groups exhibit clumped distribution. (credi t a: modification of work by Ben Tubby; credit b: m odification of work by
Rosendahl; credit c: modification of work by Rebecca Wood. “distribution patterns” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Demography
While population size and density describe a populat ion at one particular point in time, scientists must u se demography to study the
dynamics of a population. Demography is the statistical study of population changes over time: birth rates, death rates, and life
expectancies. Each of these measures, especially birth rates, may be affected by the population character istics described above. For
example, a large population size results in a higher birth rate because more potentially reproductive in dividuals are present. In
contrast, a large population size can also result in a higher death rate because of competition, disease, and the accumulation of
waste. Similarly, a higher population density or a clum ped dispersion pattern results in more potential repro ductive encounters
between individuals, which can increase birth rate. La stly, a female-biased sex ratio (the ratio of males t o females) or age structure
(the proportion of population members at specific age ranges) composed of many individuals of reproducti ve age can increase birth
rates.
In addition, the demographic characteristics of a po pulation can influence how the population grows or de clines over time. If birth
and death rates are equal, the population remains st able. However, the population size will increase if bi rth rates exceed death rates;
the population will decrease if birth rates are less than death rates. Life expectancy is another import ant factor; the length of time

25.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70915individuals remain in the population impacts local r esources, reproduction, and the overall health of the population. These
demographic characteristics are often displayed in the f orm of a life table.
Life Tables
Life tables provide important information about the life histo ry of an organism. Life tables divide the population into age groups
and often sexes, and show how long a member of that gr oup is likely to live. They are modeled after actuari al tables used by the
insurance industry for estimating human life expectan cy. Life tables may include the probability of indi viduals dying before their
next birthday (i.e., their mortality rate), the percentage of surviving individuals dying at a particular age interval, and their life
expectancy at each interval. An example of a life table is shown in Table from a study of Dall mountain sheep, a spec ies
native to northwestern North America. Notice that the po pulation is divided into age intervals (column A). T he mortality rate (per
1000), shown in column D, is based on the number of ind ividuals dying during the age interval (column B) di vided by the number
of individuals surviving at the beginning of the inter val (Column C), multiplied by 1000.
For example, between ages three and four, 12 individual s die out of the 776 that were remaining from the ori ginal 1000 sheep. This
number is then multiplied by 1000 to get the mortality rate per thousand.
As can be seen from the mortality rate data (column D), a high death rate occurred when the sheep were between 6 and 12 months
old, and then increased even more from 8 to 12 years old, after which there were few survivors. The data in dicate that if a sheep in
this population were to survive to age one, it could b e expected to live another 7.7 years on average, as shown by the life
expectancy numbers in column E.

25.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70915Table: Life Table of Dall Mountain Sheep (Data Adapted from Deevey, D. 1947)
Age
interval
(years)Number dying in age
interval out of 1000
bornNumber surviving at
beginning of age interval
out of 1000 bornMortality rate per 1000
alive at beginning of age
intervalLife expectancy or mean
lifetime remaining to those
attaining age interval
0-0.5 54 1000 54.0 7.06
0.5-1 145 946 153.3 —
1-2 12 801 15.0 7.7
2-3 13 789 16.5 6.8
3-4 12 776 15.5 5.9
4-5 30 764 39.3 5.0
5-6 46 734 62.7 4.2
6-7 48 688 69.8 3.4
7-8 69 640 107.8 2.6
8-9 132 571 231.2 1.9
9-10 187 439 426.0 1.3
10-11 156 252 619.0 0.9
11-12 90 96 937.5 0.6
12-13 3 6 500.0 1.2
13-14 3 3 1000 0.7
This life table of Ovis dalli shows the number of deaths, number of survivors, mortal ity rate, and life expectancy at each age interval for the Dall
mountain sheep.
Survivorship Curves
Another tool used by population ecologists is a survivorship curve, which is a graph of the number of individuals survi ving at
each age interval plotted versus time (usually with data compiled from a life table). These curves allow us to compare the life
histories of different populations (Figure). Humans an d most primates exhibit a Type I survivorship curve because a high
percentage of offspring survive their early and midd le years—death occurs predominantly in older indivi duals. These types of
species usually have small numbers of offspring at o ne time, and they give a high amount of parental car e to them to ensure their
survival. Birds are an example of an intermediate o r Type II survivorship curve because birds die more or less equally at each age
interval. These organisms also may have relatively few offspring and provide significant parental care. T rees, marine invertebrates,
and most fishes exhibit a Type III survivorship curve because very few of these organisms survive their yo unger years; however,
those that make it to an old age are more likely to survive for a relatively long period of time. Organi sms in this category usually
have a very large number of offspring, but once they are born, little parental care is provided. Thus the se offspring are “on their
own” and vulnerable to predation, but their sheer number s assure the survival of enough individuals to perpetua te the species.

25.1.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70915
Figure: Survivorship curves show the distribution of individua ls in a population according to age. Humans and most
mammals have a Type I survivorship curve because death primarily occurs in the older years. Birds have a Type II survivorship
curve, as death at any age is equally probable. Trees have a Type III survivorship curve because very few sur vive the younger
years, but after a certain age, individuals are much more likely to survive. (credit: “survivorship curves” by OpenStax is licensed
under CC BY 4.0)
Summary
Populations are individuals of a species that live in a particular habitat. Ecologists measure characteristics of populations: size,
density, dispersion pattern, age structure, and sex r atio. Life tables are useful to calculate life expec tancies of individual population
members. Survivorship curves show the number of individuals surviving at each age interval plotted versus time.
References
Deevey, D. 1947. “Life Tables for Natural Populations of Anima ls,” The Quarterly Review of Biology 22, no. 4: 283-314.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
25.1: Population Demography is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.
45.1: Population Demography by OpenStax is licensed CC BY 4.0.

25.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7091625.2: Population Dynamics and Regulation
The logistic model of population growth, while valid i n many natural populations and a useful model, is a simplification of realworld population dynamics. Implicit in the model is that the carrying capacity of the environment does not change, which is not the
case. The carrying capacity varies annually: for exa mple, some summers are hot and dry whereas others are cold and wet. In many
areas, the carrying capacity during the winter is muc h lower than it is during the summer. Also, natural eve nts such as earthquakes,
volcanoes, and fires can alter an environment and he nce its carrying capacity. Additionally, populations do not usually exist in
isolation. They engage in interspecific competition: that is, they share the environment with other species, competing with them for
the same resources. These factors are also important to understanding how a specific population will grow.
Nature regulates population growth in a variety of ways. These are grouped into density-dependent factors, in which the density of
the population at a given time affects growth rate an d mortality, and density-independent factors, which i nfluence mortality in a
population regardless of population density. Note that in the former, the effect of the factor on the pop ulation depends on the
density of the population at onset. Conservation bio logists want to understand both types because this hel ps them manage
populations and prevent extinction or overpopulation.
Density-dependent Regulation
Most density-dependent factors are biological in nature (biotic) and include pred ation, inter- and intraspecific competition,
accumulation of waste, and diseases such as those cause d by parasites. Usually, the denser a population is, th e greater its mortality
rate. For example, during intra- and interspecific co mpetition, the reproductive rates of the individuals will usually be lower,
reducing their population’s rate of growth. In additi on, low prey density increases the mortality of its p redator because it has more
difficulty locating its food source.
An example of density-dependent regulation is shown in Figure with results from a study focusing on the gian t intestinal
roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides), a parasite of humans and other mammals (Croll et al. 1982). Denser populations of the parasite
exhibited lower fecundity: they contained fewer eggs. One possible explanation for this is that females woul d be smaller in more
dense populations (due to limited resources) and tha t smaller females would have fewer eggs. This hypothesis was tested and
disproved in a 2009 study which showed that female wei ght had no influence (Walker et al, 2009). The actua l cause of the densitydependence of fecundity in this organism is still uncle ar and awaiting further investigation.
Figure: In this population of roundworms, fecundity (number of eggs) decreases with population density. (credit: Cr oll et al.
Density-independent Regulation and Interaction with Density-dependent Factors
Most density-independent factors are physical or chemical in nature (abiotic) These factors influence the mortality of a
population regardless of its density, including weath er, natural disasters, and pollution. An individual deer may be killed in a forest
fire regardless of how many deer happen to be in tha t area. Its chances of survival are the same whether th e population density is
high or low. The same holds true for cold winter weather.

25.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70916In real-life situations, population regulation is very complicated and density-dependent and independent f actors can interact. A
dense population that is reduced in a density-indepe ndent manner by some environmental factor(s) will be able to recover
differently than a sparse population. For example, a population of deer affected by a harsh winter will rec over faster if there are
more deer remaining to reproduce.
Evolution Connection – Why Did the Woolly Mammoth Go Extinct?
It’s easy to get lost in the discussion of dinosaurs a nd theories about why they went extinct 65 million ye ars ago. Was it due to a
meteor slamming into Earth near the coast of modern -day Mexico, or was it from some long-term weather cycle that is not yet
understood? One hypothesis that will never be proposed is that humans had something to do with it. Mammals we re small,
insignificant creatures of the forest 65 million years ago, and no humans existed.
Figure: (top) 1916 mural of a mammoth herd from the Americ an Museum of Natural History, (center) the only stuffe d
mammoth in the world, from the Museum of Zoology loc ated in St. Petersburg, Russia, and (bottom) a one-mon th-old baby
mammoth, named Lyuba, discovered in Siberia in 2007. (credit a: modification of work by Charles R. Knight; credit b:
modification of work by “Tanapon”/Flickr; credit c: modification of work by Matt Howry. “mammoths” by Op enStax is licensed
under CC BY 4.0)
Woolly mammoths, however, began to go extinct about 1 0,000 years ago, when they shared the Earth with human s who were no
different anatomically than humans today (Figure). Ma mmoths survived in isolated island populations as re cently as 1700
BC. We know a lot about these animals from carcasses fo und frozen in the ice of Siberia and other regions o f the north. Scientists

25.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70916have sequenced at least 50 percent of its genome an d believe mammoths are between 98 and 99 percent iden tical to modern
elephants.
It is commonly thought that climate change and human hunting led to their extinction. A 2008 study esti mated that climate change
reduced the mammoth’s range from 3,000,000 square mi les 42,000 years ago to 310,000 square miles 6,000 years ago (NoguésBravo et al. 2008). It is also well documented that hu mans hunted these animals. A 2012 study showed that n o single factor was
exclusively responsible for the extinction of these magnificent creatures (MacDonald et al. 2012). In addi tion to human hunting,
climate change, and reduction of habitat, these scie ntists demonstrated another important factor in the ma mmoth’s extinction was
the migration of humans across the Bering Strait to North Am erica during the last ice age 20,000 years ago.
The maintenance of stable populations was and is very complex, with many interacting factors determining t he outcome. It is
important to remember that humans are also part of n ature. Once we contributed to a species’ decline using primitive hunting
technology only.
Life Histories of K-selected and r-selected Species
While reproductive strategies play a key role in li fe histories, they do not account for important fac tors like limited resources and
competition. The regulation of population growth by t hese factors can be used to introduce a classical conc ept in population
biology, that of K-selected versus r-selected species.
Early Theories about Life History: K-selected and r-selected Species
By the second half of the twentieth century, the con cept of K- and r-selected species was used extensively and successfully t o study
populations. The concept relates not only to reprodu ctive strategies but also to a species’ habitat and behavior, especially in the way
that they obtain resources and care for their young. It includes length of life and survivorship factors as well. For this analysis,
population biologists have grouped species into the two large categories— K-selected and r-selected—although they are really two
ends of a continuum.
K-selected species are species selected by stable, predictable environme nts. Populations of K-selected species tend to exist close to
their carrying capacity (hence the term K-selected) where intraspecific competition is high. Th ese species have few, large
offspring, a long gestation period, and often give lon g-term care to their offspring (Table). While larger in size when born,
the offspring are relatively helpless and immature a t birth. By the time they reach adulthood, they must develop skills to compete
for natural resources. In plants, scientists think of parental care more broadly: how long fruit takes to d evelop or how long it
remains on the plant are determining factors in the time to the next reproductive event. Examples of K-selected species are primates
(including humans), elephants, and plants such as oak trees (Figu re a).
Oak trees grow very slowly and take, on average, 20 yea rs to produce their first seeds, known as acorns. As man y as 50,000 acorns
can be produced by an individual tree, but the germ ination rate is low as many of these rot or are eate n by animals such as squirrels.
In some years, oaks may produce an exceptionally la rge number of acorns, and these years may be on a t wo- or three-year cycle
depending on the species of oak (r-selection).
As oak trees grow to a large size and for many years be fore they begin to produce acorns, they devote a la rge percentage of their
energy budget to growth and maintenance. The tree’s height and size allow it to dominate other plants in the competition for
sunlight, the oak’s primary energy resource. Furtherm ore, when it does reproduce, the oak produces large, e nergy-rich seeds that
use their energy reserve to become quickly established (K-selection).
In contrast, r-selected species have a large number of small offspring (hence their r designation (Table)). This strategy is
often employed in unpredictable or changing environ ments. Animals that are r-selected do not give long-term parental care and t he
offspring are relatively mature and self-sufficient at birth. Examples of r-selected species are marine invertebrates, such as j ellyfish,
and plants, such as the dandelion (Figure b). Dandelions have small seeds that are wind-dispersed long distances. Man y seeds
are produced simultaneously to ensure that at least some of them reach a hospitable environment. Seeds that land in inhospitable
environments have little chance for survival since t heir seeds are low in energy content. Note that survi val is not necessarily a
function of energy stored in the seed itself.

25.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70916Table: Characteristics of K-selected and r-selected species
Characteristics of K-selected species Characteristics of r-selected species
Mature late Mature early
Greater longevity Lower longevity
Increased parental care Decreased parental care
Increased competition Decreased competition
Fewer offspring More offspring
Larger offspring Smaller offspring

Figure: (a) Elephants are considered K-selected species as they live long, mature late, and provide long-term paren tal care to
few offspring. Oak trees produce many offspring that d o not receive parental care, but are considered K-sel ected species based on
longevity and late maturation. (b) Dandelions and je llyfish are both considered r-selected species as they ma ture early, have short
lifespans, and produce many offspring that receive no parental care. (credit: “K– and r-selected species” by OpenStax is licensed
under CC BY 4.0)
Modern Theories of Life History
The r– and K-selection theory, although accepted for decades and used for much groundbreaking research, has now been
reconsidered, and many population biologists have aba ndoned or modified it. Over the years, several studies attempted to confirm
the theory, but these attempts have largely failed. Ma ny species were identified that did not follow the th eory’s predictions.
Furthermore, the theory ignored the age-specific mort ality of the populations which scientists now know is very important. New
demographic-based models of life history evolution have been developed which incorporate many ecologica l concepts included in
r– and K-selection theory as well as population age structure an d mortality factors.
Body Size correlates with Generation Time
Generation time is the average span of time between th e birth of an individual and the birth of its offsp ring. The general trend is
that the larger the species, the longer the generation time (Figure).

25.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70916
Figure: Relationship between generation time and body lengt h in 47 taxonomic groups, ranging from bacteria to l ong-lived
trees. Data transformed by log10. Data derived from B onner (1965; c.f., McNaughton and Wolf, 1979; also Sa mmarco, pers. obs.;
Strychar, pers. obs.). Image from Sammarco, P., & Stryc har, K. 2009.
Summary
Populations are regulated by a variety of density-dep endent and density-independent factors. Species are d ivided into two
categories based on a variety of features of their li fe history patterns: r-selected species, which have large numbers of offspri ng,
and K-selected species, which have few offspring. The r– and K-selection theory has fallen out of use; however, ma ny of its key
features are still used in newer, demographically-based mod els of population dynamics.
References
Croll, N.A. et al. 1982. “The Population Biology and Contr ol of Ascaris lumbricoides in a Rural Community in Iran.” Transactions
of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 76, no. 2: 187-197, doi:10.1016/0035-9203(82)90272-3.
MacDonald, G.M., et al. 2012. “Pattern of Extinction of the Woolly Mammoth in Beringia.” Nature Communications 3, no. 893,
doi:10.1038/ncomms1881.
Nogués-Bravo, D. et al. 2008. “Climate Change, Humans, and the Extinction of the Woolly Mammoth.” PLoS Biol 6: e79,
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060079.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Walker, M. et al. 2009. “Density-Dependent Effects on the Weight of Female Ascaris lumbricoides Infections of Humans and its
Impact on Patterns of Egg Production.” Parasites & Vectors 2, no. 11, doi:10.1186/1756-3305-2-11.
Sammarco, P., & Strychar, K. 2009. Effects of Climate Chan ge/Global Warming on Coral Reefs: Adaptation/Exaptati on in Corals,
Evolution in Zooxanthellae, and Biogeographic Shifts. Environmental Bioindicators, 4, 9–45.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15555270902905377
25.2: Population Dynamics and Regulation is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

25.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7091725.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection
A species’ life history describes the series of events over its lifetime, such as how resources are allocated for growth, maintenance,
and reproduction. Life history traits affect the lif e table of an organism. A species’ life history is genetically determined and shaped
by the environment and natural selection.
Life History Patterns and Energy Budgets
Energy is required by all living organisms for their g rowth, maintenance, and reproduction; at the same ti me, energy is often a
major limiting factor in determining an organism’s survival. Plants, for example, acquire energy from the sun via photosynthesis
but must expend this energy to grow, maintain healt h, and produce energy-rich seeds to produce the next generation. Animals have
the additional burden of using some of their energy reserves to acquire food. Furthermore, some animals must expend energy
caring for their offspring. Thus, all species have an energy budget: they must balance energy intake with their use of energy for
metabolism, reproduction, parental care, and energy stora ge (such as bears building up body fat for winter hiberna tion).
Parental Care and Fecundity
Fecundity is the potential reproductive capacity of an indivi dual within a population. Fecundity describes how many offspring
could ideally be produced if an individual has as m any offspring as possible, repeating the reproductive cycle as soon as possible
after the birth of the offspring. In animals, fecund ity is inversely related to the amount of parental c are given to an individual
offspring. Species, such as many marine invertebrates, th at produce many offspring usually provide little if any care for the
offspring (they would not have the energy or the abi lity to do so anyway). Most of their energy budget is used to produce many tiny
offspring. Animals with this strategy are often self-suf ficient at a very early age. This is because of the energy tradeoff these
organisms have made to maximize their evolutionary fi tness. Because their energy is used for producing offspr ing instead of
parental care, it makes sense that these offspring h ave some ability to be able to move within their env ironment and find food and
perhaps shelter. Even with these abilities, their small size makes them extremely vulnerable to predation, so the production of many
offspring allows enough of them to survive to maintain t he species.
Animal species that have few offspring during a repro ductive event usually give extensive parental care, devoting much of their
energy budget to these activities, sometimes at the expense of their own health. This is the case with ma ny mammals, such as
humans, kangaroos, and pandas. The offspring of these s pecies are relatively helpless at birth and need to develop before they
achieve self-sufficiency.
Plants with low fecundity produce few energy-rich seeds (such as coconuts and chestnuts) with each having a go od chance to
germinate into a new organism; plants with high fecun dity usually have many small, energy-poor seeds (like orchids) that have a
relatively poor chance of surviving. Although it may seem that coconuts and chestnuts have a better chanc e of surviving, the energy
tradeoff of the orchid is also very effective. It is a matter of where the energy is used, for large numb ers of seeds or for fewer seeds
with more energy.
Early versus Late Reproduction
The timing of reproduction in a life history also affects species survival. Organ isms that reproduce at an early age have a greater
chance of producing offspring, but this is usually at the expense of their growth and the maintenance of t heir health. Conversely,
organisms that start reproducing later in life often have greater fecundity or are better able to provid e parental care, but they risk
that they will not survive to reproductive age. Examp les of this can be seen in fishes. Small fish like gup pies use their energy to
reproduce rapidly, but never attain the size that wo uld give them defense against some predators. Large r fish, like the bluegill or
shark, use their energy to attain a large size but do so with the risk that they will die before they can rep roduce or at least reproduce
to their maximum. These different energy strategies a nd tradeoffs are key to understanding the evolution of each species as it
maximizes its fitness and fills its niche. In terms of energy budgeting, some species “blow it all” and u se up most of their energy
reserves to reproduce early before they die. Other spe cies delay having reproduction to become stronger, m ore experienced
individuals and to make sure that they are strong enough to provide parental care if necessary.

25.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70917Single versus Multiple Reproductive Events
Some life history traits, such as fecundity, the timing of reproduction, and parental care, can be grouped together into general
strategies that are used by multiple species. Semelparity occurs when a species reproduces only once during its lifetime and then
dies. Such species use most of their resource budget du ring a single reproductive event, sacrificing their health to the point that they
do not survive. Examples of semelparity are bamboo, wh ich flowers once and then dies, and the Chinook salmon (Figure),
which uses most of its energy reserves to migrate from t he ocean to its freshwater nesting area, where it repr oduces and then dies.
Scientists have posited alternate explanations for the evolutionary advantage of the Chinook’s post-repro duction death: a
programmed suicide caused by a massive release of corti costeroid hormones, presumably so the parents can be come food for the
offspring, or simple exhaustion caused by the energy demand s of reproduction; these are still being debated.
Iteroparity describes species that reproduce repeatedly during their lives. Some animals are able to mate only once per year but
survive multiple mating seasons. The pronghorn antelop e is an example of an animal that goes into a season al estrus cycle
(“heat”): a hormonally induced physiological condit ion preparing the body for successful mating (Figure). Females of these
species mate only during the estrus phase of the cy cle. A different pattern is observed in primates, inc luding humans and
chimpanzees, which may attempt reproduction at any ti me during their reproductive years, even though thei r menstrual cycles
make pregnancy likely only a few days per month during ovulat ion (Figure).
Figure: The (top) Chinook salmon mates once and dies. The (ce nter) pronghorn antelope mates during specific times o f the
year during its reproductive life. Primates, such as hum ans and (bottom) chimpanzees, may mate on any day, in dependent of
ovulation. (credit a: modification of work by Roger Tabor, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by Mark Gocke, USDA; credit
c: modification of work by “Shiny Things”/Flickr. “re production strategies” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Evolution Connection – Energy Budgets, Reproductive Costs, and Sexual Selection in Drosophila
Research into how animals allocate their energy reso urces for growth, maintenance, and reproduction has u sed a variety of
experimental animal models. Some of this work has been done using the common fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Studies have
shown that not only does reproduction have a cost as far as how long male fruit flies live, but also fru it flies that have already
mated several times have limited sperm remaining for reproduction. Fruit flies maximize their last chances a t reproduction by
selecting optimal mates.
In a 1981 study, male fruit flies were placed in encl osures with either virgin or inseminated females. The males that mated with
virgin females had shorter life spans than those in contact with the same number of inseminated females with which they were
unable to mate. This effect occurred regardless of h ow large (indicative of their age) the males were. Thus, males that did not mate
lived longer, allowing them more opportunities to find m ates in the future.
More recent studies, performed in 2006, show how males s elect the female with which they will mate and how this is affected by
previous matings (Figure) (Byrne & Rice, 2006). Males were allowed to select between smaller and larger fema les. Findings

25.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70917showed that larger females had greater fecundity, pro ducing twice as many offspring per mating as the smal ler females did. Males
that had previously mated, and thus had lower supplies of sperm, were termed “resource-depleted,” while males that had not mated
were termed “non-resource-depleted.” The study showed that although non-resource-depleted males preferent ially mated with
larger females, this selection of partners was more pron ounced in the resource-depleted males. Thus, males wi th depleted sperm
supplies, which were limited in the number of times tha t they could mate before they replenished their spe rm supply, selected
larger, more fecund females, thus maximizing their cha nces for offspring. This study was one of the first to s how that the
physiological state of the male affected its mating b ehavior in a way that clearly maximizes its use of lim ited reproductive
resources.
Figure: Male fruit flies that had previously mated (sperm-dep leted) picked larger, more fecund females more often than
those that had not mated (non-sperm-depleted). This ch ange in behavior causes an increase in the efficiency of a limited
reproductive resource: sperm. (credit: Byrne, P. and Rice, R. 2006. “mate choice” by OpenStax is licensed u nder CC BY 4.0)
These studies demonstrate two ways in which the energy budget is a factor in reproduction. First, energy expen ded on mating may
reduce an animal’s lifespan, but by this time they h ave already reproduced, so in the context of natura l selection this early death is
not of much evolutionary importance. Second, when reso urces such as sperm (and the energy needed to repleni sh it) are low, an
organism’s behavior can change to give them the best chance of passing their genes on to the next generat ion. These changes in
behavior, so important to evolution, are studied in a discipline known as behavioral biology, or ethology, a t the interface between
population biology and psychology.
Summary
All species have evolved a pattern of living, called a life history strategy, in which they partition ener gy for growth, maintenance,
and reproduction. These patterns evolve through nat ural selection; they allow species to adapt to their environment to obtain the
resources they need to successfully reproduce. There i s an inverse relationship between fecundity and pare ntal care. A species may
reproduce early in life to ensure surviving to a rep roductive age or reproduce later in life to become larger and healthier and better
able to give parental care. A species may reproduce onc e (semelparity) or many times (iteroparity) in its life.
References
Byrne, P. and Rice, R. 2006. “Evidence for adaptive ma le mate choice in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, ” Proc Biol Sci. 273,
no. 1589: 917-922, doi: 10.1098/rspb.2005.3372.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

25.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7091825.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
Although life histories describe the way many characte ristics of a population (such as their age structure) c hange over time in a
general way, population ecologists make use of a variet y of methods to model population dynamics mathemati cally. These more
precise models can then be used to accurately descri be changes occurring in a population and better pred ict future changes. Certain
models that have been accepted for decades are now b eing modified or even abandoned due to their lack o f predictive ability, and
scholars strive to create effective new models.
Exponential Growth
Charles Darwin, in his theory of natural selection, was g reatly influenced by the English clergyman Thomas M althus. Malthus
published a book in 1798 stating that populations with unlimited natural resources grow very rapidly, and the n population growth
decreases as resources become depleted. This accelerati ng pattern of increasing population size is called exponential growth.
The best example of exponential growth is seen in bac teria. Bacteria are prokaryotes that reproduce by pr okaryotic fission. This
division takes about an hour for many bacterial specie s. If 1000 bacteria are placed in a large flask with an unlimited supply of
nutrients (so the nutrients will not become depleted), after an hour, there is one round of division and each organism divides,
resulting in 2000 organisms—an increase of 1000. In a nother hour, each of the 2000 organisms will double, pr oducing 4000, an
increase of 2000 organisms. After the third hour, the re should be 8000 bacteria in the flask, an increase of 4000 organisms. The
important concept of exponential growth is that the population growth rate—the number of organisms added in each reproductive
generation—is accelerating; that is, it is increasi ng at a greater and greater rate. After 1 day and 24 of these cycles, the population
would have increased from 1000 to more than 16 billi on. When the population size, N, is plotted over time, a J-shaped growth
curve is produced (Figure).
The bacteria example is not representative of the r eal world where resources are limited. Furthermore, some bacteria will die during
the experiment and thus not reproduce, lowering the g rowth rate. Therefore, when calculating the growth rat e of a population, the
death rate (D) (number of organisms that die during a particular tim e interval) is subtracted from the birth rate (B) (number of
organisms that are born during that interval). This is shown i n the following formula:
The birth rate is usually expressed on a per capita (for each individual) basis. Thus, B (birth rate) = bN (the per capita birth rate “ b”
multiplied by the number of individuals “ N”) and D (death rate) = dN (the per capita death rate “d” multiplied by the nu mber of
individuals “ N”). Additionally, ecologists are interested in the popu lation at a particular point in time, an infinitely small time
interval. For this reason, the terminology of differen tial calculus is used to obtain the “ instantaneous ” growth rate, replacing the
change in number and time with an instant-specific measurem ent of number and time.
Notice that the “ d” associated with the first term refers to the deriva tive (as the term is used in calculus) and is diffe rent from the
death rate, also called “ d.” The difference between birth and death rates is f urther simplified by substituting the term “ r” (intrinsic
rate of increase) for the relationship between birth and death rates:
The value “ r” can be positive, meaning the population is increasin g in size; or negative, meaning the population is d ecreasing in
size; or zero, where the population’s size is unchangi ng, a condition known as zero population growth. A fur ther refinement of the
formula recognizes that different species have inhere nt differences in their intrinsic rate of increase (often thought of as the
potential for reproduction), even under ideal condi tions. Obviously, a bacterium can reproduce more rapi dly and have a higher
intrinsic rate of growth than a human. The maximal growth rate for a species is its biotic potential, or r, thus changing the
equation to:max

25.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70918
Figure: When resources are unlimited, populations exhibit exp onential growth, resulting in a J-shaped curve. When
resources are limited, populations exhibit logistic gro wth. In logistic growth, population expansion decrease s as resources become
scarce, and it levels off when the carrying capacity of the environment is reached, resulting in an S-shaped curve. (credit:
“population growth” by OpenStax is licensed under CC B Y 4.0)
Logistic Growth
Exponential growth is possible only when infinite natural resources are available; this is not the case in the real world. Char les
Darwin recognized this fact in his description of the “struggle for existence,” which states that individual s will compete (with
members of their own or other species) for limited reso urces. The successful ones will survive to pass on the ir own characteristics
and traits (which we know now are transferred by genes) to the next generation at a greater rate (natural s election). To model the
reality of limited resources, population ecologists dev eloped the logistic growth model.
Carrying Capacity and the Logistic Model
In the real world, with its limited resources, exponenti al growth cannot continue indefinitely. Exponential g rowth may occur in
environments where there are few individuals and plenti ful resources, but when the number of individuals ge ts large enough,
resources will be depleted, slowing the growth rate. Ev entually, the growth rate will plateau or level off (Figure). This
population size, which represents the maximum populat ion size that a particular environment can support, is called the carrying
capacity, or K.
The formula we use to calculate logistic growth adds the carrying capacity as a moderating force in the growth rate. The
expression “ K – N” is indicative of how many individuals may be added to a population at a given stage, and “ K – N” divided by
“K” is the fraction of the carrying capacity available for further growth. Thus, the exponential growth mode l is restricted by this
factor to generate the logistic growth equation:
Notice that when N is very small, (K-N)/K becomes close to K/K or 1, and the right side of the equation reduces t o r N, which
means the population is growing exponentially and is not influenced by carrying capacity. On the other ha nd, when N is large, (KN)/K come close to zero, which means that population growth will be slowed greatly or even stopped. Thus, populati on growth is
greatly slowed in large populations by the carrying capacity K. This model also allows for the population of a nega tive population
growth, or a population decline. This occurs when the n umber of individuals in the population exceeds the carrying capacity
(because the value of (K-N)/K is negative).
A graph of this equation yields an S-shaped curve (Fig ure), and it is a more realistic model of population growth than
exponential growth. There are three different sectio ns to an S-shaped curve. Initially, growth is exponent ial because there are few
individuals and ample resources available. Then, as res ources begin to become limited, the growth rate decre ases. Finally, growth
levels off at the carrying capacity of the environmen t, with little change in population size over time.
Role of Intraspecific Competition
The logistic model assumes that every individual with in a population will have equal access to resources a nd, thus, an equal chance
for survival. For plants, the amount of water, sunlight, nutrients, and the space to grow are the important r esources, whereas in
animals, important resources include food, water, shelter, nesting space, and mates.max

25.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70918In the real world, phenotypic variation among indivi duals within a population means that some individual s will be better adapted to
their environment than others. The resulting compet ition between population members of the same species for resources is termed
intraspecific competition (intra- = “within”; -specific = “species”). Intraspecif ic competition for resources may not affect
populations that are well below their carrying capaci ty—resources are plentiful and all individuals can o btain what they need.
However, as population size increases, this competition intensifies. In addition, the accumulation of waste prod ucts can reduce an
environment’s carrying capacity.
Examples of Logistic Growth
Yeast, a microscopic fungus used to make bread and a lcoholic beverages, exhibits the classical S-shaped c urve when grown in a
test tube (Figure a). Its growth levels off as the popu lation depletes the nutrients that are necessary for its growth. In the real
world, however, there are variations to this idealized cu rve. Examples in wild populations include sheep and h arbor seals (Figure
b). In both examples, the population size exceeds the carrying capacity for short periods of time and the n falls below the
carrying capacity afterward. This fluctuation in popu lation size continues to occur as the population osc illates around its carrying
capacity. Still, even with this oscillation, the logisti c model is confirmed.
Figure: (a) Yeast grown in ideal conditions in a test tube sho w a classical S-shaped logistic growth curve, whereas (b) a
natural population of seals shows real-world fluctuatio n. (credit: “examples of population growth” by OpenS tax is licensed under
CC BY 4.0)
Summary
Populations with unlimited resources grow exponentiall y, with an accelerating growth rate. When resources bec ome limiting,
populations follow a logistic growth curve. The populatio n of a species will level off at the carrying capacity of i ts environment.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

25.5.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7091925.5: Human Population Growth
Concepts of animal population dynamics can be applie d to human population growth. Humans are not unique in their ability to
alter their environment. For example, beaver dams alt er the stream environment where they are built. Humans, however, have the
ability to alter their environment to increase its carrying capacity sometimes to the detriment of other species (e.g., via artificial
selection for crops that have a higher yield). Earth ’s human population is growing rapidly, to the extent that some worry about the
ability of the earth’s environment to sustain this population, as long-term exponential growth carries t he potential risks of famine,
disease, and large-scale death.
Although humans have increased the carrying capacity of their environment, the technologies used to ach ieve this transformation
have caused unprecedented changes to Earth’s enviro nment, altering ecosystems to the point where some may be in danger of
collapse. The depletion of the ozone layer, erosion due to acid rain, and damage from global climate ch ange are caused by human
activities. The ultimate effect of these changes on ou r carrying capacity is unknown. As some point out, it is likely that the negative
effects of increasing carrying capacity will outweigh the positive ones—the carrying capacity of the world for human beings might
actually decrease.
The world’s human population is currently experienci ng exponential growth even though human reproduction is far below its
biotic potential (Figure). To reach its biotic potential, all females would have to become pregnant every nine months or so
during their reproductive years. Also, resources would h ave to be such that the environment would support suc h growth. Neither of
these two conditions exists. In spite of this fact, the hum an population is still growing exponentially.
Figure: Human population growth since 1000 AD is exponential (dark blue line). Notice that while the population in Asia
(yellow line), which has many economically underdeve loped countries, is increasing exponentially, the popu lation in Europe (light
blue line), where most of the countries are economica lly developed, is growing much more slowly. (credit: “Human population
growth” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
A consequence of exponential human population growth is the time that it takes to add a particular numbe r of humans to the Earth
is becoming shorter. Figure shows that 123 years were necessary to add 1 billion humans in 1930, but it on ly took 24 years to
add two billion people between 1975 and 1999. As alread y discussed, at some point it would appear that our ab ility to increase our
carrying capacity indefinitely on a finite world is uncertain. Without new technological advances, the hu man growth rate has been
predicted to slow in the coming decades. However, the pop ulation will still be increasing and the threat of overpop ulation remains.

25.5.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70919
Figure: The time between the addition of each billion huma n beings to Earth decreases over time. (credit: modifi cation of
work by Ryan T. Cragun. “time between each billion” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Overcoming Density-Dependent Regulation
Humans are unique in their ability to alter their en vironment with the conscious purpose of increasing it s carrying capacity. This
ability is a major factor responsible for human popu lation growth and a way of overcoming density-depende nt growth regulation.
Much of this ability is related to human intelligence, society, and communication. Humans can construct shel ter to protect
themselves from the elements and have developed agri culture and domesticated animals to increase their fo od supplies. In addition,
humans use language to communicate this technology t o new generations, allowing them to improve upon prev ious
accomplishments.
Other factors in human population growth are migration and public health. Humans originated in Africa, but ha ve since migrated to
nearly all inhabitable land on the Earth. Public hea lth, sanitation, and the use of antibiotics and vac cines have decreased the ability
of infectious disease to limit human population growt h. In the past, diseases such as the bubonic plague of the fourteenth century
killed between 30 and 60 percent of Europe’s populat ion and reduced the overall world population by as m any as 100 million
people. Today, the threat of infectious disease, while not gone, is certainly less severe. According to the Wo rld Health Organization,
global death from infectious disease declined from 1 6.4 million in 1993 to 14.7 million in 1992. To comp are to some of the
epidemics of the past, the percentage of the world’s population killed between 1993 and 2002 decreased fr om 0.30 percent of the
world’s population to 0.24 percent. Thus, it appears tha t the influence of infectious disease on human popul ation growth is
becoming less significant.
Age Structure, Population Growth, and Economic Development
The age structure of a population is an important factor in populatio n dynamics. Age structure is the proportion of a popula tion at
different age ranges. Age structure allows better predic tion of population growth, plus the ability to associ ate this growth with the
level of economic development in the region. Countr ies with rapid growth have a pyramidal shape in their age structure diagrams,
showing a preponderance of younger individuals, many o f whom are of reproductive age or will be soon (Figure). This
pattern is most often observed in underdeveloped cou ntries where individuals do not live to old age becau se of less-than-optimal
living conditions. Age structures of areas with slow gr owth, including developed countries such as the United States, still have a
pyramidal structure, but with many fewer young and rep roductive-aged individuals and a greater proportion of older individuals.
Other developed countries, such as Italy, have zero pop ulation growth. The age structure of these populations is more conical, with
an even greater percentage of middle-aged and older individuals. The actual growth rates in different c ountries are shown in Figure
, with the highest rates tending to be in the less economical ly developed countries of Africa and Asia.

25.5.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70919
Figure: Typical age structure diagrams are shown. The rapid g rowth diagram narrows to a point, indicating that th e number
of individuals decreases rapidly with age. In the slow growth model, the number of individuals decreases stead ily with age. Stable
population diagrams are rounded on the top, showing t hat the number of individuals per age group decreases gradually, and then
increases for the older part of the population. (cred it: “age structure diagram” by OpenStax is licensed un der CC BY 4.0)
Figure: The percent growth rate of population in different countries is shown. Notice that the highest growth is o ccurring in
less economically developed countries in Africa and Asi a. (credit: “growth rate map” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Long-Term Consequences of Exponential Human Population Growth
Many dire predictions have been made about the world’s population leading to a major crisis called the “ population explosion.” In
the 1968 book The Population Bomb, biologist Dr. Paul R. Ehrlich wrote, “The battle to fe ed all of humanity is over. In the 1970s
hundreds of millions of people will starve to death in spite of any crash programs embarked upon now. At t his late date, nothing
can prevent a substantial increase in the world death rate” (Erlich, 1968). While many critics view this sta tement as an
exaggeration, the laws of exponential population growt h are still in effect, and unchecked human population growth cannot
continue indefinitely.
In spite of population control policies such as the one-child policy in China, the human population con tinues to grow. At some
point, the food supply may run out because of the sub sequent need to produce more and more food to feed our population. The
United Nations estimates that future world population gr owth may vary from 6 billion (a decrease) to 16 bill ion people by the year
2100. There is no way to know whether human population growth will moderate to the point where the crisis desc ribed by Dr.
Ehrlich will be averted.
Another result of population growth is the endangerme nt of the natural environment. Many countries have attempted to reduce the
human impact on climate change by reducing their em ission of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide. However, t hese treaties have not
been ratified by every country, and many underdevel oped countries trying to improve their economic cond ition may be less likely
to agree with such provisions if it means slower econ omic development. Furthermore, the role of human activ ity in causing climate
change has become a hotly debated socio-political is sue in some developed countries, including the United States. Thus, we enter
the future with considerable uncertainty about our abil ity to curb human population growth and protect our envir onment.
Summary
The world’s human population is growing at an exponen tial rate. Humans have increased the world’s carrying c apacity through
migration, agriculture, medical advances, and commu nication. The age structure of a population allows us to predict population
growth. Unchecked human population growth could have dire lo ng-term effects on our environment.

25.5.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70919References
Erlich, P. 1968. prologue to The Population Bomb, (1968; repr., New York: Ballantine, 1970).
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
25.5: Human Population Growth is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

25.6.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092025.6: Community Ecology
Populations rarely, if ever, live in isolation from po pulations of other species. In most cases, numerous spe cies share a habitat. The
interactions between these populations play a major r ole in regulating population growth and abundance. Al l populations occupying
the same habitat form a community: populations inha biting a specific area at the same time. The number o f species occupying the
same habitat and their relative abundance is known as species diversity. Areas with low diversity, such as the gl aciers of Antarctica,
still contain a wide variety of living things, whereas the diversity of tropical rainforests is so great that it cannot be counted.
Ecology is studied at the community level to understand h ow species interact with each other and compete for the s ame resources.
Predation and Herbivory
Perhaps the classical example of species interaction is predation: the hunting of prey by its predator. Nature shows o n television
highlight the drama of one living organism killing another. Populations of predators and prey in a commu nity are not constant over
time: in most cases, they vary in cycles that appear t o be related. The most often cited example of preda tor-prey dynamics is seen in
the cycling of the lynx (predator) and the snowshoe h are (prey), using nearly 200 year-old trapping data from North American
forests (Figure). This cycle of predator and prey l ast approximately 10 years, with the predator populat ion lagging 1–2 years
behind that of the prey population. As the hare numb ers increase, there is more food available for the lyn x, allowing the lynx
population to increase as well. When the lynx populati on grows to a threshold level, however, they kill so ma ny hares that hare
population begins to decline, followed by a decline i n the lynx population because of scarcity of food. W hen the lynx population is
low, the hare population size begins to increase due, a t least in part, to low predation pressure, starting the c ycle anew.
Figure: The cycling of lynx and snowshoe hare populations in Northern Ontario is an example of predator-prey dyna mics.
(credit: “lynx and snowshoe hare populations” by OpenSt ax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
The idea that the population cycling of the two spec ies is entirely controlled by predation models has c ome under question. More
recent studies have pointed to undefined density-dep endent factors as being important in the cycling, in addition to predation. One
possibility is that the cycling is inherent in the ha re population due to density-dependent effects such as lower fecundity (maternal
stress) caused by crowding when the hare population g ets too dense. The hare cycling would then induce the cycling of the lynx
because it is the lynxes’ major food source. The mo re we study communities, the more complexities we find, allowing ecologists to
derive more accurate and sophisticated models of popula tion dynamics.
Herbivory describes the consumption of plants by insects and o ther animals, and it is another interspecific relations hip that affects
populations. Unlike animals, most plants cannot outrun predators or use mimicry to hide from hungry animals. Some plants have
developed mechanisms to defend against herbivory. Ot her species have developed mutualistic relationship s; for example, herbivory
provides a mechanism of seed distribution that aids in plant reproduction.
Defense Mechanisms against Predation and Herbivory
The study of communities must consider evolutionary for ces that act on the members of the various populati ons contained within
it. Species are not static, but slowly changing and ada pting to their environment by natural selection and other evolutionary forces.
Species have evolved numerous mechanisms to escape pred ation and herbivory. These defenses may be mechanical, chemical,
physical, or behavioral.
Mechanical defenses, such as the presence of thorns on plants or the har d shell on turtles, discourage animal predation and
herbivory by causing physical pain to the predator or by physically preventing the predator from being able to eat the prey.

25.6.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920Chemical defenses are produced by many animals as well as plants, such a s the foxglove which is extremely toxic when eaten.
Figure shows some organisms’ defenses against predation and herbivory.
Figure: The (a) honey locust tree (Gleditsia triacanthos) uses thorns, a mechanical defense, against herbivores, while the (b)
Florida red-bellied turtle (Pseudemys nelsoni) uses its shell as a mechanical defense against predators. (c) Foxglove (Digitalis sp.)
uses a chemical defense: toxins produced by the plant c an cause nausea, vomiting, hallucinations, convulsions, or death when
consumed. (d) The North American millipede (Narceus americanus) uses both mechanical and chemical defenses: when
threatened, the millipede curls into a defensive ball and produces a noxious substance that irritates eyes and skin. (credit a:
modification of work by Huw Williams; credit b: modi fication of work by “JamieS93”/Flickr; credit c: modi fication of work by
Philip Jägenstedt; credit d: modification of work by C ory Zanker. “defense mechanisms” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY
4.0)
Many species use their body shape and coloration to av oid being detected by predators. The tropical walking stick is an insect with
the coloration and body shape of a twig which makes it very hard to see when stationary against a backgroun d of real twigs (Figure
). In another example, the chameleon can change its color to match its surroundings. Both of these are e xamples of
camouflage or avoiding detection by blending in with the backgroun d.
Figure: (top) The tropical walking stick and (bottom) the c hameleon use body shape and/or coloration to prevent detection
by predators. (credit a: modification of work by Lin da Tanner; credit b: modification of work by Frank Vassen. “camouflage” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)

25.6.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920Some species use coloration as a way of warning predators that they are not good to eat. For example, the cinna bar moth caterpillar,
the fire-bellied toad, and many species of beetle have bright colors that warn of a foul taste, the presenc e of toxic chemicals, and/or
the ability to sting or bite, respectively. Predators th at ignore this coloration and eat the organisms will experience their unpleasant
taste or presence of toxic chemicals and learn not to eat them in the future. This type of defensive mech anism is called aposematic
coloration, or warning coloration (Figure).
Figure: (a) The strawberry poison dart frog (Oophaga pumilio) uses aposematic coloration to warn predators that it is toxic,
while the (b) striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis) uses aposematic coloration to warn predators of the u npleasant odor it produces.
(credit a: modification of work by Jay Iwasaki; credi t b: modification of work by Dan Dzurisin. “warning coloration” by OpenStax
is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
While some predators learn to avoid eating certain p otential prey because of their coloration, other sp ecies have evolved
mechanisms to mimic this coloration to avoid being ea ten, even though they themselves may not be unpleas ant to eat or contain
toxic chemicals. In Batesian mimicry, a harmless species imitates the warning coloration of a harmful one. Assuming they share
the same predators, this coloration then protects t he harmless ones, even though they do not have the sa me level of physical or
chemical defenses against predation as the organism they mimic. Many insect species mimic the coloration of wasps or bees, which
are stinging, venomous insects, thereby discouraging pre dation (Figure).
Figure: Batesian mimicry occurs when a harmless species mimics th e coloration of a harmful species, as is seen with the (a)
bumblebee and (b) bee-like robber fly. (credit a, b: modification of work by Cory Zanker. “Batesian mim icry” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In Müllerian mimicry, multiple species share the same warning coloration, but all of them actually have defenses. Figure
shows a variety of foul-tasting butterflies with simi lar coloration. In Emsleyan/Mertensian mimicry, a deadly prey mimics a less
dangerous one, such as the venomous coral snake mimicki ng the non-venomous milk snake. This type of mimicr y is extremely rare
and more difficult to understand than the previous two types. For this type of mimicry to work, it is essen tial that eating the milk
snake has unpleasant but not fatal consequences. Then, these predators learn not to eat snakes with this c oloration, protecting the
coral snake as well. If the snake were fatal to the pre dator, there would be no opportunity for the predato r to learn not to eat it, and
the benefit for the less toxic species would disappear.

25.6.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920
Figure: Several unpleasant-tasting Heliconius butterfly species share a similar color pattern with b etter-tasting varieties, an
example of Müllerian mimicry. (credit: Joron M, Papa R, Beltrán M, Chamberlain N, Mavárez J, et al. “Heli conius” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Competitive Exclusion Principle
Resources are often limited within a habitat and mult iple species may compete to obtain them. All species hav e an ecological niche
in the ecosystem, which describes how they acquire the resources they need and how they interact with other species in the
community. The competitive exclusion principle states that two species cannot occupy the same niche in a habitat. In other words,
different species cannot coexist in a community if t hey are competing for all the same resources. An examp le of this principle is
shown in Figure, with two protozoan species, Paramecium aurelia and Paramecium caudatum. When grown individually in
the laboratory, they both thrive. But when they are p laced together in the same test tube (habitat), P. aurelia outcompetes P.
caudatum for food, leading to the latter’s eventual extinction.
Figure: Paramecium aurelia and Paramecium caudatum grow well individually, but when they compete for the same
resources, the P. aurelia outcompetes the P. caudatum. (credit: “Paramecium competition” by OpenStax is li censed under CC BY
4.0)
This exclusion may be avoided if a population evolves to make use of a different resource, a different area of the habitat, or feeds
during a different time of day, called resource partitioning. The two organisms are then said to occupy differen t microniches.
These organisms coexist by minimizing direct competit ion.

25.6.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920Symbiosis
Symbiotic relationships, or symbioses (plural), are close interactions between individuals of different species over an extended
period of time which impact the abundance and distri bution of the associating populations. Most scientists accept this definition,
but some restrict the term to only those species th at are mutualistic, where both individuals benefit fro m the interaction. In this
discussion, the broader definition will be used.
Commensalism
A commensal relationship occurs when one species benefits from the close, pr olonged interaction, while the other neither benefits
nor is harmed. Birds nesting in trees provide an exam ple of a commensal relationship (Figure). The tree is not harmed by the
presence of the nest among its branches. The nests are light and produce little strain on the structural i ntegrity of the branch, and
most of the leaves, which the tree uses to get energy by photosynthesis, are above the nest so they are una ffected. The bird, on the
other hand, benefits greatly. If the bird had to nest in the open, its eggs and young would be vulnerable to predators. Another
example of a commensal relationship is the clownfish a nd the sea anemone. The sea anemone is not harmed by th e fish and the fish
benefits with protection from predators who would be stung upo n nearing the sea anemone.
Figure: The southern masked-weaver bird is starting to make a nest in a tree in Zambezi Valley, Zambia. This is an e xample
of a commensal relationship, in which one species (the bird) benefits, while the other (the tree) neither b enefits nor is harmed.
(credit: “Hanay”/Wikimedia Commons. “Hanay” by OpenS tax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Mutualism
A second type of symbiotic relationship is called mutualism, where two species benefit from their interaction. Some scientists
believe that these are the only true examples of sy mbiosis. For example, termites have a mutualistic re lationship with protozoa that
live in the insect’s gut (Figure). The termite benef its from the ability of bacterial symbionts within t he protozoa to digest
cellulose. The termite itself cannot do this, and witho ut the protozoa, it would not be able to obtain ener gy from its food (cellulose
from the wood it chews and eats). The protozoa and the bacterial symbionts benefit by having a protective environment and a
constant supply of food from the wood chewing actions of the termite. Lichens have a mutualistic relation ship between fungus and
photosynthetic algae or bacteria (Figure). As these sy mbionts grow together, the glucose produced by the a lgae provides
nourishment for both organisms, whereas the physical st ructure of the lichen protects the algae from the e lements and makes
certain nutrients in the atmosphere more available to the a lgae.
Figure: (a) Termites form a mutualistic relationship with symb iotic protozoa in their guts, which allow both organ isms to
obtain energy from the cellulose the termite consumes. (b) Lichen is a fungus that has symbiotic photosyntheti c algae living inside
its cells. (credit a: modification of work by Scott Ba uer, USDA; credit b: modification of work by Cory Za nker. “mutualism” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Parasitism
A parasite is an organism that lives in or on another living or ganism and derives nutrients from it. In a parasitic relationship, the
parasite benefits, but the organism being fed upon, th e host, is harmed. The host is usually weakened by the parasite as it siphons

25.6.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920resources the host would normally use to maintain itse lf. The parasite, however, is unlikely to kill the host, especially not quickly,
because this would allow no time for the organism to compl ete its reproductive cycle by spreading to another host.
The reproductive cycles of parasites are often very complex, sometimes requiring more than one host speci es. A tapeworm is a
parasite that causes disease in humans when contaminat ed, undercooked meat such as pork, fish, or beef is consu med (Figure
). The tapeworm can live inside the intestine of the host for several years, benefiting from the food the host is bringing into
its gut by eating, and may grow to be over 50 ft long by adding segments. The parasite moves from species to species in a cycle,
making two hosts necessary to complete its life cycle. Another common parasite is Plasmodium falciparum, the protozoan cause of
malaria, a significant disease in many parts of the world. Living in human liver and red blood cells, th e organism reproduces
asexually in the gut of blood-feeding mosquitoes to complete its life cycle. Thus malaria is spread from h uman to human by
mosquitoes, one of many arthropod-borne infectious disea ses.
Figure: This diagram shows the life cycle of a pork tapeworm (Taenia solium), a human worm parasite. (credit:
modification of work by CDC. “Taenia solium” by Open Stax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Characteristics of Communities
Communities are complex entities that can be charac terized by their structure (the types and numbers of species present) and
dynamics (how communities change over time). Understanding comm unity structure and dynamics enable community ecolog ists
to manage ecosystems more effectively.
Foundation Species
Foundation species are considered the “base” or “bedrock” of a commun ity, having the greatest influence on its overall str ucture.
They are usually the primary producers: organisms that bring most of the energy into the co mmunity. Kelp, brown algae, is a
foundation species, forming the basis of the kelp forests off the coast of California.
Foundation species may physically modify the environ ment to produce and maintain habitats that benefit t he other organisms that
use them. An example is the photosynthetic corals of the coral reef (Figure). Corals themselves are not ph otosynthetic, but
harbor symbionts within their body tissues (dinoflage llates called zooxanthellae) that perform photosynth esis; this is another
example of a mutualism. The exoskeletons of living a nd dead coral make up most of the reef structure, whic h protects many other
species from waves and ocean currents.

25.6.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920
Figure: Coral is the foundation species of coral reef ecosystem s. (credit: Jim E. Maragos, USFWS. “coral reflection” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Biodiversity, Species Richness, and Relative Species Abundance
Biodiversity describes a community’s biological complexity: it is measured by the number of different species (species richness)
in a particular area and their relative abundance (species evenness). The area in question could be a habitat, a biome, or the entire
biosphere. Species richness is the term that is used to describe the number of species living in a habitat or biome. Species richness
varies across the globe (Figure). One factor in deter mining species richness is latitude, with the greatest species richness
occurring in ecosystems near the equator, which often have warmer temperatures, large amounts of rainfall, a nd low seasonality.
The lowest species richness occurs near the poles, which are much colder, drier, and thus less conducive to life in Geologic time
(time since glaciations). The predictability of clima te or productivity is also an important factor. Other factors influence species
richness as well. For example, the study of island biog eography attempts to explain the relatively high spe cies richness found in
certain isolated island chains, including the Galápagos Islands that inspired the young Darwin. Relative species abundance is the
number of individuals in a species relative to the t otal number of individuals in all species within a ha bitat, ecosystem, or biome.
Foundation species often have the highest relative abund ance of species.
Figure: The greatest species richness for mammals in North and So uth America is associated with the equatorial latitude s.
(credit: modification of work by NASA, CIESIN, Colum bia University. “species richness map” by OpenStax is lice nsed under CC
BY 4.0)
Keystone Species
A keystone species is one whose presence is key to maintaining biodive rsity within an ecosystem and to upholding an ecologic al
community’s structure. The intertidal sea star, Pisaster ochraceus, of the northwestern United States is a keystone speci es (Figure
). Studies have shown that when this organism is remov ed from communities, populations of their natural p rey (mussels)
increase, completely altering the species composition and reducing biodiversity. Another keystone species i s the banded tetra, a fish
in tropical streams, which supplies nearly all of the phosphorus, a necessary inorganic nutrient, to the r est of the community. If
these fish were to become extinct, the community would be gr eatly affected.

25.6.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920
Figure: The Pisaster ochraceus sea star is a keystone species. (credit: Jerry Kirkhart. “Pisaster ochraceus” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Everyday Connection – Invasive Species
Invasive species are non-native organisms that, when introduced to an area out of their native range, threaten the ecosy stem
balance of that habitat. Many such species exist in t he United States, as shown in Figure. Whether enjoying a forest hike,
taking a summer boat trip, or simply walking down an urban street, you have likely encountered an invasive species.
Figure: In the United States, invasive species like (a) purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria) and the (b) zebra mussel
(Dreissena polymorpha) threaten certain aquatic ecosystems. Some forests are t hreatened by the spread of (c) common buckthorn
(Rhamnus cathartica), (d) garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata), and (e) the emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis). The (f) European
starling (Sturnus vulgaris) may compete with native bird species for nest holes. (credit a: modification of work by Liz West; credit
b: modification of work by M. McCormick, NOAA; cred it c: modification of work by E. Dronkert; credit d: modification of work
by Dan Davison; credit e: modification of work by USD A; credit f: modification of work by Don DeBold. “i nvasive species” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
One of the many recent proliferations of an invasive species concerns the growth of Asian carp populations. Asian carp were
introduced to the United States in the 1970s by fishe ries and sewage treatment facilities that used the fi sh’s excellent filter feeding
capabilities to clean their ponds of excess plankto n. Some of the fish escaped, however, and by the 1980s they had colonized many
waterways of the Mississippi River basin, including the Illi nois and Missouri Rivers.
V oracious eaters and rapid reproducers, Asian carp may o utcompete native species for food, potentially leadin g to their extinction.
For example, black carp are voracious eaters of native mussels and snails, limiting this food source for nati ve fish species. Silver
carp eat plankton that native mussels and snails fe ed on, reducing this food source by a different alte ration of the food web. In some
areas of the Mississippi River, Asian carp species ha ve become the most predominant, effectively outcomp eting native fishes for
habitat. In some parts of the Illinois River, Asian ca rp constitute 95 percent of the community’s biomass. Although edible, the fish
is bony and not a desired food in the United States. Moreover, their presence threatens the native fish an d fisheries of the Great
Lakes, which are important to local economies and rec reational anglers. Asian carp have even injured human s. The fish, frightened
by the sound of approaching motorboats, thrust themselves into the air, often landing in the boat or directly hit ting the boaters.
The Great Lakes and their prized salmon and lake tro ut fisheries are also being threatened by these invasi ve fish. Asian carp have
already colonized rivers and canals that lead into Lake Michigan. One infested waterway of particular importa nce is the Chicago
Sanitary and Ship Channel, the major supply waterway lin king the Great Lakes to the Mississippi River. To prev ent the Asian carp
from leaving the canal, a series of electric barrier s have been successfully used to discourage their migr ation; however, the threat is

25.6.9 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920significant enough that several states and Canada hav e sued to have the Chicago channel permanently cut off from Lake Michigan.
Local and national politicians have weighed in on how to solve the problem, but no one knows whether the Asia n carp will
ultimately be considered a nuisance, like other inva sive species such as the water hyacinth and zebra musse l, or whether it will be
the destroyer of the largest freshwater fishery of the worl d.
The issues associated with Asian carp show how population and community ecology, fisheries management, and pol itics intersect
on issues of vital importance to the human food supply and economy. Socio-political issues like this make e xtensive use of the
sciences of population ecology (the study of members of a particular species occupying a particular are a known as a habitat) and
community ecology (the study of the interaction of all species within a habitat).
Community Dynamics
Community dynamics are the changes in community structure and composit ion over time. Sometimes these changes are induced
by environmental disturbances such as volcanoes, ea rthquakes, storms, fires, and climate change. Communitie s with a stable
structure are said to be at equilibrium. Following a disturban ce, the community may or may not return to the equilib rium state.
Succession describes the sequential appearance and disap pearance of species in a community over time. In pr imary succession,
newly exposed or newly formed land is colonized by li ving things; in secondary succession, part of an eco system is disturbed and
remnants of the previous community remain.
Primary Succession and Pioneer Species
Primary succession occurs when new land is formed or rock is exposed: for example, following the eruption of volcanoes, such as
those on the Big Island of Hawaii. As lava flows into th e ocean, new land is continually being formed. On the B ig Island,
approximately 32 acres of land is added each year. Fi rst, weathering and other natural forces break down t he substrate enough for
the establishment of certain hearty plants and lich ens with few soil requirements, known as pioneer species. These species help to
further break down the mineral rich lava into soil wh ere other, less hardy species will grow and eventuall y replace the pioneer
species. In addition, as these early species grow and die, they add to an ever-growing layer of decomposing organic material and
contribute to soil formation. Over time the area will reach an equilibrium state, with a set of organisms quite different from the
pioneer species.
Secondary succession
A classic example of secondary succession occurs in oak and hickory forests cleared by wildfi re (Figure). Wildfires will
burn most vegetation and kill those animals unable t o flee the area. Their nutrients, however, are returne d to the ground in the form
of ash. Thus, even when areas are devoid of life due to sever e fires, the area will soon be ready for new life to take ho ld.
Before the fire, the vegetation was dominated by tall trees with access to the major plant energy resource: sunlight. Their height
gave them access to sunlight while also shading the ground and other low-lying species. After the fire, t hough, these trees are no
longer dominant. Thus, the first plants to grow back a re usually annual plants followed within a few years by quickly growing and
spreading grasses and other pioneer species. Due to, at least in part, changes in the environment brought o n by the growth of the
grasses and other species, over many years, shrubs wil l emerge along with small pine, oak, and hickory trees. These organisms are
called intermediate species. Eventually, over 150 year s, the forest will reach its equilibrium point where s pecies composition is no
longer changing and resembles the community before the fire. This equilibrium state is referred to as th e climax community, which
will remain stable until the next disturbance.

25.6.10 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70920
Figure: Secondary succession is shown in an oak and hickory fore st after a forest fire. (credit: “Secondary succession” b y
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Summary
Communities include all the different species livin g in a given area. The variety of these species is c alled species richness. Many
organisms have developed defenses against predation a nd herbivory, including mechanical defenses, warning co loration, and
mimicry, as a result of evolution and the interacti on with other members of the community. Two species can not exist in the same
habitat competing directly for the same resources. Spe cies may form symbiotic relationships such as commens alism or mutualism.
Community structure is described by its foundation an d keystone species. Communities respond to environmental disturbances by
succession (the predictable appearance of different ty pes of plant species) until a stable community structure is established.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
25.6: Community Ecology is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

25.7.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092125.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate Causes of Behavior
Behavior is the change in activity of an organism in response to a stimulus. Behavioral biology is the study of the biological and
evolutionary bases for such changes. The idea that beha viors evolved as a result of the pressures of natura l selection is not new.
Animal behavior has been studied for decades, by biol ogists in the science of ethology, by psychologists i n the science of
comparative psychology, and by scientists of many disci plines in the study of neurobiology. Although there is overlap between
these disciplines, scientists in these behavioral fie lds take different approaches. Comparative psycholo gy is an extension of work
done in human and behavioral psychology. Ethology is a n extension of genetics, evolution, anatomy, physiolog y, and other
biological disciplines. Still, one cannot study behavior al biology without touching on both comparative psycho logy and ethology.
One goal of behavioral biology is to dissect out the i nnate behaviors, which have a strong genetic componen t and are largely
independent of environmental influences, from the le arned behaviors, which result from environmental con ditioning. Innate
behavior, or instinct, is important because there is n o risk of an incorrect behavior being learned. They are “hard wired” into the
system. On the other hand, learned behaviors, although riskier, are flexible, dynamic, and can be altered acc ording to changes in the
environment.
Innate Behaviors: Movement and Migration
Innate or instinctual behaviors rely on response to stimuli. The simplest example of this is a reflex action, an involuntary and
rapid response to stimulus. To test the “knee-jerk” reflex, a doctor taps the patellar tendon below the kne ecap with a rubber
hammer. The stimulation of the nerves there leads to the reflex of extending the leg at the knee. This i s similar to the reaction of
someone who touches a hot stove and instinctually pul ls his or her hand away. Even humans, with our great c apacity to learn, still
exhibit a variety of innate behaviors.
Kinesis and Taxis
Another activity or movement of innate behavior is kinesis, or the undirected movement in response to a stimul us. Orthokinesis is
the increased or decreased speed of movement of an organism in response to a stimulus. Woodlice, for examp le, increase their
speed of movement when exposed to high or low tempera tures. This movement, although random, increases the probability that the
insect spends less time in the unfavorable environmen t. Another example is klinokinesis, an increase in turning behaviors. It is
exhibited by bacteria such as E. coli which, in association with orthokinesis, helps the o rganisms randomly find a more hospitable
environment.
A similar, but more directed version of kinesis is taxis: the directed movement towards or away from a stimulu s. This movement
can be in response to light (phototaxis), chemical signals (chemotaxis), or gravity (geotaxis) and can be directed toward (positive)
or away (negative) from the source of the stimulus. An example of a p ositive chemotaxis is exhibited by the unicellular protozoan
Tetrahymena thermophila. This organism swims using its cilia, at times moving in a straight line, and at other times making turns.
The attracting chemotactic agent alters the frequen cy of turning as the organism moves directly toward th e source, following the
increasing concentration gradient.
Fixed Action Patterns
A fixed action pattern is a series of movements elicited by a stimulus such that even when the stimulus is removed, the pattern
goes on to completion. An example of such a behavior o ccurs in the three-spined stickleback, a small freshwa ter fish (Figure
). Males of this species develop a red belly during b reeding season and show instinctual aggressiveness to other males during
this time. In laboratory experiments, researchers expose d such fish to objects that in no way resemble a fish in their shape, but
which were painted red on their lower halves. The male sticklebacks responded aggressively to the objects jus t as if they were real
male sticklebacks.

25.7.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70921
Figure: Male three-spined stickleback fish exhibit a fixed ac tion pattern. During mating season, the males, which d evelop a
bright red belly, react strongly to red-bottomed obj ects that in no way resemble fish. (credit: “fixed act ion pattern” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Migration
Migration is the long-range seasonal movement of animals. It i s an evolved, adapted response to variation in resourc e availability,
and it is a common phenomenon found in all major gr oups of animals. Birds fly south for the winter to get to warmer climates with
sufficient food, and salmon migrate to their spawning grounds. The popular 2005 documentary March of the Penguins followed the
62-mile migration of emperor penguins through Antarcti ca to bring food back to their breeding site and to their yo ung.
Although migration is thought of as innate behavior, only some migrating species always migrate (obligate migration). Animals
that exhibit facultative migration can choose to mi grate or not. Additionally, in some animals, only a p ortion of the population
migrates, whereas the rest does not migrate (incomplete migration). For example, owls that live in the tundra may migra te in years
when their food source, small rodents, is relatively scarc e, but not migrate during the years when rodents are ple ntiful.
Foraging
Foraging is the act of searching for and exploiting food reso urces. Feeding behaviors that maximize energy gain a nd minimize
energy expenditure are called optimal foraging behavi ors, and these are favored by natural section.
Innate Behaviors: Living in Groups
Not all animals live in groups, but even those that l ive relatively solitary lives, with the exception of t hose that can reproduce
asexually, must mate. Mating usually involves one anim al signaling another so as to communicate the desir e to mate. There are
several types of energy-intensive behaviors or disp lays associated with mating, called mating rituals. Other behaviors found in
populations that live in groups are described in ter ms of which animal benefits from the behavior. In selfish behavior, only the
animal in question benefits; in altruistic behavior, one animal’s actions benefit another animal; coope rative behavior describes
when both animals benefit. All of these behaviors involve some sort of communication between population members.
Communication within a Species
Animals communicate with each other using stimuli kno wn as signals. An example of this is seen in the three-spined stick leback,
where the visual signal of a red region in the lower half of a fish signals males to become aggressive and signals females to mate.
Other signals are chemical (pheromones), aural (sound), visual (courtship and aggressive displays), or tactile (touch). These types
of communication may be instinctual or learned or a combination of both. These are not the same as the communication we
associate with language, which has been observed only in hum ans and perhaps in some species of primates and cetaceans.
A pheromone is a secreted chemical signal used to obt ain a response from another individual of the same spe cies. The purpose of
pheromones is to elicit a specific behavior from the receiving individual. Pheromones are especially comm on among social insects,
but they are used by many species to attract the opp osite sex, to sound alarms, to mark food trails, and t o elicit other, more complex
behaviors. Even humans are thought to respond to ce rtain pheromones called axillary steroids. These chemicals influence human
perception of other people, and in one study were resp onsible for a group of women synchronizing their mens trual cycles. The role
of pheromones in human-to-human communication is still so mewhat controversial and continues to be researched.
Songs are an example of an aural signal, one that nee ds to be heard by the recipient. Perhaps the best known of these are songs of
birds, which identify the species and are used to att ract mates. Other well-known songs are those of whales, whi ch are of such low
frequency that they can travel long distances under water. Dolphins communicate with each other using a wide variety of

25.7.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70921vocalizations. Male crickets make chirping sounds using a specialized organ to attract a mate, repel other males, and to announce a
successful mating.
Courtship displays are a series of ritualized visual behaviors (signals) designed to attract and convince a member of the opposite
sex to mate. These displays are ubiquitous in the an imal kingdom. Often these displays involve a series o f steps, including an initial
display by one member followed by a response from the other. If at any point, the display is performed inco rrectly or a proper
response is not given, the mating ritual is abandoned and t he mating attempt will be unsuccessful.
Aggressive displays are also common in the animal kingdom. An example i s when a dog bares its teeth when it wants another dog
to back down. Presumably, these displays communicate no t only the willingness of the animal to fight but al so its fighting ability.
Although these displays do signal aggression on the p art of the sender, it is thought that these displays are actually a mechanism to
reduce the amount of actual fighting that occurs be tween members of the same species: they allow individu als to assess the fighting
ability of their opponent and thus decide whether it is “worth the fight.” The testing of certain hypothe ses using game theory has
led to the conclusion that some of these displays m ay overstate an animal’s actual fighting ability and are used to “bluff” the
opponent. This type of interaction, even if “dishonest,” would be favored by natural selection if it is successful m ore times than not.
Distraction displays are seen in birds and some fish. They are designed to attract a predator away from the nest that contai ns their
young. This is an example of an altruistic behavior: it benefits the young more than the individual per forming the display, which is
putting itself at risk by doing so.
Many animals, especially primates, communicate with other members in the group through touch. Activities such as grooming,
touching the shoulder or root of the tail, embracing, lip contact, and greeting ceremonies have all bee n observed in the Indian
langur, an Old World monkey. Similar behaviors are found i n other primates, especially in the great apes.
Altruistic Behaviors
Behaviors that lower the fitness of the individual bu t increase the fitness of another individual are ter med altruistic. Examples of
such behaviors are seen widely across the animal kingd om. Social insects such as worker bees have no ability to reproduce, yet
they maintain the queen so she can populate the hive with her offspring. Meerkats keep a sentry standing guard to warn the rest of
the colony about intruders, even though the sentry is putting itself at risk. Wolves and wild dogs bring meat to pack members not
present during a hunt. Lemurs take care of infants u nrelated to them. Although on the surface, these beha viors appear to be
altruistic, it may not be so simple.
There has been much discussion over why altruistic be haviors exist. Do these behaviors lead to overall evo lutionary advantages for
their species? Do they help the altruistic individua l pass on its own genes? And what about such activities between unrelated
individuals? One explanation for altruistic-type beha viors is found in the genetics of natural selection. In the 1976 book, The Selfish
Gene, scientist Richard Dawkins attempted to explain many se emingly altruistic behaviors from the viewpoint of th e gene itself.
Although a gene obviously cannot be selfish in the hu man sense, it may appear that way if the sacrifice of an individual benefits
related individuals that share genes that are identic al by descent (present in relatives because of comm on lineage). Mammal parents
make this sacrifice to take care of their offspring. Emperor penguins migrate miles in harsh conditions t o bring food back for their
young. The selfish gene concept has been controversial over the years and is still discussed among scientists in related fields.
Even less-related individuals, those with less genetic i dentity than that shared by parent and offspring, be nefit from seemingly
altruistic behavior. The activities of social insect s such as bees, wasps, ants, and termites are good examp les. Sterile workers in
these societies take care of the queen because they are closely related to it, and as the queen has offs pring, she is passing on genes
from the workers indirectly. Thus, it is of fitness b enefit for the worker to maintain the queen without h aving any direct chance of
passing on its genes due to its sterility. The loweri ng of individual fitness to enhance the reproductive fitness of a relative and thus
one’s inclusive fitness evolves through kin selection. This phenomenon can explain many superficially altruistic behaviors seen in
animals. However, these behaviors may not be truly defi ned as altruism in these cases because the actor is ac tually increasing its
own fitness either directly (through its own offspring) or indirectly (through the inclusive fitness it gai ns through relatives that
share genes with it).
Unrelated individuals may also act altruistically to e ach other, and this seems to defy the selfish gene exp lanation. An example of
this observed in many monkey species where a monkey wi ll present its back to an unrelated monkey to have that individual pick
the parasites from its fur. After a certain amount of time, the roles are reversed and the first monkey n ow grooms the second

25.7.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70921monkey. Thus, there is reciprocity in the behavior. Both benefit from the interaction a nd their fitness is raised more than if neither
cooperated nor if one cooperated and the other did not cooperate. This behavior is still not necessarily a ltruism, as the giving
behavior of the actor is based on the expectation th at it will be the receiver of the behavior in the fu ture, termed reciprocal altruism.
Reciprocal altruism requires that individuals repeate dly encounter each other, often the result of livin g in the same social group and
that cheaters (those that never give back) are punished.
Evolutionary game theory, a modification of classica l game theory in mathematics, has shown that many of t hese so-called
altruistic behaviors are not altruistic at all. The definition of pure altruism, based on human behavior, is an action that benefits
another without any direct benefit to oneself. Most of t he behaviors previously described do not seem to sa tisfy this definition, and
game theorists are good at finding selfish component s in them. Others have argued that the terms “selfish” and “altruistic” should
be dropped completely when discussing animal behavior, as they describe human behavior and may not be dire ctly applicable to
instinctual animal activity. What is clear, though, is that heritable behaviors that improve the chance s of passing on one’s genes or a
portion of one’s genes are favored by natural selec tion and will be retained in future generations as lon g as those behaviors convey
a fitness advantage. These instinctual behaviors may then be applied, in special circumstances, to other sp ecies, as long as it doesn’t
lower the animal’s fitness.
Finding Sex Partners
Not all animals reproduce sexually, but many that do have the same challenge: they need to find a suitabl e mate and often have to
compete with other individuals to obtain one. Signifi cant energy is spent in the process of locating, att racting, and mating with the
sex partner. Two types of selection occur during this process and can lead to traits that are important to reproduction called
secondary sexual characteristics: intersexual selection, the choosing of a mate where individuals of one sex choose mates of the
other sex, and intrasexual selection, the competition for mates between species members o f the same sex. Intersexual selection is
often complex because choosing a mate may be based o n a variety of visual, aural, tactile, and chemical c ues. An example of
intersexual selection is when female peacocks choose to mate with the male with the brightest plumage. This t ype of selection often
leads to traits in the chosen sex that do not enhanc e survival but are those traits most attractive to th e opposite sex (often at the
expense of survival). Intrasexual selection involves ma ting displays and aggressive mating rituals such as ram s butting heads—the
winner of these battles is the one that is able to mat e. Many of these rituals use up considerable energy b ut result in the selection of
the healthiest, strongest, and/or most dominant indivi duals for mating. Three general mating systems, all involving innate as
opposed to learned behaviors, are seen in animal popul ations: monogamous, polygynous, and polyandrous.
In monogamous systems, one male and one female are paired for at least on e breeding season. In some animals, such as the gray
wolf, these associations can last much longer, even a li fetime. Several explanations have been proposed for th is type of mating
system. The “ mate-guarding hypothesis ” states that males stay with the female to prevent ot her males from mating with her. This
behavior is advantageous in such situations where mat es are scarce and difficult to find. Another explanat ion is the “ maleassistance hypothesis,” where males that remain with a female to help guard and rear their young will have more and healthier
offspring. Monogamy is observed in many bird populatio ns where, in addition to the parental care from the f emale, the male is also
a major provider of parental care for the chicks. A t hird explanation for the evolutionary advantages of monogamy is the “ femaleenforcement hypothesis.” In this scenario, the female ensures that the male d oes not have other offspring that might compete with
her own, so she actively interferes with the male’s signaling to attract other mates.
Polygynous mating refers to one male mating with multiple female s. In these situations, the female must be responsible for most of
the parental care as the single male is not capable of providing care to that many offspring. In resourc ed-based polygyny, males
compete for territories with the best resources and t hen mate with females that enter the territory, drawn to its resource richness.
The female benefits by mating with a dominant, genet ically fit male; however, it is at the cost of havin g no male help in caring for
the offspring. An example is seen in the yellow-rumped h oneyguide, a bird whose males defend beehives because th e females feed
on their wax. As the females approach, the male defendin g the nest will mate with them. Harem mating structures are a type of
polygynous system where certain males dominate mating while controlling a territory with resources. Elephant seals, where the
alpha male dominates the mating within the group, ar e an example. A third type of polygyny is a lek system. Here there is a
communal courting area where several males perform el aborate displays for females, and the females choose their mate from this
group. This behavior is observed in several bird species i ncluding the sage grouse and the prairie chicken.

25.7.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70921In polyandrous mating systems, one female mates with many males. These types of sy stems are much rarer than monogamous
and polygynous mating systems. In pipefishes and seaho rses, males receive the eggs from the female, fertili ze them, protect them
within a pouch, and give birth to the offspring (Figur e). Therefore, the female is able to provide eggs to several males
without the burden of carrying the fertilized eggs.
Figure: Polyandrous mating, in which one female mates with ma ny males, occurs in the (a) seahorse and the (b) pipefi sh.
(credit a: modification of work by Brian Gratwicke; credit b: modification of work by Stephen Childs. “ polyandry” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Simple Learned Behaviors
The majority of the behaviors previously discussed we re innate or at least have an innate component (variations on the innate
behaviors may be learned). They are inherited and t he behaviors do not change in response to signals fro m the environment.
Conversely, learned behaviors, even though they may have instinctive components, a llow an organism to adapt to changes in the
environment and are modified by previous experiences. Simple learned behaviors include habituation and im printing—both are
important to the maturation process of young animals.
Habituation
Habituation is a simple form of learning in which an animal stop s responding to a stimulus after a period of repeated exposure.
This is a form of non-associative learning, as the stim ulus is not associated with any punishment or reward. Prai rie dogs typically
sound an alarm call when threatened by a predator, b ut they become habituated to the sound of human foo tsteps when no harm is
associated with this sound, therefore, they no longer respond to them with an alarm call. In this example, habituation is specific to
the sound of human footsteps, as the animals still resp ond to the sounds of potential predators.
Imprinting
Imprinting is a type of learning that occurs at a particular age or a life stage that is rapid and independent o f the species involved.
Hatchling ducks recognize the first adult they see, t heir mother, and make a bond with her. A familiar sig ht is ducklings walking or
swimming after their mothers (Figure). This is another type of non-associative learning but is very import ant in the
maturation process of these animals as it encourages t hem to stay near their mother so they will be protect ed, greatly increasing
their chances of survival. However, if newborn ducks se e a human before they see their mother, they will imp rint on the human and
follow it in just the same manner as they would follow their real mother. The International Crane Foundatio n has helped raise the
world’s population of whooping cranes from 21 individu als to about 600. Imprinting hatchlings has been a ke y to success:
biologists wear full crane costumes so the birds never “see” humans.
Figure: The attachment of ducklings to their mother is an ex ample of imprinting. (credit: modification of work by Mark
Harkin, “imprinting” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Conditioned Behavior
Conditioned behaviors are types of associative learning, where a stimulus b ecomes associated with a consequence. During
operant conditioning, the behavioral response is modified by its consequences, with regards to its form, strength, or frequency.

25.7.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70921Classical Conditioning
In classical conditioning, a response called the conditioned response is assoc iated with a stimulus that it had previously not bee n
associated with, the conditioned stimulus. The response to the original, unconditioned stimulus is called t he unconditioned
response. The most cited example of classical condit ioning is Ivan Pavlov’s experiments with dogs (Figure). In Pavlov’s
experiments, the unconditioned response was the saliv ation of dogs in response to the unconditioned stim ulus of seeing or smelling
their food. The conditioning stimulus that research ers associated with the unconditioned response was the ringing of a bell. During
conditioning, every time the animal was given food, the bell was rung. This was repeated during several tria ls. After some time, the
dog learned to associate the ringing of the bell wit h food and to respond by salivating. After the condi tioning period was finished,
the dog would respond by salivating when the bell was r ung, even when the unconditioned stimulus, the food, wa s absent. Thus,
the ringing of the bell became the conditioned stim ulus and the salivation became the conditioned respo nse. Although it is thought
by some scientists that the unconditioned and condit ioned responses are identical, even Pavlov discovered that the saliva in the
conditioned dogs had characteristic differences when com pared to the unconditioned dog.
Figure: In the classic Pavlovian response, the dog becomes condi tioned to associate the ringing of the bell with food. (credit:
“Pavlovian response” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
It had been thought by some scientists that this typ e of conditioning required multiple exposures to th e paired stimulus and
response, but it is now known that this is not necessary in all cases and that some conditioning can be lear ned in a single pairing
experiment. Classical conditioning is a major tenet o f behaviorism, a branch of psychological philosophy that proposes that all
actions, thoughts, and emotions of living things are behaviors that can be treated by behavior modificat ion and changes in the
environment.
Operant Conditioning
In operant conditioning, the conditioned behavior is gradually modified by its consequences as the animal responds to the
stimulus. A major proponent of such conditioning was p sychologist B.F. Skinner, the inventor of the Skinner box. Skinner put rats
in his boxes that contained a lever that would dispe nse food to the rat when depressed. While initially t he rat would push the lever a
few times by accident, it eventually associated pushi ng the lever with getting the food. This type of learn ing is an example of
operant conditioning. Operant learning is the basis of most animal training. The conditioned behavior is co ntinually modified by
positive or negative reinforcement, often a reward such as food or some type of punishm ent, respectively. In this way, the animal
is conditioned to associate a type of behavior with the punishment or reward, and, over time, can be induce d to perform behaviors
that they would not have done in the wild, such as the tric ks dolphins perform at marine amusement park shows (Figu re).
Figure: The training of dolphins by rewarding them with foo d is an example of positive reinforcement operant con ditioning.
(credit: Roland Tanglao. “operant conditioning” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Cognitive Learning
Classical and operant conditioning are inefficient wa ys for humans and other intelligent animals to learn. Some primates, including
humans, are able to learn by imitating the behavior o f others and by taking instructions. The development of complex language by

25.7.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70921humans has made cognitive learning, the manipulation of information using the mind, th e most prominent method of human
learning. In fact, that is how students are learning ri ght now by reading this book. As students read, they can make mental images
of objects or organisms and imagine changes to them, o r behaviors by them, and anticipate the consequences. In addition to visual
processing, cognitive learning is also enhanced by rem embering past experiences, touching physical object s, hearing sounds,
tasting food, and a variety of other sensory-based i nputs. Cognitive learning is so powerful that it can be used to understand
conditioning in detail. In the reverse scenario, conditi oning cannot help someone learn about cognition.
Classic work on cognitive learning was done by Wolfgang Köhler with chimpanzees. He demonstrated that these anima ls were
capable of abstract thought by showing that they could learn how to solve a puzzle. When a banana was hung in their cage too high
for them to reach, and several boxes were placed rand omly on the floor, some of the chimps were able to s tack the boxes one on top
of the other, climb on top of them, and get the ban ana. This implies that they could visualize the result of stacking the boxes even
before they had performed the action. This type of lea rning is much more powerful and versatile than conditioni ng.
Cognitive learning is not limited to primates, altho ugh they are the most efficient in using it. Maze runni ng experiments done with
rats by H.C. Blodgett in the 1920s were the first to sh ow cognitive skills in a simple mammal. The motivation for the animals to
work their way through the maze was a piece of food at its end. In these studies, the animals in Group I were ru n in one trial per
day and had food available to them each day on comp letion of the run (Figure). Group II rats were not fe d in the maze for the
first six days and then subsequent runs were done with food for several days after. Group III rats had food av ailable on the third day
and every day thereafter. The results were that the co ntrol rats, Group I, learned quickly, and figured out h ow to run the maze in
seven days. Group III did not learn much during the t hree days without food but rapidly caught up to the control group when given
the food reward. Group II learned very slowly for the six days with no reward to motivate them, and they did not begin to catch up
to the control group until the day food was given, and then it took two days longer to learn the maze.
Figure
It may not be immediately obvious that this type of learning is different than conditioning. Although one might be tempted to
believe that the rats simply learned how to find thei r way through a conditioned series of right and left turns, E.C. Tolman proved a
decade later that the rats were making a representat ion of the maze in their minds, which he called a “cog nitive map.” This was an
early demonstration of the power of cognitive learning and how these abilities were not just limited to humans.
Sociobiology
Sociobiology is an interdisciplinary science originally populari zed by social insect researcher E.O. Wilson in the 19 70s. Wilson
defined the science as “the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organizat ion” (Wilson, 1978). The
main thrust of sociobiology is that animal and huma n behavior, including aggressiveness and other socia l interactions, can be
explained almost solely in terms of genetics and nat ural selection. This science is controversial; noted scientists such as the late
Stephen Jay Gould criticized the approach for ignorin g the environmental effects on behavior. This is anoth er example of the
nature versus nurture debate of the role of genetics versus the role of t he environment in determining an organism’s
characteristics.
Sociobiology also links genes with behaviors and has b een associated with “ biological determinism,” the belief that all behaviors
are hardwired into our genes. No one disputes that ce rtain behaviors can be inherited and that natural s election plays a role in
retaining them. It is the application of such principles t o human behavior that sparks this controversy, which rema ins active today.

25.7.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70921Summary
Behaviors are responses to stimuli. They can either be instinctual/innate behaviors, which are not influenc ed by the environment, or
learned behaviors, which are influenced by environme ntal changes. Instinctual behaviors include mating syst ems and methods of
communication. Learned behaviors include imprinting and habituation, conditioning, and, most powerfully, co gnitive learning.
Although the connection between behavior, genetics, and evolution is well established, the explanation of hum an behavior as
entirely genetic is controversial.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Wilson, E. 1978. On Human Nature (repr., Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004), xx.
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate Ca uses of Behavior is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
26: Ecosystems
Figure: In the southwestern United States, rainy weather cause s an increase in production of pinyon nuts, causing the deer
mouse population to explode. Deer mice may carry a v irus called Sin Nombre (a hantavirus) that causes respiratory disease in
humans and has a high fatality rate. In 1992–1993, we t El Niño weather caused a Sin Nombre epidemic. Navajo healers, who were
aware of the link between this disease and weather, pr edicted the outbreak. (credit “highway”: modificati on of work by Phillip
Capper; credit “mouse”: modification of work by USFWS. “Sin Nombre epidemic” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In 1993, an interesting example of ecosystem dynamics occurred when a rare lung disease struck inhabitants of the southwestern
United States (Figure). This disease had an alarming r ate of fatalities, killing more than half of early pa tients, many of whom
were Native Americans. These formerly healthy young ad ults died from complete respiratory failure. The dis ease was unknown,
and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the United Sta tes government agency responsible for managing potent ial epidemics,
was brought in to investigate. The scientists could h ave learned about the disease had they known to talk with the Navajo healers
who lived in the area and who had observed the connec tion between rainfall and mice populations, thereby pr edicting the 1993
outbreak.
The cause of the disease, determined within a few weeks by the CDC investigators, was the hantavirus known as Sin Nombre, the
virus with “no name.” With insights from traditional Na vajo medicine, scientists were able to characterize th e disease rapidly and
institute effective health measures to prevent its s pread. This example illustrates the importance of un derstanding the complexities
of ecosystems and how they respond to changes in the environ ment.
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Thumbnail: Bee pollinating Aquilegia vulgaris. (CC BY-SA 3.0 / cropped from original; Roo72 via Wikimedia Commons).
26: Ecosystems is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

26.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092226.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
Life in an ecosystem is often about competition for limited resources, a characteristic of the theory of natural selection.
Competition in communities (all living things within specific habitats) is obse rved both within species and among different
species. The resources for which organisms compete i nclude organic material from living or previously li ving organisms, sunlight,
and mineral nutrients, which provide the energy for living processes and the matter to make up organisms’ physical structures.
Other critical factors influencing community dynamic s are the components of its physical and geographic environment: a habitat’s
latitude, amount of rainfall, topography (elevation), and available species. These are all important env ironmental variables that
determine which organisms can exist within a particular ar ea.
An ecosystem is a community of living organisms and their intera ctions with their abiotic (non-living) environment. Ecosystems
can be small, such as the tide pools found near the r ocky shores of many oceans, or large, such as the Amazo n Rainforest in Brazil
(Figure).
Figure: A (a) tidal pool ecosystem in Matinicus Island in Main e is a small ecosystem, while the (b) Amazon Rainforest in
Brazil is a large ecosystem. (credit a: modification o f work by “takomabibelot”/Flickr; credit b: modifica tion of work by Ivan
Mlinaric. “ecosystems” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
There are three broad categories of ecosystems based on their general environment: freshwater, ocean water, and terrestrial.
Within these broad categories are individual ecosystem types based on the organisms present and the type of environ mental habitat.
Ocean ecosystems are the most common, comprising 75 percent of the Ea rth’s surface and consisting of three basic types: shallow
ocean, deep ocean water, and deep ocean surfaces (the low depth areas of the deep oceans). The shallow ocean ecosystems
include extremely biodiverse coral reef ecosystems, and the deep ocean surface is known for its large n umbers of plankton and
krill (small crustaceans) that support it. These two enviro nments are especially important to aerobic respirato rs worldwide as the
phytoplankton perform 40 percent of all photosynthesis on Earth. Although not as diverse as the other two, deep ocean ecosystems
contain a wide variety of marine organisms. Such ecos ystems exist even at the bottom of the ocean where lig ht is unable to
penetrate through the water.
Freshwater ecosystems are the rarest, occurring on only 1.8 percent of the Earth’s surface. Lakes, rivers, streams, and springs
comprise these systems; they are quite diverse, and they support a variety of fish, amphibians, reptiles, insects, phytoplankton,
fungi, and bacteria.
Terrestrial ecosystems, also known for their diversity, are grouped into l arge categories called biomes, such as tropical rain
forests, savannas, deserts, coniferous forests, deciduou s forests, and tundra. Grouping these ecosystems into just a few biome
categories obscures the great diversity of the indivi dual ecosystems within them. For example, there is grea t variation in desert
vegetation: the saguaro cacti and other plant life in the Sonoran Desert, in the United States, are relativ ely abundant compared to
the desolate rocky desert of Boa Vista, an island off the c oast of Western Africa (Figure).

26.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70922
Figure: Desert ecosystems, like all ecosystems, can vary greatly. The desert in (a) Saguaro National Park, Arizona, h as
abundant plant life, while the rocky desert of (b) B oa Vista island, Cape Verde, Africa, is devoid of plan t life. (credit a: modification
of work by Jay Galvin; credit b: modification of wor k by Ingo Wölbern. “Desert ecosystems” by OpenStax is li censed under CC
BY 4.0)
Ecosystems are complex with many interacting parts. The y are routinely exposed to various disturbances or changes in the
environment that affect their compositions: yearly v ariations in rainfall and temperature and the slower processes of plant growth,
which may take several years. Many of these disturban ces are a result of natural processes. For example, when lightning causes a
forest fire and destroys part of a forest ecosystem, the ground is eventually populated by grasses, then by bushes and shrubs, and
later by mature trees, restoring the forest to its former state. The impact of environmental disturbance s caused by human activities
is as important as the changes wrought by natural proce sses. Human agricultural practices, air pollution, acid rain, global
deforestation, overfishing, eutrophication, oil spills, and illegal dumping on land and into the ocean ar e all issues of concern to
conservationists.
Equilibrium is the steady-state of an ecosystem where all organism s are in balance with their environment and with each other. In
ecology, two parameters are used to measure changes in e cosystems: resistance and resilience. The ability of an ecosystem to
remain at equilibrium in spite of disturbances is call ed resistance. The speed at which an ecosystem recover s equilibrium after
being disturbed is called its resilience. Ecosystem re sistance and resilience are especially important when considering human
impact. The nature of an ecosystem may change to such a degree that it can lose its resilience entirely. Th is process can lead to the
complete destruction or irreversible altering of the e cosystem.
Food Chains and Food Webs
The term food chain is sometimes used metaphorically to describe human s ocial situations. It is not surprising that in our
competitive society, individuals who are considered su ccessful are seen as being at the top of the food ch ain, consuming all others
for their benefit, whereas the less successful are seen as being at the bottom.
The scientific understanding of a food chain is more precise than in its everyday usage. In ecology, a fo od chain is a linear
sequence of organisms through which nutrients and en ergy pass: primary producers, primary consumers, and higher-level
consumers are used to describe ecosystem structure and dynamics. There is a single path through the chain. Each organism in a
food chain occupies what is called a trophic level. Depending on their role as producers or consumers, spe cies or groups of species
can be assigned to various trophic levels.
In many ecosystems, the bottom of the food chain consi sts of photosynthetic organisms (plants and/or phytoplank ton), which are
called primary producers. The organisms that consume the primary producers ar e herbivores: the primary consumers.
Secondary consumers are usually carnivores that eat the primary consumers. Tertiary consumers are carnivores that eat other
carnivores. Higher-level consumers feed on the next lo wer trophic levels, and so on, up to the organisms a t the top of the food
chain: the apex consumers. In the Lake Ontario food chain shown in Figure, the Chinook salmon is the apex consumer at the
top of this food chain.

26.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70922
Figure: These are the trophic levels of a food chain in Lake Ontario at the United States-Canada border. Energy a nd nutrients
flow from photosynthetic green algae at the bottom t o the top of the food chain: the Chinook salmon. (cr edit: “food chain in Lake
Ontario” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
One major factor that limits the length of food chai ns is energy. Energy is lost as heat between each trophic level due to the second
law of thermodynamics. Thus, after a limited number o f trophic energy transfers, the amount of energy rem aining in the food chain
may not be great enough to support viable populations at yet a higher trophic level.
The loss of energy between trophic levels is illustrat ed in the 1940s by the pioneering studies of Howard T. Odum of the Silver
Springs ecosystem located in Florida (Figure). The prim ary producers generated 20,819 kcal/m /yr (kilocalories per square
meter per year), the primary consumers generated 336 8 kcal/m /yr, the secondary consumers generated 383 kc al/m /yr, and the
tertiary consumers only generated 21 kcal/m /yr. Thus, t here is little energy remaining for another level o f consumers in this
ecosystem.
Figure: The relative energy in trophic levels in a Silver Sp rings, Florida, ecosystem is shown. Each trophic level h as less
energy available and supports fewer organisms at the ne xt level. (credit: “trophic levels Silver Springs” by OpenStax is licensed
under CC BY 4.0)
There is one problem when using food chains to accur ately describe most ecosystems. Even when all organisms are grouped into
appropriate trophic levels, some of these organisms can feed on species from more than one trophic lev el; likewise, some of these
organisms can be eaten by species from multiple trophi c levels. In other words, the linear model of ecosystems, the food chain, is2
2 2

26.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70922not completely descriptive of ecosystem structure. A holistic model—which accounts for all the interactio ns between different
species and their complex interconnected relationsh ips with each other and with the environment—is a more accurate and
descriptive model for ecosystems. A food web is a graphic representation of a holistic, non-linear web of primary producers,
primary consumers, and higher-level consumers used to des cribe ecosystem structure and dynamics (Figure).
Figure: This food web shows the interactions between organisms a cross trophic levels in the Lake Ontario ecosystem.
Primary producers are outlined in green, primary consu mers in orange, secondary consumers in blue, and tertia ry (apex) consumers
in purple. Arrows point from an organism that is consum ed to the organism that consumes it. Notice how some li nes point to more
than one trophic level. For example, the opossum shrimp eats both primary producers and primary consumers. (cr edit: NOAA,
GLERL. “food web” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
A comparison of the two types of structural ecosystem m odels shows strength in both. Food chains are more flexib le for analytical
modeling, are easier to follow, and are easier to exp eriment with, whereas food web models more accurately r epresent ecosystem
structure and dynamics, and data can be directly used as input for simulation modeling.
Two general types of food webs are often shown interacti ng within a single ecosystem. A grazing food web has plants or other
photosynthetic organisms at its base, followed by her bivores and various carnivores. A detrital food web consists of a base of
organisms that feed on decaying organic matter (dead organisms), called decomposers or detritivores. These organisms are
usually bacteria or fungi that recycle organic mate rial back into the biotic part of the ecosystem as th ey themselves are consumed
by other organisms. As all ecosystems require a method to recycle material from dead organisms, most grazing f ood webs have an
associated detrital food web. For example, in a meadow ecosystem, plants may support a grazing food web of dif ferent organisms,
primary and other levels of consumers, while at the sa me time supporting a detrital food web of bacteria, f ungi, and detrivorous
invertebrates feeding off dead plants and animals.
Evolution Connection – Three-spined Stickleback
It is well established by the theory of natural selec tion that changes in the environment play a major r ole in the evolution of species
within an ecosystem. However, little is known about how the evolution of species within an ecosystem can alte r the ecosystem
environment. In 2009, Dr. Luke Harmon, from the Universi ty of Idaho in Moscow, published a paper that for th e first time showed
that the evolution of organisms into subspecies can ha ve direct effects on their ecosystem environment (Harmon, 2009).
The three-spines stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) is a freshwater fish that evolved from a saltwater f ish to live in freshwater
lakes about 10,000 years ago, which is considered a rec ent development in evolutionary time (Figure). Over t he last 10,000
years, these freshwater fish then became isolated from each other in different lakes. Depending on which lak e population was
studied, findings showed that these sticklebacks then e ither remained as one species or evolved into two spec ies. The divergence of
species was made possible by their use of different area s of the pond for feeding called micro niches.
Dr. Harmon and his team created artificial pond micro cosms in 250-gallon tanks and added muck from freshwat er ponds as a
source of zooplankton and other invertebrates to su stain the fish. In different experimental tanks, they introduced one species of
stickleback from either a single-species or double-sp ecies lake.
Over time, the team observed that some of the tanks b loomed with algae while others did not. This puzzled t he scientists, and they
decided to measure the water’s dissolved organic carbo n (DOC), which consists of mostly large molecules of de caying organic

26.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70922matter that give pond-water its slightly brownish color. It turned out that the water from the tanks with two- species fish contained
larger particles of DOC (and hence darker water) than wa ter with single-species fish. This increase in DOC blocke d the sunlight
and prevented algal blooming. Conversely, the water fr om the single-species tank contained smaller DOC particle s, allowing more
sunlight penetration to fuel the algal blooms.
This change in the environment, which is due to the d ifferent feeding habits of the stickleback species i n each lake type, probably
has a great impact on the survival of other species in these ecosystems, especially other photosynthetic o rganisms. Thus, the study
shows that, at least in these ecosystems, the environme nt and the evolution of populations have reciprocal effects that may now be
factored into simulation models.
Figure: The three-spined stickleback evolved from a saltwater fish to freshwater fish. (credit: Barrett Paul, USFWS. “ threespined stickleback” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Research into Ecosystem Dynamics: Ecosystem Experimentation and Modeling
The study of the changes in ecosystem structure cau sed by changes in the environment (disturbances) or by internal forces is called
ecosystem dynamics. Ecosystems are characterized usin g a variety of research methodologies. Some ecologis ts study ecosystems
using controlled experimental systems, while some study e ntire ecosystems in their natural state, and others use b oth approaches.
A holistic ecosystem model attempts to quantify the composition, interaction, a nd dynamics of entire ecosystems; it is the most
representative of the ecosystem in its natural state. A food web is an example of a holistic ecosystem model. However, this type of
study is limited by time and expense, as well as the fact that it is neither feasible nor ethical to do e xperiments on large natural
ecosystems. To quantify all different species in an ecosystem and the dynamics in their habitat is diffi cult, especially when studying
large habitats such as the Amazon Rainforest, which covers 1.4 billion acres (5.5 million km) of the Earth’s surface.
For these reasons, scientists study ecosystems under more controlled conditions. Experimental systems usually involve either
partitioning a part of a natural ecosystem that can be used for experiments, termed a mesocosm, or by re-creating an ecosystem
entirely in an indoor or outdoor laboratory environ ment, which is referred to as a microcosm. A major limitation to these
approaches is that removing individual organisms fr om their natural ecosystem or altering a natural ec osystem through partitioning
may change the dynamics of the ecosystem. These change s are often due to differences in species numbers and diversity and also to
environmental alterations caused by partitioning (m esocosm) or re-creating (microcosm) the natural habita t. Thus, these types of
experiments are not totally predictive of changes that would occur in the ecosystem from which they were gathered.
As both of these approaches have their limitations, som e ecologists suggest that results from these experim ental systems should be
used only in conjunction with holistic ecosystem stud ies to obtain the most representative data about ecos ystem structure, function,
and dynamics.
Scientists use the data generated by these experimen tal studies to develop ecosystem models that demonstrate the structure and
dynamics of ecosystems. Three basic types of ecosystem modeling are routinely used in research and ecosystem management: a
conceptual model, an analytical model, and a simulation model. A conceptual model is an ecosystem model that cons ists of flow
charts to show interactions of different compartments of the living and nonliving components of the ecosyst em. A conceptual
model describes ecosystem structure and dynamics and shows how environmental disturbances affect the ecosyst em; however, its
ability to predict the effects of these disturbances i s limited. Analytical and simulation models, in contr ast, are mathematical
methods of describing ecosystems that are indeed capa ble of predicting the effects of potential environme ntal changes without
direct experimentation, although with some limitatio ns as to accuracy. An analytical model is an ecosystem model that is created
using simple mathematical formulas to predict the ef fects of environmental disturbances on ecosystem str ucture and dynamics. A
simulation model is an ecosystem model that is creat ed using complex computer algorithms to holistically model ecosystems and to2

26.1.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70922predict the effects of environmental disturbances on e cosystem structure and dynamics. Ideally, these mod els are accurate enough
to determine which components of the ecosystem are pa rticularly sensitive to disturbances, and they can se rve as a guide to
ecosystem managers (such as conservation ecologists or fish eries biologists) in the practical maintenance of ecosystem health.
Conceptual Models
Conceptual models are useful for describing ecosystem structure and d ynamics and for demonstrating the relationships betwee n
different organisms in a community and their enviro nment. Conceptual models are usually depicted graph ically as flow charts. The
organisms and their resources are grouped into specifi c compartments with arrows showing the relationship and transfer of energy
or nutrients between them. Thus, these diagrams are someti mes called compartment models.
To model the cycling of mineral nutrients, organic a nd inorganic nutrients are subdivided into those th at are bioavailable (ready to
be incorporated into biological macromolecules) and t hose that are not. For example, in a terrestrial ecosy stem near a deposit of
coal, carbon will be available to the plants of this e cosystem as carbon dioxide gas in a short-term perio d, not from the carbon-rich
coal itself. However, over a longer period, microorgan isms capable of digesting coal will incorporate its ca rbon or release it as
natural gas (methane, CH), changing this unavailable organic source into an available one. This conversi on is greatly accelerated
by the combustion of fossil fuels by humans, which rel eases large amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmos phere. This is thought
to be a major factor in the rise of atmospheric carb on dioxide levels in the industrial age. The carbon dioxide released from burning
fossil fuels is produced faster than photosynthetic o rganisms can use it. This process is intensified by t he reduction of
photosynthetic trees because of worldwide deforestatio n. Most scientists agree that high atmospheric carbon d ioxide is a major
cause of global climate change.
Conceptual models are also used to show the flow of en ergy through particular ecosystems. Figure is based on Howard T.
Odum’s classical study of Silver Springs, Florida, in the mid-twentieth century (Odum. 1957). This study shows the energy content
and transfer between various ecosystem compartments.
Figure: This conceptual model shows the flow of energy throug h a spring ecosystem in Silver Springs, Florida. Notice th at
the energy decreases with each increase in trophic lev el. (credit: “energy through a spring ecosystem” by Op enStax is licensed
under CC BY 4.0)4

26.1.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70922Analytical and Simulation Models
The major limitation of conceptual models is their i nability to predict the consequences of changes in ecosystem species and/or
environment. Ecosystems are dynamic entities and su bject to a variety of abiotic and biotic disturbanc es caused by natural forces
and/or human activity. Ecosystems altered from thei r initial equilibrium state can often recover from such disturbances and return
to a state of equilibrium. As most ecosystems are sub ject to periodic disturbances and are often in a sta te of change, they are usually
either moving toward or away from their equilibrium state. There are many of these equilibrium states among th e various
components of an ecosystem, which affects the ecosyst em overall. Furthermore, as humans have the ability to greatly and rapidly
alter the species content and habitat of an ecosyste m, the need for predictive models that enable underst anding of how ecosystems
respond to these changes becomes more crucial.
Analytical models often use simple, linear components of ecosystems, s uch as food chains, and are known to be complex
mathematically; therefore, they require a significa nt amount of mathematical knowledge and expertise. Alt hough analytical models
have great potential, their simplification of comple x ecosystems is thought to limit their accuracy. Simulation models that use
computer programs are better able to deal with the complexit ies of ecosystem structure.
A recent development in simulation modeling uses super computers to create and run individual-based simulat ions, which account
for the behavior of individual organisms and their ef fects on the ecosystem as a whole. These simulations a re considered to be the
most accurate and predictive of the complex responses of e cosystems to disturbances.
Summary
Ecosystems exist on land, at sea, in the air, and unde rground. Different ways of modeling ecosystems are nece ssary to understand
how environmental disturbances will affect ecosystem st ructure and dynamics. Conceptual models are useful to show the general
relationships between organisms and the flow of materia ls or energy between them. Analytical models are used to describe linear
food chains, and simulation models work best with holistic food webs.
References
Harmon, L. 2009. Nature. (V ol. 458, April)
Odum, H. 1957. “Trophic Structure and Productivity of Silver Sp rings, Florida,” Ecological Monographs 27, no. 1: 47–112.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

26.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092326.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
All living things require energy in one form or anot her. Energy is required by most complex metabolic pa thways (often in the form
of adenosine triphosphate, ATP), especially those respo nsible for building large molecules from smaller com pounds, and life itself
is an energy-driven process. Living organisms would n ot be able to assemble macromolecules (proteins, lip ids, nucleic acids, and
complex carbohydrates) from their monomeric subunits wit hout a constant energy input.
It is important to understand how organisms acquire ener gy and how that energy is passed from one organism to another through
food webs and their constituent food chains. Food webs illustrate how energy flows directionally through ecosy stems, including
how efficiently organisms acquire it, use it, and how much remains for use by other organisms of the food web.
How Organisms Acquire Energy in a Food Web
Energy is acquired by living things in three ways: photosynt hesis, chemosynthesis, and the consumption and digestio n of other
living or previously living organisms by heterotrophs.
Photosynthetic and chemosynthetic organisms are both grouped into a category known as autotrophs: organisms capable of
synthesizing their own food (more specifically, capa ble of using inorganic carbon as a carbon source). Ph otosynthetic autotrophs
(photoautotrophs) use sunlight as an energy source, whereas chemosynthet ic autotrophs (chemoautotrophs) use inorganic
molecules as an energy source. Autotrophs are critic al for all ecosystems. Without these organisms, energ y would not be available
to other living organisms and life itself would not be poss ible.
Photoautotrophs, such as plants, algae, and photosyn thetic bacteria, serve as the energy source for a m ajority of the world’s
ecosystems. These ecosystems are often described by g razing food webs. Photoautotrophs harness the solar ener gy of the sun by
converting it to chemical energy in the form of ATP (and NADP). The energy stored in ATP is used to synthesiz e complex organic
molecules, such as glucose.
Chemoautotrophs are primarily bacteria that are fou nd in rare ecosystems where sunlight is not available, such as in those
associated with dark caves or hydrothermal vents at the bottom of the ocean (Figure). Many chemoautotrop hs in
hydrothermal vents use hydrogen sulfide (H S), which is re leased from the vents as a source of chemical energy. This allows
chemoautotrophs to synthesize complex organic molecu les, such as glucose, for their own energy and in turn su pplies energy to the
rest of the ecosystem.
Figure: Swimming shrimp, a few squat lobsters, and hundreds of v ent mussels are seen at a hydrothermal vent at the bott om
of the ocean. As no sunlight penetrates to this depth, the ecosystem is supported by chemoautotrophic bacteria and organic material
that sinks from the ocean’s surface. This picture was tak en in 2006 at the submerged NW Eifuku volcano off th e coast of Japan by
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The summit of this highly active volcano lies 1 535 m below the
surface. (credit: NOAA. “Chemoautotrophs” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Productivity within Trophic Levels
Productivity within an ecosystem can be defined as the percentage of energy entering the ecosystem incorporated into b iomass in a
particular trophic level. Biomass is the total mass, in a unit area at the time of me asurement, of living or previously living2

26.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70923organisms within a trophic level. Ecosystems have chara cteristic amounts of biomass at each trophic level. Fo r example, in the
English Channel ecosystem, the primary producers acco unt for a biomass of 4 g/m (grams per meter squared), while the primary
consumers exhibit a biomass of 21 g/m.
The productivity of the primary producers is especia lly important in any ecosystem because these organis ms bring energy to other
living organisms by photoautotrophy or chemoautotro phy. The rate at which photosynthetic primary produce rs incorporate energy
from the sun is called gross primary productivity. An example of gross primary productivity is shown in t he compartment
diagram of energy flow within the Silver Springs aquati c ecosystem as shown (Figure). In this ecosystem, the total energy
accumulated by the primary producers (gross primary pro ductivity) was shown to be 20,810 kcal/m /yr.
Because all organisms need to use some of this energy for their own functions (like respiration and result ing metabolic heat loss)
scientists often refer to the net primary productiv ity of an ecosystem. Net primary productivity is the energy that remains in the
primary producers after accounting for the organisms’ respiration and heat loss. The net productivity is the n available to the
primary consumers at the next trophic level. In our Silver Spring example, 13,187 of the 20,810 kcal/m /yr were used for
respiration or were lost as heat, leaving 7,632 kcal/m /yr of energy for use by the primary consumers.
Ecological Efficiency: The Transfer of Energy between Trophic Levels
As illustrated in Figure, large amounts of energy are lost from the ecosystem from one trophic level to t he next level as
energy flows from the primary producers through the vari ous trophic levels of consumers and decomposers.
Figure: This conceptual model shows the flow of energy throug h a spring ecosystem in Silver Springs, Florida. Notice th at
the energy decreases with each increase in trophic lev el. (credit: “energy through a spring ecosystem” by Op enStax is licensed
under CC BY 4.0)
The main reason for this loss is the second law of thermodynamics, which states that whenever energy is converted from one
form to another, there is a tendency toward disorder (entropy) in the system. In biologic systems, this means a great deal of energy
is lost as metabolic heat when the organisms from one trophic level consume the next level. In the Silver Springs ecosystem
example, we see that the primary consumers produced 1103 kcal/m /yr from the 7618 kcal/m /yr of energy av ailable to them from2
2 2

26.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70923the primary producers. The measurement of energy tra nsfer efficiency between two successive trophic levels is termed the trophic
level transfer efficiency (TLTE) and is defined by the formula:
In Silver Springs, the TLTE between the first two troph ic levels was approximately 14.8 percent. The low eff iciency of energy
transfer between trophic levels is usually the major factor that limits the length of food chains observe d in a food web. The fact is,
after four to six energy transfers, there is not enough energy left to support another trophic level. In the Lake Ontario example, only
three energy transfers occurred between the primary produ cer, (green algae), and the apex consumer (Chinook salmon).
Ecologists have many different methods of measuring energy transfers within ecosystems. Some transfers are e asier or more
difficult to measure depending on the complexity of the ecosystem and how much access scientists have to o bserve the ecosystem.
In other words, some ecosystems are more difficult to s tudy than others, and sometimes the quantification of energy transfers has to
be estimated.
Another main parameter that is important in character izing energy flow within an ecosystem is the net prod uction efficiency. Net
production efficiency (NPE) allows ecologists to quantify how efficiently organism s of a particular trophic level incorporate the
energy they receive into biomass; it is calculated using the following formula:
Net consumer productivity is the energy content avail able to the organisms of the next trophic level. Assimilation is the biomass
(energy content generated per unit area) of the pre sent trophic level after accounting for the energy lost due to incomplete ingestion
of food, energy used for respiration, and energy lost as waste. Incomplete ingestion refers to the fact that some consumers eat only
a part of their food. For example, when a lion kills an antelope, it will eat everything except the hide an d bones. The lion is missing
the energy-rich bone marrow inside the bone, so the lion d oes not make use of all the calories its prey could provide.
Thus, NPE measures how efficiently each trophic level u ses and incorporates the energy from its food into biomass to fuel the next
trophic level. In general, cold-blooded animals (ectotherms), such as invertebrates, fish, amphibians, and repti les, use less of the
energy they obtain for respiration and heat than war m-blooded animals (endotherms), such as birds and mammals. The extra heat
generated in endotherms, although an advantage in ter ms of the activity of these organisms in colder env ironments, is a major
disadvantage in terms of NPE. Therefore, many endothe rms have to eat more often than ectotherms to get th e energy they need for
survival. In general, NPE for ectotherms is an order of magnitude (10x) higher than for endotherms. For e xample, the NPE for a
caterpillar eating leaves has been measured at 18 p ercent, whereas the NPE for a squirrel eating acorns may be as low as 1.6
percent.
The inefficiency of energy use by warm-blooded animals has broad implications for the world’s food supply. It is widely accepted
that the meat industry uses large amounts of crops to feed livestock, and because the NPE is low, much of the energy from animal
feed is lost. For example, it costs about 1¢ to prod uce 1000 dietary calories (kcal) of corn or soybeans, but approximately $0.19 to
produce a similar number of calories growing cattle for beef consumption. The same energy content of milk from cattle is also
costly, at approximately $0.16 per 1000 kcal. Much of this difference is due to the low NPE of cattle. Thus, t here has been a
growing movement worldwide to promote the consumption o f non-meat and non-dairy foods so that less energy i s wasted feeding
animals for the meat industry.
Modeling Ecosystems Energy Flow: Ecological Pyramids
The structure of ecosystems can be visualized with ec ological pyramids, which were first described by the pi oneering studies of
Charles Elton in the 1920s. Ecological pyramids show the relative amounts of various parameters (such as the number of
organisms, energy, and biomass) across trophic levels.
Pyramids of numbers can be either upright or inverted, depending on the ecosystem. As shown in Figure, typic al grassland
during the summer has a base of many plants and the numbers of organisms decrease at each trophic leve l. However, during the
summer in a temperate forest, the base of the pyramid consists of few trees compared with the number of pr imary consumers,
mostly insects. Because trees are large, they have gre at photosynthetic capability and dominate other pla nts in this ecosystem to
obtain sunlight. Even in smaller numbers, primary produ cers in forests are still capable of supporting other tr ophic levels.

26.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70923Another way to visualize ecosystem structure is with py ramids of biomass. This pyramid measures the amount of energy converted
into living tissue at the different trophic levels. Using the Silver Springs ecosystem example, this data e xhibits an upright biomass
pyramid (Figure), whereas the pyramid from the English Channel example is inverted. The plants (primary p roducers) of the
Silver Springs ecosystem make up a large percentage of the biomass found there. However, the phytoplankton in the English
Channel example make up less biomass than the primary consumers, the zooplankton. As with inverted pyramids of numbers, this
inverted pyramid is not due to a lack of productivit y from the primary producers but results from the hi gh turnover rate of the
phytoplankton. The phytoplankton are consumed rapidl y by the primary consumers, thus, minimizing their bio mass at any
particular point in time. However, phytoplankton reproduce q uickly, thus they are able to support the rest of the eco system.
Pyramid ecosystem modeling can also be used to show ene rgy flow through the trophic levels. Pyramids of energy are always
upright, and an ecosystem without sufficient primary productivity cannot be supported. All types of ecologi cal pyramids are useful
for characterizing ecosystem structure. However, in the study of energy flow through the ecosystem, pyramid s of energy are the
most consistent and representative models of ecosystem structure.
Figure: Ecological pyramids depict the (a) biomass, (b) numbe r of organisms, and (c) energy in each trophic level. (credit:
“Ecological pyramids” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Consequences of Food Webs: Biological Magnification
One of the most important environmental consequences of ecosystem dynamics is biomagnification. Biomagnification is the
increasing concentration of persistent, toxic substanc es in organisms at each trophic level, from the pri mary producers to the apex
consumers. Many substances have been shown to bioaccumulate, including classical studies with the pesticide
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), which was published in the 1960s bestseller, Silent Spring, by Rachel Carson. DDT was
a commonly used pesticide before its dangers became known. In some aquatic ecosystems, organisms from eac h trophic level
consumed many organisms of the lower level, which caus ed DDT to increase in birds (apex consumers) that ate fish. Thus, birds
accumulated sufficient amounts of DDT to cause fragili ty in their eggshells. This effect increased egg br eakage during nesting and
was shown to have adverse effects on these bird populations. The use of DDT was banned in the United States in the 1970s.
Other substances that biomagnify are polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which were used in coolant liquids in the United States
until their use was banned in 1979, and heavy metals, such as mercury, lead, and cadmium. These substances were best studied in
aquatic ecosystems, where fish species at different tro phic levels accumulate toxic substances brought throu gh the ecosystem by the
primary producers. As illustrated in a study performed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in the
Saginaw Bay of Lake Huron (Figure), PCB concentrations i ncreased from the ecosystem’s primary producers
(phytoplankton) through the different trophic level s of fish species. The apex consumer (walleye) has mor e than four times the

26.2.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70923amount of PCBs compared to phytoplankton. Also, based o n results from other studies, birds that eat these f ish may have PCB
levels at least one order of magnitude higher than those found in the lake fish.
Figure: This chart shows the PCB concentrations found at the va rious trophic levels in the Saginaw Bay ecosystem of Lak e
Huron. Numbers on the x-axis reflect enrichment with heavy isotopes of nitrogen (N), which is a marker for increasing trophic
level. Notice that the fish in the higher trophic le vels accumulate more PCBs than those in lower trophic l evels. (credit: Patricia Van
Hoof, NOAA, GLERL. “PCB concentrations” by OpenStax i s licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Other concerns have been raised by the accumulation of heavy metals, such as mercury and cadmium, in certain types of se afood.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) r ecommends that pregnant women and young children sho uld not
consume any swordfish, shark, king mackerel, or tilef ish because of their high mercury content. These indi viduals are advised to
eat fish low in mercury: salmon, tilapia, shrimp, poll ock, and catfish. Biomagnification is a good example of how ecosystem
dynamics can affect our everyday lives, even influencing th e food we eat.
Summary
Organisms in an ecosystem acquire energy in a variety of ways, which is transferred between trophic levels a s the energy flows
from the bottom to the top of the food web, with ener gy being lost at each transfer. The efficiency of the se transfers is important for
understanding the different behaviors and eating hab its of warm-blooded versus cold-blooded animals. Model ing of ecosystem
energy is best done with ecological pyramids of energ y, although other ecological pyramids provide other vital information about
ecosystem structure.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.15

26.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092426.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
Energy flows directionally through ecosystems, enterin g as sunlight (or inorganic molecules for chemoautotr ophs) and leaving as
heat during the many transfers between trophic levels. However, the matter that makes up living organisms is conserved and
recycled. The six most common elements associated wit h organic molecules—carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus,
and sulfur—take a variety of chemical forms and may exist for long periods in the atmosphere, on land, i n water, or beneath the
Earth’s surface. Geologic processes, such as weathering, erosion, water drainage, and the subduction of the co ntinental plates, all
play a role in this recycling of materials. Because ge ology and chemistry have major roles in the study of this process, the recycling
of inorganic matter between living organisms and their en vironment is called a biogeochemical cycle.
Water contains hydrogen and oxygen, which is essentia l to all living processes. The hydrosphere is the a rea of the Earth where
water movement and storage occurs: as liquid water on the surface and beneath the surface or frozen (rivers, lakes, oceans,
groundwater, polar ice caps, and glaciers), and as wat er vapor in the atmosphere. Carbon is found in all or ganic macromolecules
and is an important constituent of fossil fuels. Nit rogen is a major component of our nucleic acids and proteins and is critical to
human agriculture. Phosphorus, a major component of n ucleic acid (along with nitrogen), is one of the mai n ingredients in artificial
fertilizers used in agriculture and their associated environmental impacts on our surface water. Sulfur, cr itical to the 3–D folding of
proteins (as in disulfide binding), is released into the a tmosphere by the burning of fossil fuels, such as coal.
The cycling of these elements is interconnected. For example, the movement of water is critical for the le aching of nitrogen and
phosphate into rivers, lakes, and oceans. Furthermore, th e ocean itself is a major reservoir for carbon. Thu s, mineral nutrients are
cycled, either rapidly or slowly, through the entire b iosphere, from one living organism to another, and b etween the biotic and
abiotic world.
The Water (Hydrologic) Cycle
Water is the basis of all living processes. The human body is more than 1/2 water and human cells are more than 70 percent water.
Thus, most land animals need a supply of fresh water t o survive. However, when examining the stores of water on E arth, 97.5
percent of it is non-potable salt water (Figure). Of t he remaining water, 99 percent is locked underground as water or as ice.
Thus, less than 1 percent of fresh water is easily ac cessible from lakes and rivers. Many living things, s uch as plants, animals, and
fungi, are dependent on the small amount of fresh su rface water supply, a lack of which can have massive e ffects on ecosystem
dynamics. Humans, of course, have developed technologie s to increase water availability, such as digging wells to harvest
groundwater, storing rainwater, and using desalination to obtain drinkable water from the ocean. Although th is pursuit of drinkable
water has been ongoing throughout human history, the supply o f fresh water is still a major issue in modern times.
Figure: Only 2.5 percent of water on Earth is fresh water, a nd less than 1 percent of fresh water is easily accessible to living
things. (credit: “fresh water” by OpenStax is licensed u nder CC BY 4.0)
Water cycling is extremely important to ecosystem dynamics. Water has a major influence on climate and, thus, on the
environments of ecosystems, some located on distant par ts of the Earth. Most of the water on Earth is stored for long periods in the
oceans, underground, and as ice. Figure illustrates the average time that an individ ual water molecule may spend in the
Earth’s major water reservoirs. Residence time is a measure of the average time an individual water mole cule stays in a particular
reservoir. A large amount of the Earth’s water is loc ked in place in these reservoirs as ice, beneath the ground, and in the ocean,
and, thus, is unavailable for short-term cycling (only surfac e water can evaporate).

26.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70924
Figure: This graph shows the average residence time for water molecules in the Earth’s water reservoirs. (credit: “ti me water
molecule” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
There are various processes that occur during the cycling o f water, shown in Figure. These processes include the followin g:
evaporation/sublimation
condensation/precipitation
subsurface water flow
surface runoff/snowmelt
streamflow
The water cycle is driven by the sun’s energy as it wa rms the oceans and other surface waters. This leads to the evaporation (water
to water vapor) of liquid surface water and the sublimation (ice to water vapor) of frozen water, which deposits lar ge amounts of
water vapor into the atmosphere. Over time, this water v apor condenses into clouds as liquid or frozen drop lets and is eventually
followed by precipitation (rain or snow), which returns water to the Earth’s surf ace. Rain eventually permeates into the ground,
where it may evaporate again if it is near the surfa ce, flow beneath the surface, or be stored for long pe riods. More easily observed
is surface runoff: the flow of fresh water either from rain or melting ice. Runoff can then make its way through streams and l akes
to the oceans or flow directly to the oceans themselves.
Rain and surface runoff are major ways in which minera ls, including carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur, are cycled from land
to water. The environmental effects of runoff will be discu ssed later as these cycles are described.
Figure: Water from the land and oceans enters the atmosphere by evaporation or sublimation, where it condenses into clouds
and falls as rain or snow. Precipitated water may ente r freshwater bodies or infiltrate the soil. The cycle is complete when surface
or groundwater reenters the ocean. (credit: modifica tion of work by John M. Evans and Howard Perlman, USGS. “the water cycle”
by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)

26.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70924The Carbon Cycle
Carbon is the second most abundant element in living organ isms. Carbon is present in all organic molecules, and its role in the
structure of macromolecules is of primary importance to living organisms. Carbon compounds contain especial ly high energy,
particularly those derived from fossilized organisms, mainly plants, which humans use as fuel. Since the 1800s, the number of
countries using massive amounts of fossil fuels has in creased. Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolu tion, global demand for
the Earth’s limited fossil fuel supplies has risen; th erefore, the amount of carbon dioxide in our atmosph ere has increased. This
increase in carbon dioxide has been associated with c limate change and other disturbances of the Earth’s ecosystems and is a major
environmental concern worldwide. Thus, the “carbon foo tprint” is based on how much carbon dioxide is produc ed and how much
fossil fuel countries consume.
The carbon cycle is most easily studied as two interconnected sub-cycle s: one dealing with rapid carbon exchange among livin g
organisms and the other dealing with the long-term cyc ling of carbon through geologic processes. The enti re carbon cycle is shown
in Figure.
Figure: Carbon dioxide gas exists in the atmosphere and is dissol ved in water. Photosynthesis converts carbon dioxide ga s to
organic carbon, and respiration cycles the organic ca rbon back into carbon dioxide gas. Long-term storage of organic carbon occurs
when matter from living organisms is buried deep under ground and becomes fossilized. V olcanic activity and, more recently,
human emissions, bring this stored carbon back into the carbon cycle. (credit: modification of work by John M. Evans and Howard
Perlman, USGS. “the carbon cycle” by OpenStax is licen sed under CC BY 4.0)
The Biological Carbon Cycle
Living organisms are connected in many ways, even be tween ecosystems. A good example of this connection is the exchange of
carbon between autotrophs and heterotrophs within and between ecosystems by way of atmospheric carbon dioxide. Carbon
dioxide is the basic building block that most autotr ophs use to build multi-carbon, high-energy compound s, such as glucose. The
energy harnessed from the sun is used by these organ isms to form the covalent bonds that link carbon ato ms together. These
chemical bonds thereby store this energy for later u se in the process of respiration. Most terrestrial aut otrophs obtain their carbon
dioxide directly from the atmosphere, while marine au totrophs acquire it in the dissolved form (carbonic acid, H CO). However
carbon dioxide is acquired, a by-product of the proc ess is oxygen. The photosynthetic organisms are responsi ble for depositing
approximately 21 percent oxygen content of the atmosph ere that we observe today.
Heterotrophs and autotrophs are partners in biologic al carbon exchange (especially the primary consumer s, largely herbivores).
Heterotrophs acquire the high-energy carbon compound s from the autotrophs by consuming them and breakin g them down by
respiration to obtain cellular energy, such as ATP. T he most efficient type of respiration, aerobic respi ration, requires oxygen
obtained from the atmosphere or dissolved in water. T hus, there is a constant exchange of oxygen and car bon dioxide between the
autotrophs (which need the carbon) and the heterotro phs (which need the oxygen). Gas exchange through the atmosphere and water
is one way that the carbon cycle connects all living organ isms on Earth.
The Biogeochemical Carbon Cycle
The movement of carbon through the land, water, and air is complex, and in many cases, it occurs much mo re slowly geologically
than as seen between living organisms. Carbon is stored for long periods in what are known as carbon reservoirs, which include2 3−

26.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70924the atmosphere, bodies of liquid water (mostly oceans), ocean sediment, soil, land sediments (including foss il fuels), and the
Earth’s interior.
As stated, the atmosphere is a major reservoir of car bon in the form of carbon dioxide and is essential t o the process of
photosynthesis. The level of carbon dioxide in the atm osphere is greatly influenced by the reservoir of ca rbon in the oceans. The
exchange of carbon between the atmosphere and water re servoirs influences how much carbon is found in each location, and each
one affects the other reciprocally. Carbon dioxide (CO) from the atmosphere dissolves in water and combin es with water
molecules to form carbonic acid, and then it ionizes to carbonate and bicarbonate ions (Figure)
Figure: Carbon dioxide reacts with water to form bicarbonat e and carbonate ions. (credit: “Biogeochemical Carbo n Cycle”
by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
The equilibrium coefficients are such that more than 90 percent of the carbon in the ocean is found as bic arbonate ions. Some of
these ions combine with seawater calcium to form calcium carbonate (CaCO), a major component of marine organism shells.
These organisms eventually form sediments on the ocea n floor. Over geologic time, the calcium carbonate for ms limestone, which
comprises the largest carbon reservoir on Earth.
On land, carbon is stored in soil as a result of the d ecomposition of living organisms (by decomposers) or from weathering of
terrestrial rock and minerals. This carbon can be l eached into the water reservoirs by surface runoff. De eper underground, on land
and at sea, are fossil fuels: the anaerobically deco mposed remains of plants that take millions of years to form. Fossil fuels are
considered a non-renewable resource because their use far exceeds their rate of formation. A non-renewable resource, such as
fossil fuel, is either regenerated very slowly or not at all. Another way for carbon to enter the atmospher e is from land (including
land beneath the surface of the ocean) by the erupt ion of volcanoes and other geothermal systems. Carbo n sediments from the
ocean floor are taken deep within the Earth by the p rocess of subduction: the movement of one tectonic p late beneath another.
Carbon is released as carbon dioxide when a volcano erupts or from volcanic hydrothermal vents.
Carbon dioxide is also added to the atmosphere by the animal husbandry practices of humans. The large numb ers of land animals
raised to feed the Earth’s growing population results in increased carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere due to farming practices,
respiration, and methane production. This is another example of how human activity indirectly affects bio geochemical cycles in a
significant way. Although much of the debate about the future effects of increasing atmospheric carbon on climate change focus on
fossil fuels, scientists take natural processes, such as volcanoes and respiration, into account as they mode l and predict the future
impact of this increase.
The Nitrogen Cycle
Getting nitrogen into the living world is difficult. Plants and phytoplankton are not equipped to incorpo rate nitrogen from the
atmosphere (which exists as tightly bonded, triple cova lent N) even though this molecule comprises approximat ely 78 percent of
the atmosphere. Nitrogen enters the living world via free-living and symbiotic bacteria, which incorporate nitrogen into their
macromolecules through nitrogen fixation (conversion of N). Cyanobacteria live in most aquatic ecosystems where sunlight is
present; they play a key role in nitrogen fixation. Cyanobacteria are able to use inorganic sources of nitrogen to fix nitrogen.
Rhizobium bacteria live symbiotically in the root nodules of legumes (such as peas, beans, and peanuts) and provide them with
the organic nitrogen they need. Free-living bacteria, such as Azotobacter, are also important nitrogen fixers.
Organic nitrogen is especially important to the study of ecosystem dynamics since many ecosystem processes, such as primary
production and decomposition, are limited by the av ailable supply of nitrogen. As shown in Figure, the nit rogen that enters
living systems by nitrogen fixation is successively co nverted from organic nitrogen back into nitrogen ga s by bacteria. This process
occurs in three steps in terrestrial systems: ammonification, nitrification, and denitrification. First, the ammonification process
converts nitrogenous waste from living animals or fr om the remains of dead animals into ammonium (NH) by certain bacteria
and fungi. Second, the ammonium is converted to nitri tes (NO) by nitrifying bacteria, such as Nitrosomonas, through
nitrification. Subsequently, nitrites are converted to nitrates (NO) by similar organisms. Third, the proces s of denitrification2
4+
2−
3−

26.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70924occurs, whereby bacteria, such as Pseudomonas and Clostridium, convert the nitrates into nitrogen gas, allowing it to re-enter the
atmosphere.
Figure: Nitrogen enters the living world from the atmosphere via nitrogen-fixing bacteria. This nitrogen and nit rogenous
waste from animals is then processed back into gaseous nit rogen by soil bacteria, which also supply terrestrial f ood webs with the
organic nitrogen they need. (credit: modification o f work by John M. Evans and Howard Perlman, USGS. “Nit rogen Cycle” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Human activity can release nitrogen into the environ ment by two primary means: the combustion of fossil fuels, which releases
different nitrogen oxides, and by the use of artificial fertilizers in agriculture, which are then washed into lakes, stream s, and
rivers by surface runoff. Atmospheric nitrogen is associ ated with several effects on Earth’s ecosystems incl uding the production of
acid rain (as nitric acid, HNO) and greenhouse gas (as nitrous o xide, N O) potentially causing climate change. A major effect of
fertilizer runoff is saltwater and freshwater eutrophication, a process whereby nutrient runoff causes the excess g rowth of
microorganisms, depleting dissolved oxygen levels and kill ing ecosystem fauna.
A similar process occurs in the marine nitrogen cycle, where the ammonification, nitrification, and denitri fication processes are
performed by marine bacteria. Some of this nitrogen f alls to the ocean floor as sediment, which can then be moved to land in
geologic time by the uplift of the Earth’s surface a nd thereby incorporated into terrestrial rock. Althou gh the movement of nitrogen
from rock directly into living systems has been tra ditionally seen as insignificant compared with nitrog en fixed from the
atmosphere, a recent study showed that this process may indeed be significant and should be included in any study of the global
nitrogen cycle (Morford, Houlton, & Dahlgren, 2011).
The Phosphorus Cycle
Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for living processes; it is a major component of nucleic acid and phospholip ids, and, as calcium
phosphate, makes up the supportive components of our bones. Phosphorus is often the limiting nutrient (nece ssary for growth) in
aquatic ecosystems (Figure).
Phosphorus occurs in nature as the phosphate ion (PO). In addition to phosphate runoff as a result of hu man activity, natural
surface runoff occurs when it is leached from phosphate -containing rock by weathering, thus sending phosphat es into rivers, lakes,
and the ocean. This rock has its origins in the ocea n. Phosphate-containing ocean sediments form primarily from the bodies of
ocean organisms and from their excretions. However, in r emote regions, volcanic ash, aerosols, and mineral dust may also be
significant phosphate sources. This sediment then is moved to land over geologic time by the uplifting o f areas of the Earth’s
surface.
Phosphorus is also reciprocally exchanged between phosph ate dissolved in the ocean and marine ecosystems. The movement of
phosphate from the ocean to the land and through th e soil is extremely slow, with the average phosphate i on having an oceanic
residence time between 20,000 and 100,000 years.3 2
43−

26.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70924
Figure: In nature, phosphorus exists as the phosphate ion (PO). W eathering of rocks and volcanic activity releases
phosphate into the soil, water, and air, where it bec omes available to terrestrial food webs. Phosphate ente rs the oceans via surface
runoff, groundwater flow, and river flow. Phosphate d issolved in ocean water cycles into marine food webs. So me phosphate from
the marine food webs falls to the ocean floor, where it forms sediment. (credit: modification of work by Jo hn M. Evans and
Howard Perlman, USGS. “phosphorus cycle” by OpenStax is li censed under CC BY 4.0)
Excess phosphorus and nitrogen that enters these ecos ystems from fertilizer runoff and from sewage causes e xcessive growth of
microorganisms and depletes the dissolved oxygen, which leads to the death of many ecosystem fauna, such as shellfish and
finfish. This process is responsible for dead zones in lakes and at the mouths of many major rivers (Figure).
Figure: Dead zones occur when phosphorus and nitrogen from fe rtilizers cause excessive growth of microorganisms, which
depletes oxygen and kills fauna. Worldwide, large dea d zones are found in coastal areas of high population density. (credit: NASA
Earth Observatory. “dead zones” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
A dead zone is an area within a freshwater or marine ecosystem where large areas are depleted of their norm al flora and fauna;
these zones can be caused by oil spills, dumping of to xic chemicals, and other human activities. The number of dead zones has
been increasing for several years, and more than 40 0 of these zones were present as of 2008. One of the wor st dead zones is off the
coast of the United States in the Gulf of Mexico, where fe rtilizer runoff from the Mississippi River basin has created a dead zone of
over 8463 square miles. Phosphate and nitrate runoff from fertilizers also negatively affect several la ke and bay ecosystems
including the Chesapeake Bay in the eastern United States.
Everyday Connection – Chesapeake Bay
The Chesapeake Bay has long been valued as one of the most scenic areas on Earth. It is now in distress and is recognized as a
declining ecosystem. In the 1970s, the Chesapeake B ay was one of the first ecosystems to have identified dead zones, which
continue to kill many fish and bottom-dwelling species, such as clams, oysters, and worms. Several species have d eclined in the43−

26.3.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70924Chesapeake Bay due to surface water runoff containin g excess nutrients from artificial fertilizer used on land. The source of the
fertilizers (with high nitrogen and phosphate conten t) is not limited to agricultural practices. There are many nearby urban areas
and more than 150 rivers and streams empty into the bay that are carrying fertilizer runoff from lawns and gardens. Thus, the
decline of the Chesapeake Bay is a complex issue and req uires the cooperation of industry, agriculture, and ever yday homeowners.
Of particular interest to conservationists is the oy ster population; it is estimated that more than 200,000 acres of oyster reefs existed
in the bay in the 1700s, but that number has now declin ed to only 36,000 acres. Oyster harvesting was once a major industry for
Chesapeake Bay, but it declined 88 percent between 19 82 and 2007. This decline was due not only to fertili zer runoff and dead
zones but also to overharvesting. Oysters require a certain minimum population densit y because they must be in close proximity
to reproduce. Human activity has altered the oyster popul ation and locations, greatly disrupting the ecosystem.
The restoration of the oyster population in the Ches apeake Bay has been ongoing for several years with mix ed success. Not only do
many people find oysters good to eat, but they also cl ean up the bay. Oysters are filter feeders, and as the y eat, they clean the water
around them. In the 1700s, it was estimated that it too k only a few days for the oyster population to filter the entire volume of the
bay. Today, with changed water conditions, it is estimated that the present population would take nearly a year to do the same job.
Restoration efforts have been ongoing for several ye ars by non-profit organizations, such as the Chesape ake Bay Foundation. The
restoration goal is to find a way to increase populat ion density so the oysters can reproduce more effici ently. Many disease-resistant
varieties (developed at the Virginia Institute of Mar ine Science for the College of William and Mary) are now available and have
been used in the construction of experimental oyste r reefs. Efforts to clean and restore the bay by Vi rginia and Delaware have been
hampered because much of the pollution entering the bay comes from other states, which stresses the need for inter-state
cooperation to gain successful restoration.
The new, hearty oyster strains have also spawned a ne w and economically viable industry—oyster aquaculture— which not only
supplies oysters for food and profit, but also has the add ed benefit of cleaning the bay.
The Sulfur Cycle
Sulfur is an essential element for the macromolecules of li ving things. As a part of the amino acid cysteine, it is involved in the
formation of disulfide bonds within proteins, which help to determine their 3-D fold ing patterns, and hence their functions. As
shown in Figure, sulfur cycles between the oceans, lan d, and atmosphere. Atmospheric sulfur is found in the form of sulfur
dioxide (SO) and enters the atmosphere in three ways: from the decomposition of organic molecules, from volcanic activity and
geothermal vents, and from the burning of fossil fuels by hu mans.
Figure: Sulfur dioxide from the atmosphere becomes available to terrestrial and marine ecosystems when it is dissolved in
precipitation as weak sulfuric acid or when it falls d irectly to the Earth as fallout. Weathering of rocks also makes sulfates available
to terrestrial ecosystems. Decomposition of living organ isms returns sulfates to the ocean, soil and atmosphere. (credit:
modification of work by John M. Evans and Howard Perl man, USGS. “The Sulfur Cycle” by OpenStax is licensed un der CC BY
4.0)
On land, sulfur is deposited in four major ways: precipitation, direct fallout from the atmosphere, rock weathering, and
geothermal vents (Figure). Atmospheric sulfur is found in the form of sulfur dioxide (SO), and as rain falls through the
atmosphere, sulfur is dissolved in the form of weak sulfuric acid (H SO). Sulfur can also fall directly from the atmospher e in a2
2 4

26.3.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70924process called fallout. Also, the weathering of sulfur-co ntaining rocks releases sulfur into the soil. These r ocks originate from ocean
sediments that are moved to land by the geologic up lifting of ocean sediments. Terrestrial ecosystems can then make use of these
soil sulfates (SO), and upon the death and decomposition of these org anisms, release the sulfur back into the atmosphere as
hydrogen sulfide (H S) gas.
Figure: At this sulfur vent in Lassen V olcanic National Park in northeastern California, the yellowish sulfur deposits are
visible near the mouth of the vent. (credit: “sulfur vent” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Sulfur enters the ocean via runoff from land, atmosphe ric fallout, and underwater geothermal vents. Some ec osystems rely on
chemoautotrophs using sulfur as a biological energy source. This sulfur then supports marine ecosystems in the form of sulfates.
Human activities have played a major role in alterin g the balance of the global sulfur cycle. The burnin g of large quantities of fossil
fuels, especially coal, releases larger amounts of hydro gen sulfide gas into the atmosphere. As rain falls thr ough this gas, it creates
the phenomenon known as acid rain. Acid rain is corrosive rain caused by rainwater fal ling to the ground through sulfur dioxide
gas, turning it into weak sulfuric acid, which causes damage to aquatic ecosystems. Acid rain damages the natu ral environment by
lowering the pH of lakes, which kills many of the resid ent fauna; it also affects the man-made environment through the chemical
degradation of buildings. For example, many marble mo numents, such as the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC, ha ve suffered
significant damage from acid rain over the years. The se examples show the wide-ranging effects of human activ ities on our
environment and the challenges that remain for our fu ture.
Summary
Mineral nutrients are cycled through ecosystems and t heir environment. Of particular importance are water, carbon, nitrogen,
phosphorus, and sulfur. All of these cycles have major i mpacts on ecosystem structure and function. As human activities have
caused major disturbances to these cycles, their stu dy and modeling is especially important. A variety of human activities, such as
pollution, oil spills, and other events have damaged e cosystems, potentially causing global climate change. The health of Earth
depends on understanding these cycles and how to protect the env ironment from irreversible damage.
References
Morford, S., Houlton, B. and Dahlgren, R. 2011. “Increased Forest Ecosystem Carbon and Nitrogen Storage from Nitrog en Rich
Bedrock,” Nature 477, no. 7362: 78–81.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.42−

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
27: Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
Figure: Lake Victoria in Africa, shown in this satellite imag e, was the site of one of the most extraordinary evolu tionary
findings on the planet, as well as a casualty of devasta ting biodiversity loss. (credit: modification of work by Rishabh Tatiraju,
using NASA World Wind software. “Lake Victoria” by Ope nStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In the 1980s, biologists working in Lake Victoria (Fig ure) in Africa discovered one of the most extraordi nary products of
evolution on the planet. Located in the Great Rift Va lley, Lake Victoria is a large lake about 68,900 km in area (larger than Lake
Huron, the second largest of North America’s Great Lake s). Biologists were studying species of a family of fish called cichlids.
They found that as they sampled for fish in differe nt locations of the lake, they never stopped finding new species, and they
identified nearly 500 evolved types of cichlids. Bu t while studying these variations, they quickly disco vered that the invasive Nile
Perch was destroying the lake’s cichlid population, bringin g hundreds of cichlid species to extinction with devastat ing rapidity.
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
27.2: The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
Thumbnail: Starfish on coral. (CC BY-SA 3.0 / cropped from orig inal; Richard Ling via Wikimedia Commons).
27: Conservation Biology and Biodiversity is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

27.1.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092527.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
Traditionally, ecologists have measured biodiversity, a general term for the variety present in the bios phere, by taking into account
both the number of species and their commonness. Biodiv ersity can be estimated at a number of levels of org anization of living
things. These estimation indexes, which came from infor mation theory, are most useful as a first step in qu antifying biodiversity
between and within ecosystems; they are less useful whe n the main concern among conservation biologists is simply the loss of
biodiversity. However, biologists recognize that measure s of biodiversity, in terms of species diversity, may help focus efforts to
preserve the biologically or technologically importan t elements of biodiversity.
The Lake Victoria cichlids provide an example throu gh which we can begin to understand biodiversity. The bi ologists studying
cichlids in the 1980s discovered hundreds of cichlid species representing a variety of specializations to particular habitat types and
specific feeding strategies: eating plankton floati ng in the water, scraping and then eating algae from rocks, eating insect larvae
from the bottom, and eating the eggs of other specie s of cichlid. The cichlids of Lake Victoria are the product of an adaptive
radiation. An adaptive radiation is a rapid (less than three million years in the ca se of the Lake Victoria cichlids) branching
through speciation of a phylogenetic tree into many closely related species; typically, the species “ra diate” into different habitats
and niches. The Galápagos finches are an example of a modest adaptive radiation with 15 species. The cich lids of Lake Victoria are
an example of a spectacular adaptive radiation that in cludes about 500 species.
At the time biologists were making this discovery, som e species began to quickly disappear. A culprit in th ese declines was a
species of large fish that was introduced to Lake Vi ctoria by fisheries to feed the people living aroun d the lake. The Nile perch was
introduced in 1963, but lay low until the 1980s when i ts populations began to surge. The Nile perch populat ion grew by consuming
cichlids, driving species after species to the point of extinction (the disappearance of a species). In fac t, there were several factors
that played a role in the extinction of perhaps 200 cichlid species in Lake Victoria: the Nile perch, de clining lake water quality due
to agriculture and land clearing on the shores of L ake Victoria, and increased fishing pressure. Scientis ts had not even cataloged all
of the species present—so many were lost that were never name d. The diversity is now a shadow of what it once was.
The cichlids of Lake Victoria are a thumbnail sketc h of contemporary rapid species loss that occurs all over Earth and is caused by
human activity. Extinction is a natural process of macroevolution that occurs at the rate of about one out of 1 mill ion species
becoming extinct per year. The fossil record reveals that there have been five periods of mass extinction in history with much
higher rates of species loss, and the rate of specie s loss today is comparable to those periods of mass ex tinction. However, there is a
major difference between the previous mass extinctio ns and the current extinction we are experiencing: h uman activity.
Specifically, three human activities have a major imp act: the destruction of habitat, the introduction of exotic species, and overharvesting. Predictions of species loss within the next century, a tiny amount of time on geological timescales, rangi ng from 10
percent to 50 percent. Extinctions on this scale hav e only happened five other times in the history of the planet, and they have been
caused by cataclysmic events that changed the course of the history of life in each instance. Many scient ists believe Earth is now
entering a sixth mass extinction.
Types of Biodiversity
Scientists generally accept that the term biodiversity describes the number and kinds of species in a locat ion or on the planet.
Species can be difficult to define, but most biologist s still feel comfortable with the concept and are abl e to identify and count
eukaryotic species in most contexts. Biologists hav e also identified alternate measures of biodiversit y, some of which are important
for planning how to preserve biodiversity.
Genetic diversity is one of those alternate concepts. Genetic diversity or variation is the raw material for adaptation in a species. A
species’ future potential for adaptation depends on the genetic diversity held in the genomes of the in dividuals in populations that
make up the species. The same is true for higher tax onomic categories. A genus with very different types of species will have more
genetic diversity than a genus with species that look alike and have similar ecologies. If there were a cho ice between one of these
genera of species being preserved, the one with the gr eatest potential for subsequent evolution is the mos t genetically diverse one.
It would be ideal not to have to make such choices, but inc reasingly this may be the norm.
Many genes code for proteins, which in turn carry out t he metabolic processes that keep organisms alive and reproducing. Genetic
diversity can be measured as chemical diversity in th at different species produce a variety of chemicals in their cells, both the

27.1.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70925proteins as well as the products and byproducts of m etabolism. This chemical diversity has potential benefits for humans as a
source of pharmaceuticals, so it provides one way to measure diversity that is important to human health and welfar e.
Humans have generated diversity in domestic animals, p lants, and fungi. This diversity is also suffering lo sses because of
migration, market forces, and increasing globalism in agriculture, especially in heavily populated regions such as China, India, and
Japan. The human population directly depends on this diversity as a stable food source, and its decline i s troubling biologists and
agricultural scientists.
It is also useful to define ecosystem diversity, meaning the number of different ecosystems on the planet or in a given geographic
area. Whole ecosystems can disappear even if some of t he species might survive by adapting to other ecosyst ems. The loss of an
ecosystem means the loss of interactions between speci es, the loss of unique features of coadaptation, and the loss of biological
productivity that an ecosystem is able to create. An ex ample of a largely extinct ecosystem in North America is the prairie
ecosystem. Prairies once spanned central North America fr om the boreal forest in northern Canada down into Mex ico. They are
now all but gone, replaced by crop fields, pasture land s, and suburban sprawl. Many of the species survive, but th e hugely
productive ecosystem that was responsible for creating the most productive agricultural soils is now gone. As a consequence, soils
are disappearing or must be maintained at greater expen se.
Current Species Diversity
Despite considerable effort, knowledge of the species that inhabit the planet is limited. A recent estimat e suggests that the
eukaryote species for which science has names, about 1.5 million species, account for less than 20 percen t of the total number of
eukaryote species present on the planet (8.7 millio n species, by one estimate). Estimates of numbers of prokaryotic species are
largely guesses, but biologists agree that science ha s only begun to catalog their diversity. Even with wha t is known, there is no
central repository of names or samples of the descr ibed species; therefore, there is no way to be sure tha t the 1.5 million
descriptions is an accurate number. It is a best gu ess based on the opinions of experts in different ta xonomic groups. Given that
Earth is losing species at an accelerating pace, scien ce is very much in the place it was with the Lake Vic toria cichlids: knowing
little about what is being lost. Table presents recent estimates of biodiversity in different groups.
Table: Estimates of the Numbers of Described and Predicted Spec ies by Taxonomic Group
Mora et al. 2011 Chapman 2009 Groombridge & Jenkins 20 02
Described Predicted Described Predicted Described Predicted
Animalia 1,124,516 9,920,000 1,424,153 6,836,330 1,225,5 00 10,820,000
Chromista 17,892 34,900 25,044 200,500 — —
Fungi 44,368 616,320 98,998 1,500,000 72,000 1,500,000
Plantae 224,244 314,600 310,129 390,800 270,000 320,000
Protozoa 16,236 72,800 28,871 1,000,000 80,000 600,000
Prokaryotes — — 10,307 1,000,000 10,175 —
Total 1,438,769 10,960,000 1,897,502 10,897,630 1,657,67 5 13,240,000
There are various initiatives to catalog described species in accessible ways, and the internet is facilit ating that effort. Nevertheless,
it has been pointed out that at the current rate of species description, which according to the State of Ob served Species Report is
17,000 to 20,000 new species per year, it will take cl ose to 500 years to finish describing life on this pl anet (IISE, 2011). Over time,
the task becomes both increasingly impossible and incr easingly easier as extinction removes species from the pl anet.
Naming and counting species may seem an unimportant pu rsuit given the other needs of humanity, but it is n ot simply an
accounting. Describing species is a complex process by which biologists determine an organism’s unique chara cteristics and
whether or not that organism belongs to any other desc ribed species. It allows biologists to find and reco gnize the species after the
initial discovery and allows them to follow up on que stions about its biology. In addition, the unique char acteristics of each species

27.1.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70925make it potentially valuable to humans or other speci es on which humans depend. Understanding these charact eristics is the value
of finding and naming species.
Patterns of Biodiversity
Biodiversity is not evenly distributed on Earth. La ke Victoria contained almost 500 species of cichlids alone, ignoring the other fish
families present in the lake. All of these species were found only in Lake Victoria; therefore, the 500 sp ecies of cichlids were
endemic. Endemic species are found in only one location. Endemics wi th highly restricted distributions are particularly v ulnerable
to extinction. Higher taxonomic levels, such as gener a and families, can also be endemic. Lake Huron contain s about 79 species of
fish, all of which are found in many other lakes in No rth America. What accounts for the difference in fish diversity in these two
lakes? Lake Victoria is a tropical lake, while Lake Hur on is a temperate lake. Lake Huron in its present form is only about 7,000
years old, while Lake Victoria in its present form is a bout 15,000 years old. Biogeographers have suggested t hese two factors,
latitude and age, are two of several hypotheses to explain bi odiversity patterns on the planet.
Biogeography is the study of the distribution of the world’s spec ies—both in the past and in the present. The work of
biogeographers is critical to understanding our phy sical environment, how the environment affects specie s, and how environmental
changes impact the distribution of a species; it ha s also been critical to developing evolutionary theo ry. Biogeographers need to
understand both biology and ecology. They also need to be well-versed in evolutionary studies, soil science, a nd climatology.
There are three main fields of study under the headi ng of biogeography: ecological biogeography, historical biogeography
(called paleobiogeography), and conservation biogeography. Ecological biogeography studies the current facto rs affecting the
distribution of plants and animals. Historical biogeogra phy, as the name implies, studies the past distributi on of species.
Conservation biogeography, on the other hand, is fo cused on the protection and restoration of species based upon known historical
and current ecological information. Each of these fi elds considers both zoogeography and phytogeography —the past and present
distribution of animals and plants.
One of the oldest observed patterns in ecology is tha t species biodiversity in almost every taxonomic gro up increases as latitude
declines. In other words, biodiversity increases closer to t he equator (Figure).
Figure: This map illustrates the number of amphibian species ac ross the globe and shows the trend toward higher
biodiversity at lower latitudes. A similar pattern is o bserved for most taxonomic groups. (credit: “amphibian map” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
It is not yet clear why biodiversity increases closer to the equator, but hypotheses include the greater a ge of the ecosystems in the
tropics versus temperate regions that were largely d evoid of life or drastically impoverished during the last glaciation. The idea is
that greater age provides more time for speciation. Another possible explanation is the increased energy the tropics receive from the
sun versus the decreased energy that temperate and po lar regions receive. It is not entirely clear how gr eater energy input could
translate into more species. The complexity of tropical ecosystems may promote speciation by increasing the heterogeneity, or
number of ecological niches, in the tropics relative to higher latitudes. The greater heterogeneity pro vides more opportunities for
coevolution, specialization, and perhaps greater sel ection pressures leading to population differentiat ion. However, this hypothesis
suffers from some circularity—ecosystems with more sp ecies encourage speciation, but how did they get mor e species to begin

27.1.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70925with? The tropics have been perceived as being more stable than temperate regions, which have a pronounce d climate and daylength seasonality. The tropics have their own forms o f seasonality, such as rainfall, but they are genera lly assumed to be more
stable environments and this stability might promote speciation.
Regardless of the mechanisms, it is certainly true that all levels of biodiversity are greatest in the tropics. Additionally, the rate of
endemism is the highest, and there are more biodivers ity hotspots. However, this richness of diversity also me ans that our
knowledge of species is lowest, and there is a high potential fo r biodiversity loss.
Conservation of Biodiversity
In 1988, British environmentalist Norman Myers develop ed a conservation concept to identify areas rich in species and at
significant risk for species loss: biodiversity hotspots. Biodiversity hotspots are geographical areas that contain high numbers of
endemic species. The purpose of the concept was to ide ntify important locations on the planet for conserva tion efforts, a kind of
conservation triage. By protecting hotspots, governments are able to p rotect a larger number of species. The original cri teria for a
hotspot included the presence of 1500 or more endemi c plant species and 70 percent of the area disturbed b y human activity. There
are now 34 biodiversity hotspots (Figure) containing large numbers of endemic species, which include hal f of Earth’s
endemic plants.
Figure: Conservation International has identified 34 biodive rsity hotspots, which cover only 2.3 percent of the Ea rth’s
surface but have endemic to them 42 percent of the t errestrial vertebrate species and 50 percent of the wo rld’s plants. (credit:
“biodiversity hotspots” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Biodiversity Change through Geological Time
The number of species on the planet, or in any geogra phical area, is the result of an equilibrium of two ev olutionary processes that
are ongoing: speciation and extinction. Both are natural “birth” and “death” processes of macroevolution. When speciation rates
begin to outstrip extinction rates, the number of sp ecies will increase; likewise, the number of species wil l decrease when
extinction rates begin to overtake speciation rates. Throughout Earth’s history, these two processes have fluctuated—sometimes
leading to dramatic changes in the number of species on E arth as reflected in the fossil record (Figure).

27.1.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70925
Figure: Percent extinction occurrences as reflected in the f ossil record have fluctuated throughout Earth’s history. Sudden
and dramatic losses of biodiversity, called mass extincti ons, have occurred five times. (credit: “extinction o ccurrences” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Paleontologists have identified five strata in the foss il record that appear to show sudden and dramatic (g reater than half of all
extant species disappearing from the fossil record) losses in biodiversity. These are called mass extinctions. There are many lesser,
yet still dramatic, extinction events, but the five ma ss extinctions have attracted the most research. An argu ment can be made that
the five mass extinctions are only the five most ext reme events in a continuous series of large extinctio n events throughout the
Phanerozoic (since 542 million years ago). In most cases, the hypothesized causes are still controversial.
The Five Mass Extinctions
The fossil record of the mass extinctions was the bas is for defining periods of geological history, so t hey typically occur at the
transition point between geological periods. The transi tion in fossils from one period to another reflects the dramatic loss of species
and the gradual origin of new species. These transiti ons can be seen in the rock strata. Table provides data on the five mass
extinctions.
Table: the names and dates for the five mass extinctions in Ea rth’s history.
Mass Extinctions
Geological Period Mass Extinction Name Time (millions of years ago)
Ordovician–Silurian end-Ordovician O–S 450–440
Late Devonian end-Devonian 375–360
Permian–Triassic end-Permian 251
Triassic–Jurassic end-Triassic 205
Cretaceous–Paleogene end-Cretaceous K–Pg (K–T) 65.5
The Ordovician-Silurian extinction event is the first recorded mass extinction and the secon d largest. During this period, about
85 percent of marine species (few species lived outsi de the oceans) became extinct. The main hypothesis f or its cause is a period of
glaciation and then warming. The extinction event ac tually consists of two extinction events separated b y about 1 million years.
The first event was caused by cooling, and the second ev ent was due to the subsequent warming. The climate cha nges affected
temperatures and sea levels. Some researchers have s uggested that a gamma-ray burst, caused by a nearby supernova, is a possible
cause of the Ordovician-Silurian extinction. The gamma- ray burst would have stripped away the Earth’s ozone l ayer causing
intense ultraviolet radiation from the sun and may a ccount for climate changes observed at the time. The hypothesis is speculative,
but extraterrestrial influences on Earth’s history are an active line of research. Recovery of biodiversit y after the mass extinction
took from 5 to 20 million years, depending on the locatio n.

27.1.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70925The late Devonian extinction may have occurred over a relatively long period of time. It appears to have affected marine species
and not the plants or animals inhabiting terrestrial habi tats. The causes of this extinction are poorly understood.
The end-Permian extinction was the largest in the history of life. Indeed, an ar gument could be made that Earth nearly became
devoid of life during this extinction event. The pla net looked very different before and after this event. Estimates are that 96 percent
of all marine species and 70 percent of all terrestr ial species were lost. It was at this time, for example, that the trilobites, a group
that survived the Ordovician–Silurian extinction, becam e extinct. The causes for this mass extinction are not clear, but the leading
suspect is extended and widespread volcanic activity that led to a runaway global-warming event. The oceans became largely
anoxic, suffocating marine life. Terrestrial tetrapod diversity took 30 million years to recover after the end-Permian extinction. The
Permian extinction dramatically altered Earth’s biodiv ersity makeup and the course of evolution.
The causes of the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event are not clear and hypotheses of climate chan ge, asteroid impact, and volcanic
eruptions have been argued. The extinction event occ urred just before the breakup of the supercontinent Pa ngaea, although recent
scholarship suggests that the extinction may have occ urred more gradually throughout the Triassic.
The causes of the end-Cretaceous extinction event are the ones that are best understood. It was du ring this extinction event about
65 million years ago that the dinosaurs, the dominant vertebrate group for millions of yea rs, disappeared from the planet (with the
exception of a theropod clade that gave rise to bir ds). Every land animal that weighed more than 25 kg became extinct. The cause
of this extinction is now understood to be the result of a cataclysmic impact of a large meteorite, or a steroid, off the coast of what is
now the Yucatán Peninsula. This hypothesis, proposed firs t in 1980, was a radical explanation based on a sharp s pike in the levels
of iridium (which rains down from space in meteors at a fairly constant rate but is otherwise absent on Ear th’s surface) at the rock
stratum that marks the boundary between the Cretaceo us and Paleogene periods (Figure). This boundary marked the
disappearance of the dinosaurs in fossils as well as man y other taxa. The researchers who discovered the iri dium spike interpreted it
as a rapid influx of iridium from space to the atmo sphere (in the form of a large asteroid) rather than a slowing in the deposition of
sediments during that period. It was a radical explan ation, but the report of an appropriately aged and si zed impact crater in 1991
made the hypothesis more believable. Now an abundance of geological evidence supports the theory. Recover y times for
biodiversity after the end-Cretaceous extinction are shorter, in geological time, than for the end-Permian extinction, on the order of
10 million years.
Figure: In 1980, Luis and Walter Alvarez, Frank Asaro, and H elen Michels discovered, across the world, a spike in th e
concentration of iridium within the sedimentary laye r at the K–Pg boundary. These researchers hypothesized that this iridium spike
was caused by an asteroid impact that resulted in the K –Pg mass extinction. In the photo, the iridium layer i s the light band. (credit:
USGS. “K–Pg boundary” by OpenStax is licensed under CC B Y 4.0)
The Pleistocene Extinction
The Pleistocene Extinction is one of the lesser extinctions and a recent one. It is well known that the North American, and to some
degree Eurasian, megafauna, or large animals, disappe ared toward the end of the last glaciation period. Th e extinction appears to
have happened in a relatively restricted time period of 10,000–12,000 years ago. In North America, the losses were quite dramatic
and included the woolly mammoths (last dated about 4,000 years ago in an isolated po pulation), mastodon, giant beavers, giant
ground sloths, saber-toothed cats, and the North American camel, just to name a few. The possibility that the rapid extinction of
these large animals was caused by over-hunting was first s uggested in the 1900s. Research into this hypothesi s continues today. It
seems likely that over-hunting caused many pre-written hi story extinctions in many regions of the world.
In general, the timing of the Pleistocene extinction s correlated with the arrival of humans and not with climate-change events,
which is the main competing hypothesis for these extin ctions. The extinctions began in Australia about 40,000 to 50,000 years ago,
just after the arrival of humans in the area: a mar supial lion, a giant one-ton wombat, and several gian t kangaroo species
disappeared. In North America, the extinction of almost all of the large mammals occurred 10,000–12,000 year s ago. All that are

27.1.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70925left are the smaller mammals such as bears, elk, moo se, and cougars. Finally, on many remote oceanic isla nds, the extinction of
many species occurred coincident with human arrivals. Not all of the islands had large animals, but when there were large animals,
they were lost. Madagascar was colonized about 2,000 year s ago and the large mammals that lived there became extinct. Eurasia
and Africa do not show this pattern, but they also did not experience a recent arrival of humans. Humans arri ved in Eurasia
hundreds of thousands of years ago after the origin of the species in Africa. This topic remains an area of active research and
hypothesizing. It seems clear that even if climate played a role, in most cases human hunting precipitated the e xtinctions.
Present-Time Extinctions
The sixth mass extinction (also called the Holocene extinction) appears to have begun earlier than previously belie ved and has
mostly to do with the activities of Homo sapiens. Since the beginning of the Holocene period, there a re numerous recent
extinctions of individual species that are recorded i n human writings. Most of these are coincident with th e expansion of the
European colonies since the 1500s.
One of the earlier and popularly known examples is th e dodo bird. The dodo bird lived in the forests of Ma uritius, an island in the
Indian Ocean. The dodo bird became extinct around 166 2. It was hunted for its meat by sailors and was easy prey because the
dodo, which did not evolve with humans, would approach p eople without fear. Introduced pigs, rats, and dogs br ought to the island
by European ships also killed dodo young and eggs.
Steller’s sea cow became extinct in 1768; it was relate d to the manatee and probably once lived along the northwest coast of North
America. Steller’s sea cow was first discovered by European s in 1741 and was hunted for meat and oil. The last sea cow was killed
in 1768. That amounts to 27 years between the sea cow’s first co ntact with Europeans and the extinction of the species.
In 1914, the last living passenger pigeon died in a zoo in Cincinnati, Ohio. This species had once darkened the skies of North
America during its migrations, but it was hunted and s uffered from habitat loss through the clearing of fo rests for farmland. In
1918, the last living Carolina parakeet died in cap tivity. This species was once common in the eastern Uni ted States, but it suffered
from habitat loss. The species was also hunted becau se it ate orchard fruit when its native foods were destr oyed to make way for
farmland. The Japanese sea lion, which inhabited a broa d area around Japan and the coast of Korea, became e xtinct in the 1950s
due to fishermen. The Caribbean monk seal was distri buted throughout the Caribbean Sea but was driven to extinction via hunting
by 1952.
These are only a few of the recorded extinctions in th e past 500 years. The International Union for Conservat ion of Nature (IUCN)
keeps a list of extinct and endangered species calle d the Red List. The list is not complete, but it describes 380 extinct species of
vertebrates after 1500 AD, 86 of which were driven extinct by overhunting or overfishing.
Estimates of Present-Time Extinction Rates
Estimates of extinction rates are hampered by the fact that most extinctions are probably happening without observation. The
extinction of a bird or mammal is likely to be noti ced by humans, especially if it has been hunted or used in some other way. But
there are many organisms that are of less interest to humans (not necessarily of less value) and many that are undesc ribed.
The background extinction rate is estimated to be about one per million species pe r year (E/MSY). For example, assuming there
are about ten million species in existence, the expe ctation is that ten species would become extinct each year (each year represents
ten million species per year).
One contemporary extinction rate estimate uses the ex tinctions in the written record since the year 1500. Fo r birds alone, this
method yields an estimate of 26 E/MSY. However, this va lue may be underestimated for three reasons. First, ma ny species would
not have been described until much later in the tim e period, so their loss would have gone unnoticed. Sec ond, the number of
recently extinct species is increasing because extin ct species now are being described from skeletal rema ins. And third, some
species are probably already extinct even though co nservationists are reluctant to name them as such. T aking these factors into
account raises the estimated extinction rate closer to 100 E/MSY. The predicted rate by the end of the century is 1500 E/MSY.
A second approach to estimating present-time extinct ion rates is to correlate species loss with habitat los s by measuring forest-area
loss and understanding species-area relationships. The species-area relationship is the rate at which new species are seen when the
area surveyed is increased. Studies have shown that the number of species present increases as the size of th e island increases. This
phenomenon has also been shown to hold true in other habitats as well. Turning this relationship around, i f the habitat area is
reduced, the number of species living there will also decline. Estimates of extinction rates based on ha bitat loss and species-area

27.1.8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70925relationships have suggested that with about 90 percent habitat loss an expected 50 percent of species would become extinct.
Species-area estimates have led to species extinctio n rate calculations of about 1000 E/MSY and higher. In general, actual
observations do not show this amount of loss and suggest ions have been made that there is a delay in extinc tion. Recent work has
also called into question the applicability of the s pecies-area relationship when estimating the loss of s pecies. This work argues that
the species-area relationship leads to an overestima te of extinction rates. A better relationship to use m ay be the endemics-area
relationship. Using this method would bring estimates d own to around 500 E/MSY in the coming century. Note th at this value is
still 500 times the background rate.
Summary
Biodiversity exists at multiple levels of organizat ion and is measured in different ways depending on th e goals of those taking the
measurements. These measurements include numbers of species, genetic diversity, chemical diversity, and ecosystem diversity. The
number of described species is estimated to be 1.5 m illion with about 17,000 new species being described each year. Estimates for
the total number of species on Earth vary but are on the order of 10 million. Biodiversity is negatively correlated with latitude for
most taxa, meaning that biodiversity is higher in the tropics. The mechanism for this pattern is not known with certainty, but several
plausible hypotheses have been advanced.
Five mass extinctions with losses of more than 50 perc ent of extant species are observable in the fossil rec ord. Biodiversity
recovery times after mass extinctions vary, but hav e been up to 30 million years. Recent extinctions are recorded in written history
and are the basis for one method of estimating contemp orary extinction rates. The other method uses measures of habitat loss and
species-area relationships. Estimates of contemporary extinction rates vary, but some rates are as high as 50 0 times the background
rate, as determined from the fossil record, and are pred icted to rise.
References
Camilo, M. et al. 2011. “How Many Species Are There on Eart h and in the Ocean?” PLoS Biology,
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001127.
Chapman, A. 2009. Numbers of Living Species in Australia and the World, 2nd ed. (Canberra, AU: Australian Biological Resource s
Study). http://www.environment.gov.au/biodiv...d-complete.pdf.
Groombridge, B. and Jenkins, M. 2002. World Atlas of Biodiversity: Earth’ s Living Resources in the 21 Century. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
International Institute for Species Exploration (IISE), 2011. State of Observed Species (SOS). Tempe, AZ: IISE, 2011. Accessed
May, 20, 2012. http://species.asu.edu/SOS.
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.st

27.2.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092627.2: The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
It may not be clear why biologists are concerned about biodiversity loss. When biodiversity loss is though t of as the extinction of
the passenger pigeon, the dodo bird, and even the wool ly mammoth, the loss may appear to be an emotional o ne. But is the loss
practically important for the welfare of the human sp ecies? From the perspective of evolution and ecology, the loss of a particular
individual species is unimportant (however, the loss of a keystone species can lead to ecological disaster). Extinction is a normal
part of macroevolution. But the accelerated extincti on rate means the loss of tens of thousands of specie s within our lifetimes, and
it is likely to have dramatic effects on human welfa re through the collapse of ecosystems and in added c osts to maintain food
production, clean air and water, and human health.
Agriculture began after early hunter-gatherer societ ies first settled in one place and heavily modified their immediate environment.
This cultural transition has made it difficult for hu mans to recognize their dependence on undomesticate d living things on the
planet. Biologists recognize the human species is emb edded in ecosystems and is dependent on them, just as every other species on
the planet is dependent. Technology smoothes out the extremes of existence, but ultimately the human speci es cannot exist without
its ecosystem.
Human Health
Contemporary societies that live close to the land of ten have a broad knowledge of the medicinal uses of plants growing in their
area. Most plants produce secondary plant compounds, wh ich are toxins used to protect the plant from insec ts and other animals
that eat them, but some of which also work as medicatio n. For centuries cultures around the globe have organiz ed knowledge about
the medical uses of plants into ceremonies and tradit ions. Humans are not the only species to use plants fo r medicinal reasons: the
great apes, orangutans, chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorilla s have all been observed self-medicating with plants.
Modern pharmaceutical science also recognizes the imp ortance of these plant compounds. Examples of signific ant medicines
derived from plant compounds include aspirin, codeine, digoxin, atropine, and vincristine (Figure). Many m edicines were
once derived from plant extracts but are now synthesi zed. It is estimated that, at one time, 25 percent o f modern drugs contained at
least one plant extract. That number has probably dec reased to about 10 percent as natural plant ingredi ents are replaced by
synthetic versions. Antibiotics, which are responsible for extraordinary improvements in health and lifespans in developed
countries, are compounds largely derived from fungi a nd bacteria.
Figure: Catharanthus roseus, the Madagascar periwinkle, has various medicinal pro perties. Among other uses, it is a source
of vincristine, a drug used in the treatment of lymph omas. (credit: Forest and Kim Starr. “Catharanthus rose us” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
In recent years, animal venoms and poisons have excited intense research for their medicinal p otential. By 2007, the FDA had
approved five drugs based on animal toxins to treat diseases such as hypertension, chronic pain, and dia betes. Another five drugs
are undergoing clinical trials, and at least six drug s are being used in other countries. Other toxins unde r investigation come from
mammals, snakes, lizards, various amphibians, fish, snails, oc topuses, and scorpions.
Aside from representing billions of dollars in profits, these medicines improve people’s lives. Pharmaceuti cal companies are
actively looking for new compounds synthesized by li ving organisms that can function as medicine. It is e stimated that 1/3 of
pharmaceutical research and development is spent on natural compounds and that about 35 percent of new d rugs brought to market
between 1981 and 2002 were from natural compounds. The opportunities for new medications will be reduced in direct proportion
to the disappearance of species.

27.2.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70926Agricultural Diversity
Since the beginning of human agriculture more than 1 0,000 years ago, human groups have been breeding and selecting crop
varieties. This crop diversity matched the cultural diversity of highly subdivided populations of humans. For example, potatoes
were domesticated beginning around 7,000 years ago in the central Andes of Peru and Bolivia. The potatoes g rown in that region
belong to seven species and the number of varieties likely is in the thousands. Each variety has been bred to thrive at particular
elevations and soil and climate conditions. The diver sity is driven by the diverse demands of the topograph y, the limited movement
of people, and the demands created by crop rotation for d ifferent varieties that will do well in different fields.
Potatoes are only one example of human-generated div ersity. Every plant, animal, and fungus that has been cu ltivated by humans
has been bred from original wild ancestor species int o diverse varieties arising from the demands for fo od value, adaptation to
growing conditions, and resistance to pests. The potat o demonstrates a well-known example of the risks of lo w crop diversity: the
tragic Irish potato famine when the single variety gr own in Ireland became susceptible to a potato blight, wiping out the crop. The
loss of the crop led to famine, death, and mass emigr ation. Resistance to disease is a chief benefit to ma intaining crop biodiversity,
and lack of diversity in contemporary crop species carries similar risks. Seed companies, which are the sou rce of most crop
varieties in developed countries, must continually bre ed new varieties to keep up with evolving pest organis ms. These same seed
companies, however, have participated in the decline of the number of varieties available as they focus on se lling fewer varieties in
more areas of the world.
The ability to create new crop varieties relies on the diversity of varieties available and the accessibi lity of wild forms related to the
crop plant. These wild forms are often the source of new gene variants that can be bred with existing varieti es to create varieties
with new attributes. Loss of wild species related to a cr op will mean the loss of potential in crop improvemen t. Maintaining the
genetic diversity of wild species related to domesticat ed species ensures our continued food supply.
Since the 1920s, government agriculture departments ha ve maintained seed banks of crop varieties as a way t o maintain crop
diversity. This system has flaws because, over time, seed b anks are lost through accidents, and there is no way to replace them. In
2008, the Svalbard Global Seed Vault (Figure) began storing seeds from around the world as a backup system to the
regional seed banks. If a regional seed bank stores varieties in Svalbard, losses can be replaced from Sv albard. The seed vault is
located deep into the rock of an arctic island. Con ditions within the vault are maintained at ideal tem perature and humidity for seed
survival, but the deep underground location of the vault in the arctic means that failure of the vault ’s systems will not compromise
the climatic conditions inside the vault.
Figure: The Svalbard Global Seed Vault is a storage facility for seeds of Earth’s diverse crops. (credit: Mari Tefre, Svalbard
Global Seed Vault. “Svalbard Global Seed Vault” by O penStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Crop success is largely dependent on the quality of t he soil. Although some agricultural soils are rendered sterile using
controversial cultivation and chemical treatments, m ost contain a huge diversity of organisms that main tain nutrient cycles—
breaking down organic matter into nutrient compounds that crops need for growth. These organisms also mai ntain soil texture that
affects water and oxygen dynamics in the soil that a re necessary for plant growth. If farmers had to main tain arable soil using
alternate means, the cost of food would be much highe r than it is now. These kinds of processes are called ecosystem services.

27.2.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70926They occur within ecosystems, such as soil ecosystems, as a result of the diverse metabolic activities of the organisms living there,
but they provide benefits to human food production, drink ing water availability, and breathable air.
Other key ecosystem services related to food product ion are plant pollination and crop pest control. Over 150 crops in the United
States require pollination to produce food. One estima te of the benefit of honeybee pollinations within th e United States is $1.6
billion per year. Other pollinators contribute up to $6.7 billion more.
Many honeybee populations are managed by apiarists who rent out their hives’ services to farmers. Honeyb ee populations in North
America have been suffering large losses caused by a syndrome known as colony collapse disorder, whose cause is unclear. Other
pollinators include a diverse array of other bee spe cies and various insects and birds. Loss of these sp ecies would make growing
crops requiring pollination impossible, increasing depe ndence on other crops.
Finally, humans compete for their food with crop pests, m ost of which are insects. Pesticides control these competitors; however,
pesticides are costly and lose their effectiveness ove r time as pest populations adapt. They also lead to co llateral damage by killing
non-pest species and risking the health of consumers and agricultural workers. Ecologists believe that th e bulk of the work in
removing pests is actually done by predators and para sites of those pests, but the impact has not been we ll studied. A review found
that in 74 percent of studies that looked for an eff ect of landscape complexity on natural enemies of p ests, the greater the
complexity, the greater the effect of pest-suppressi ng organisms. An experimental study found that intro ducing multiple enemies of
pea aphids (an important alfalfa pest) increased the yield of alfalfa significantly. This study shows the i mportance of landscape
diversity via the question of whether a diversity of pe sts is more effective at control than one single pe st; the results showed this to
be the case. Loss of diversity in pest enemies will inevitably make it more difficult and costly to grow food.
Wild Food Sources
In addition to growing crops and raising animals for food, humans obtain food resources from wild populati ons, primarily fish
populations. For approximately 1 billion people, aquatic resources provide the main source of animal protein. But sinc e 1990,
global fish production has declined. Despite considerabl e effort, few fisheries on the planet are managed for sustai nability.
Fishery extinctions rarely lead to the complete exti nction of the harvested species, but rather to a rad ical restructuring of the marine
ecosystem in which a dominant species is so over-harveste d that it becomes a minor player, ecologically. In a ddition to humans
losing the food source, these alterations affect man y other species in ways that are difficult or impossib le to predict. The collapse of
fisheries has dramatic and long-lasting effects on lo cal populations that work in the fishery. In addition, the loss of an inexpensive
protein source to populations that cannot afford to replace it will increase the cost of living and limi t societies in other ways. In
general, the fish taken from fisheries have shifted t o smaller species as larger species are fished to ex tinction. The ultimate outcome
could clearly be the loss of aquatic systems as food s ources.
Psychological and Moral Value
Finally, it has been argued that humans benefit psycho logically from living in a biodiverse world. A chief p roponent of this idea is
entomologist E. O. Wilson. He argues that human evolutiona ry history has adapted us to live in a natural enviro nment and that built
environments generate stressors that affect human hea lth and well-being. There is considerable research into the psychological
regenerative benefits of natural landscapes that suggests the hypothesis may hold some truth. In addition, there is a moral
argument that humans have a responsibility to inflict as little harm as possible on other species.
Summary
Humans use many compounds that were first discovered or derived from living organisms as medicines: seconda ry plant
compounds, animal toxins, and antibiotics produced by bacteria and fungi. More medicines are expected to be discovered in nature.
Loss of biodiversity will impact the number of pharmaceuti cals available to humans.
Crop diversity is a requirement for food security, an d it is being lost. The loss of wild relatives to cr ops also threatens breeders’
abilities to create new varieties. Ecosystems provide ecosystem services that support human agriculture: p ollination, nutrient
cycling, pest control, and soil development and mainte nance. Loss of biodiversity threatens these ecosystem services and risks
making food production more expensive or impossible. Wild food sources are mainly aquatic, but few are be ing managed for
sustainability. Fisheries’ ability to provide protein t o human populations is threatened when extinction occurs.

27.2.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70926Biodiversity may provide important psychological ben efits to humans. Additionally, there are moral argume nts for the maintenance
of biodiversity.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
27.2: The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

27.3.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092727.3: Threats to Biodiversity
The core threat to biodiversity on the planet, and t herefore a threat to human welfare, is the combinati on of human population
growth and resource exploitation. The human populatio n requires resources to survive and grow, and those r esources are being
removed unsustainably from the environment. The thre e greatest proximate threats to biodiversity are hab itat loss, overharvesting,
and the introduction of exotic species. The first two of these are a direct result of human population gr owth and resource use. The
third results from increased mobility and trade. A fo urth major cause of extinction, anthropogenic climat e change, is predicted to
become significant during this century. Global clima te change is also a consequence of the human populati on’s need for energy and
the use of fossil fuels to meet those needs (Figure). Environmental issues, such as toxic pollution, have specific targeted
effects on species, but they are not generally seen as th reats at the magnitude of the others.
Figure: Atmospheric carbon dioxide levels fluctuate in a cyc lical manner. However, the burning of fossil fuels in recent
history has caused a dramatic increase in the levels of carbon dioxide in the Earth’s atmosphere, which have now reached levels
never before seen in human history. Scientists predict that the addition of this “greenhouse gas” to the atmo sphere is resulting in
climate change that will significantly impact biodiv ersity in the coming century. (credit: “Atmospheric c arbon dioxide levels” by
OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Habitat Loss
Habitat loss is a major threat to biodiversity. Remove the entire habitat within the range of a species and, unless the y are one of the
few species that do well in human-built environments, th e species will become extinct. Human destruction of h abitats accelerated
in the latter half of the twentieth century. Conside r the exceptional biodiversity of Sumatra: it is home to one species of orangutan,
a species of critically endangered elephant, and the Sumatran tiger, but half of Sumatra’s forest is now gone. The neighboring
island of Borneo, home to the other species of orangu tan, has lost a similar area of forest. Forest loss c ontinues even in protected
areas of Borneo. The orangutan in Borneo is listed a s endangered by the International Union for Conservati on of Nature (IUCN),
but it is simply the most visible of thousands of spe cies that will not survive the disappearance of the forests of Borneo. The forests
are removed for timber and to plant palm oil planta tions (Figure). Palm oil is used in many products inclu ding food products,
cosmetics, and biodiesel in Europe. A five-year estim ate of global forest cover loss for the years 2000–2 005 was 3.1 percent. In the
humid tropics where forest loss is primarily from tim ber extraction, 272,000 km was lost out of a global t otal of 11,564,000 km
(or 2.4 percent). In the tropics, these losses certainly also represent the extinction of species because of high l evels of endemism.2 2

27.3.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70927
Figure: (a) One species of orangutan, Pongo pygmaeus, is found only in the rainforests of Borneo, and the other species of
orangutan (Pongo abelii) is found only in the rainforests of Sumatra. These an imals are examples of the exceptional biodiversity of
(c) the islands of Sumatra and Borneo. Other species in clude the (b) Sumatran tiger (Panthera tigris sumatrae) and the (d)
Sumatran elephant (Elephas maximus sumatranus), both critically endangered species. Rainforest habi tat is being removed to make
way for (e) oil palm plantations such as this one in Bo rneo’s Sabah Province. (credit a: modification of wor k by Thorsten Bachner;
credit b: modification of work by Dick Mudde; credi t c: modification of work by U.S. CIA World Factbook; credit d: modification
of work by “Nonprofit Organizations”/Flickr; credit e: modification of work by Dr. Lian Pin Koh. “habita t loss” by OpenStax is
licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Preventing Habitat Destruction with Wise Wood Choices
Most consumers do not imagine that the home improvemen t products they buy might be contributing to habita t loss and species
extinctions. Yet the market for illegally harvested timber is huge, and the wood products often find themselves in building supply
stores in the United States. One estimate is that 10 per cent of the imported timber stream in the United State s, which is the world’s
largest consumer of wood products, is potentially ill egally logged. In 2006, this amounted to $3.6 billion in wood products. Most of
the illegal products are imported from countries that act as intermediaries and are not the originators of the wood.
How is it possible to determine if a wood product, such as flooring, was harvested sustainably or even legally? The Forest
Stewardship Council (FSC) certifies sustainably harveste d forest products, therefore, looking for their cert ification on flooring and
other hardwood products is one way to ensure that the wood has not been taken illegally from a tropical fo rest. Certification applies
to specific products, not to a producer; some produc ers’ products may not have certification while other products are certified.
While there are other industry-backed certification s other than the FSC, these are unreliable due to lack of independence from the
industry. Another approach is to buy domestic wood spec ies. While it would be great if there was a list of leg al versus illegal wood

27.3.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70927products, it is not that simple. Logging and forest man agement laws vary from country to country; what is ill egal in one country
may be legal in another. Where and how a product is ha rvested and whether the forest from which it comes is b eing maintained
sustainably all factor into whether a wood product will be certified by the FSC. It is always a good idea to as k questions about
where a wood product came from and how the supplier knows tha t it was harvested legally.
Habitat destruction can affect ecosystems other than f orests. Rivers and streams are important ecosystems an d are frequently
modified through land development and from damming or water removal. Damming of rivers affects the water fl ow and access to
all parts of a river. Differing flow regimes can reduce or eliminate populations that are adapted to these changes in flow patterns.
For example, an estimated 91 percent of river length s in the United States have been developed: they have modifications like dams,
to create energy or store water; levees, to prevent flooding; or dredging or rerouting, to create land that is more suitable for human
development. Many fish species in the United States, es pecially rare species or species with restricted distr ibutions, have seen
declines caused by river damming and habitat loss. Re search has confirmed that species of amphibians tha t must carry out parts of
their life cycles in both aquatic and terrestrial h abitats have a greater chance of suffering populatio n declines and extinction because
of the increased likelihood that one of their habitats or access between them will be lost.
Overharvesting
Overharvesting is a serious threat to many species, but particular ly to aquatic species. There are many examples of re gulated
commercial fisheries monitored by fisheries scientis ts that have nevertheless collapsed. The western Atlant ic cod fishery is the most
spectacular recent collapse. While it was a hugely pr oductive fishery for 400 years, the introduction of modern factory trawlers in
the 1980s and the pressure on the fishery led to it becoming unsustainable. The causes of fishery collap se are both economic and
political in nature. Most fisheries are managed as a co mmon (shared) resource even when the fishing territo ry lies within a
country’s territorial waters. Common resources are subj ect to an economic pressure known as the tragedy of t he commons in which
essentially no fisher has a motivation to exercise restraint in harvesting a fishery when it is not owned by that fisher. The natural
outcome of harvests of resources held in common is th eir overexploitation. While large fisheries are regulated to attempt to avoid
this pressure, it still exists in the background. This ov erexploitation is exacerbated when access to the fish ery is open and
unregulated and when technology gives fishers the ab ility to overfish. In a few fisheries, the biological growth of the resource is
less than the potential growth of the profits made fro m fishing if that time and money were invested elsewhe re. In these cases—
whales are an example—economic forces will always drive toward fishing the population to extinction.
For the most part, fishery extinction is not equivale nt to biological extinction—the last fish of a specie s is rarely fished out of the
ocean. At the same time, fishery extinction is still h armful to fish species and their ecosystems. There a re some instances in which
true extinction is a possibility. Whales have slow-gro wing populations and are at risk of complete extinctio n through hunting. There
are some species of sharks with restricted distributi ons that are at risk of extinction. The groupers are another population of
generally slow-growing fishes that, in the Caribbean, in cludes a number of species that are at risk of extinction fro m overfishing.
Coral reefs are extremely diverse marine ecosystems t hat face peril from several processes. Reefs are hom e to 1/3 of the world’s
marine fish species—about 4,000 species—despite making up only 1 percent of marine habitat. Most home marine aquaria are
stocked with wild-caught organisms, not cultured organ isms. Although no species is known to have been driven e xtinct by the pet
trade in marine species, there are studies showing that popu lations of some species have declined in response to h arvesting,
indicating that the harvest is not sustainable at th ose levels. There are concerns about the effect of the pet trade on some terrestrial
species such as turtles, amphibians, birds, plants, and e ven the orangutan.
Bush meat is the generic term used for wild animals killed for food. Hunting is practiced throughout the world, but hunting
practices, particularly in equatorial Africa and par ts of Asia, are believed to threaten several species with extinction. Traditionally,
bush meat in Africa was hunted to feed families direc tly; however, recent commercialization of the practic e now has bush meat
available in grocery stores, which has increased harv est rates to the level of unsustainability. Additiona lly, human population
growth has increased the need for protein foods that are not being met from agriculture. Species threate ned by the bush meat trade
are mostly mammals including many primates living in the C ongo basin.
Exotic Species
Exotic species are species that have been intentionally or uninte ntionally introduced by humans into an ecosystem in which they
did not evolve. Such introductions likely occur frequ ently as natural phenomena. For example, Kudzu (Pueraria lobata), which is

27.3.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70927native to Japan, was introduced in the United States in 1876. It was later planted for soil conservation. Prob lematically, it grows too
well in the southeastern United States—up to a foot a da y. It is now a pest species and covers over 7 million acres in the
southeastern United States. If an introduced species is a ble to survive in its new habitat, that introduction is now reflected in the
observed range of the species. Human transportation of people and goods, including the intentional transpor t of organisms for
trade, has dramatically increased the introduction of species into new ecosystems, sometimes at distances t hat are well beyond the
capacity of the species to ever travel itself and outsid e the range of the species’ natural predators.
Most exotic species introductions probably fail becaus e of the low number of individuals introduced or poo r adaptation to the
ecosystem they enter. Some species, however, possess pre adaptations that can make them especially successful in a new ecosystem.
These exotic species often undergo dramatic population increases in their new habitat and reset the ecologic al conditions in the new
environment, threatening the species that exist there. For this reason, exotic species are also called inv asive species. Exotic species
can threaten other species through competition for resourc es, predation, or disease.
Lakes and islands are particularly vulnerable to ext inction threats from introduced species. In Lake Vi ctoria, the intentional
introduction of the Nile perch was largely responsible for the extinction of about 200 species of cichlids. T he accidental
introduction of the brown tree snake via aircraft (Fi gure) from the Solomon Islands to Guam in 1950 has le d to the extinction
of three species of birds and three to five species o f reptiles endemic to the island. Several other spec ies are still threatened. The
brown tree snake is adept at exploiting human transp ortation as a means to migrate; one was even found on an aircraft arriving in
Corpus Christi, Texas. Constant vigilance on the part of airport, military, and commercial aircraft personnel is required to prevent
the snake from moving from Guam to other islands in t he Pacific, especially Hawaii. Islands do not make up a l arge area of land on
the globe, but they do contain a disproportionate numbe r of endemic species because of their isolation from main land ancestors.
Figure: The brown tree snake, Boiga irregularis, is an exotic species that has caused numerous extinctio ns on the island of
Guam since its accidental introduction in 1950. (cred it: NPS. “Boiga irregularis” by OpenStax is licensed un der CC BY 4.0)
It now appears that the global decline in amphibian species recognized in the 1990s is, in some part, c aused by the fungus
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, which causes the disease chytridiomycosis (Figure). There is evidence that the fungus is
native to Africa and may have been spread throughout the world by transport of a commonly used laboratory and pet species: the
African clawed toad (Xenopus laevis). It may well be that biologists themselves are respo nsible for spreading this disease
worldwide. The North American bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana, which has also been widely introduced as a food anima l but which
easily escapes captivity, survives most infections of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis and can act as a reservoir for the disease.
Figure: This Limosa Harlequin Frog (Atelopus limosus), an endangered species from Panama, died from a fung al disease
called chytridiomycosis. The red lesions are symptomatic of the disease. (credit: Brian Gratwicke. “chytridio mycosis” by OpenStax
is licensed under CC BY 4.0)

27.3.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70927Early evidence suggests that another fungal pathogen, Geomyces destructans, introduced from Europe is responsible for whitenose syndrome, which infects cave-hibernating bats in eastern North America and has spread from a point of origin in wes tern
New York State (Figure). The disease has decimated bat populations and threatens the extinction of species already listed as
endangered: the Indiana bat, Myotis sodalis, and potentially the Virginia big-eared bat, Corynorhinus townsendii virginianus. How
the fungus was introduced is unclear, but one logical presumption would be that recreational cavers unint entionally brought the
fungus on clothes or equipment from Europe.
Figure: This little brown bat in Greeley Mine, Vermont, Mar ch 26, 2009, was found to have white-nose syndrome. (c redit:
Marvin Moriarty, USFWS. “white-nose syndrome” by OpenS tax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Climate Change
Climate change, and specifically the anthropogenic (meaning, caused by humans) warming trend presently u nderway, is
recognized as a major extinction threat, particularl y when combined with other threats such as habitat loss. Scientists disagree
about the likely magnitude of the effects, with extinc tion rate estimates ranging from 15 percent to 40 pe rcent of species committed
to extinction by 2050. Scientists do agree, however, th at climate change will alter regional climates, incl uding rainfall and snowfall
patterns, making habitats less hospitable to the speci es living in them. The warming trend will shift colde r climates toward the
north and south poles, forcing species to move with th eir adapted climate norms while facing habitat gaps a long the way. The
shifting ranges will impose new competitive regimes on species as they find themselves in contact with othe r species not present in
their historic range. One such unexpected species cont act is between polar bears and grizzly bears (Figure). Previously, these
two species had separate ranges. Now, their ranges are ove rlapping and there are documented cases of these two species mating and
producing viable offspring. Changing climates also thr ow off species’ delicate timing adaptations to season al food resources and
breeding times. Many contemporary mismatches to shifts in resource availability and timing have already been docum ented.

27.3.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70927
Figure: Since 2008, grizzly bears (Ursus arctos horribilis) have been spotted farther north than their historic range, a
possible consequence of climate change. As a result, gri zzly bear habitat now overlaps polar bear (Ursus maritimus) habitat. The
two kinds of bears, which are capable of mating and p roducing viable offspring, are considered separate spec ies as historically they
lived in different habitats and never met. However, in 2006 a hunter shot a wild grizzly-polar bear hybr id known as a grolar bear,
the first wild hybrid ever found. (credit: “bear hab itat” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Range shifts are already being observed: for example, some Euro pean bird species ranges have moved 91 km northward. T he same
study suggested that the optimal shift based on warm ing trends was double that distance, suggesting that the populations are not
moving quickly enough. Range shifts have also been o bserved in plants, butterflies, other insects, freshwat er fishes, reptiles, and
mammals.
Climate gradients will also move up mountains, eventually crowding speci es higher in altitude and eliminating the habitat fo r
those species adapted to the highest elevations. Some climates will completely disappear. The rate of warm ing appears to be
accelerated in the arctic, which is recognized as a s erious threat to polar bear populations that require sea ice to hunt seals during
the winter months: seals are the only source of protei n available to polar bears. A trend to decreasing se a ice coverage has occurred
since observations began in the mid-twentieth century. The rate of decline observed in recent years is far g reater than previously
predicted by climate models.
Finally, global warming will raise ocean levels due to melt water from glaciers and the greater vol ume of warmer water. Shorelines
will be inundated, reducing island size, which will ha ve an effect on some species, and a number of islan ds will disappear entirely.
Additionally, the gradual melting and subsequent refr eezing of the poles, glaciers, and higher elevation m ountains—a cycle that has
provided freshwater to environments for centuries—will also be jeopardized. This could result in an overabun dance of salt water
and a shortage of fresh water.
Summary
The core threats to biodiversity are human populati on growth and unsustainable resource use. To date, the most significant causes
of extinctions are habitat loss, introduction of exot ic species, and overharvesting. Climate change is pred icted to be a significant
cause of extinctions in the coming century. Habitat lo ss occurs through deforestation, damming of rivers, and other activities.
Overharvesting is a threat particularly to aquatic sp ecies, while the taking of bush meat in the humid tro pics threatens many species
in Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Exotic species have be en the cause of a number of extinctions and are espe cially damaging to
islands and lakes. Exotic species’ introductions are i ncreasing because of the increased mobility of huma n populations and growing
global trade and transportation. Climate change is f orcing range changes that may lead to extinction. I t is also affecting adaptations

27.3.7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70927to the timing of resource availability that negativ ely affects species in seasonal environments. The im pacts of climate change are
greatest in the arctic. Global warming will also raise sea le vels, eliminating some islands and reducing the area of all others.
References
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

27.4.1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/7092827.4: Preserving Biodiversity
Preserving biodiversity is an extraordinary challenge that must be met by greater understanding of biodi versity itself, changes in
human behavior and beliefs, and various preservation str ategies.
Measuring Biodiversity
The technology of molecular genetics and data proces sing and storage are maturing to the point where cata loguing the planet’s
species in an accessible way is close to feasible. DNA barcoding is one molecular genetic method, which takes advanta ge of rapid
evolution in a mitochondrial gene present in eukary otes, excepting the plants, to identify species using the sequence of portions of
the gene. Plants may be barcoded using a combination of chloroplast genes. Rapid mass sequencing machines make the molecular
genetics portion of the work relatively inexpensive a nd quick. Computer resources store and make available the large volumes of
data. Projects are currently underway to use DNA barcodin g to catalog museum specimens, which have already bee n named and
studied, as well as testing the method on less studied groups. As of mid 2012, close to 150,000 named specie s had been barcoded.
Early studies suggest there are significant numbers o f undescribed species that looked too much like sib ling species to previously
be recognized as different, which can now can be identifie d with DNA barcoding.
Numerous computer databases now provide information abo ut named species and a framework for adding new species. However,
as already noted, at the present rate of description of new species, it will take close to 500 years before t he complete catalog of life
is known. Many, perhaps most, species on the planet do not ha ve that much time.
There is also the problem of understanding which specie s known to science are threatened and to what degree t hey are threatened.
This task is carried out by the non-profit IUCN which, ma intains the Red List —an online listing of endangered species categorize d
by taxonomy, type of threat, and other criteria (Figu re). The Red List is supported by scientific research. In 2011, the list
contained 61,000 species, all with supporting documenta tion.

27.4.2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70928
Figure: The proportion of extant (i.e., excluding Extinct) species in The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Ver sion
2020-3 assessed in each category for the more comprehen sively assessed (i.e., at least 80% of the group has been assessed) groups
containing ≥150 species. Species are grouped into classe s (with the exception of reef-forming corals, which i ncludes species from
classes Hydrozoa and Anthozoa), and are ordered accord ing to the vertical red lines, which indicate the be st estimate for proportion
of extant species considered threatened (CR, EN, or VU). Best estimates of percentage threatened species (with lower and upper
estimates) for each group are: cycads 63% (63-64%); am phibians 40% (34-50%); selected dicots (birches; cacti; magnolias;
maples; oaks; protea family; southern beeches; teas) 38% (34-45%); selected reptiles (marine turtles; seasnakes; chameleons;
crocodiles & alligators) 34% (29-44%); conifers 34% (3 4-35%); sharks, rays & chimeras 33% (27-47%); reef-form ing corals 33%
(27-44%); selected crustaceans (lobsters; freshwater crab s; freshwater crayfishes; freshwater shrimps) 27.5% (17-56 %); mammals
26% (23-37%); birds 14% (13.5-14%); selected bony fish es (anchovies; angelfishes; billfishes; blennies; bonefishe s;
butterflyfishes; cornetfishes; croakers and drums; dentic le herring; dragonfishes, lightfishes and relatives; fil efishes; ghost
pipefishes; groupers; gulpers, snipe eels and relatives; j acks, pompanos and relatives; ladyfishes; lanternfishes; l izardfishes and
allies; pristigasterids; pufferfishes; round herrings; sard ines and relatives; seabreams, porgies and picarels; seaho rses, pipefishes
and relatives; shrimpfishes; sturgeons; Sundaland noodlefi shes; surgeonfishes, tangs and unicornfishes; swordfish; tarp ons;
trumpetfishes; tunas; wolf herrings; wrasses) 6% (5-22%); selected gastropods (cone snails) 7.5% (6-20%); cephalop ods
(nautiluses; octopuses; squids) 1.5% (1-57%). The numbers to the right of each bar represent the total number of extant species
assessed for each group. EW – Extinct in the Wild, CR – Critically Endangered, EN – Endangered, VU – Vulne rable, NT – Near
Threatened, DD – Data Deficient, LC – Least Concern. Available from: https://www.iucnredlist.org/resource...mmary%20Tables
Changing Human Behavior
Legislation throughout the world has been enacted to protect spe cies. The legislation includes international treaties as well as
national and state laws. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)
treaty came into force in 1975. The treaty, and the national legislation that supports it, provides a le gal framework for preventing
approximately 33,000 listed species from being trans ported across nations’ borders, thus protecting the m from being caught or
killed when international trade is involved. The treat y is limited in its reach because it only deals with international movement of
organisms or their parts. It is also limited by various c ountries’ ability or willingness to enforce the treat y and supporting
legislation. The illegal trade in organisms and thei r parts is probably a market in the hundreds of milli ons of dollars. Illegal wildlife
trade is monitored by another non-profit: Trade Records Analysis of Flora and Fauna in Commerce (TRAFFIC).
Within many countries, there are laws that protect end angered species and regulate hunting and fishing. I n the United States, the
Endangered Species Act (ESA) was enacted in 1973. Species at risk are listed by the Endangered Species Act; the U.S. Fish &
Wildlife Service is required by law to develop managem ent plans that protect the listed species and bring them back to sustainable
numbers. The Endangered Species Act, and others like it in other countries, is a useful tool, but it suffers b ecause it is often difficult
to get a species listed, or to get an effective manage ment plan in place once it is listed. Additionally, species may be controversially
taken off the list without necessarily having had a c hange in their situation. More fundamentally, the appro ach to protecting
individual species rather than entire ecosystems is b oth inefficient and focuses efforts on a few highly v isible and often charismatic

27.4.3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70928species, perhaps at the expense of other species tha t go unprotected. At the same time, the Endangered Spec ies Act has a critical
habitat provision outlined in the recovery mechanism th at may benefit species other than the one targeted for man agement.
The Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA) is an agreement between the United States and Ca nada that was signed into law in 1918
in response to declines in North American bird species caused by hunting. The Migratory Bird Treaty Act now lists over 800
protected species. It makes it illegal to disturb or kill the protected species or distribute their parts (much of the hunting of birds in
the past was for their feathers).
The international response to global warming has been mixed. The Kyoto Protocol, an international agreement that came out of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change t hat committed countries to reducing greenhouse gas e missions by
2012, was ratified by some countries, but spurned by o thers. Two important countries in terms of their poten tial impact that did not
ratify the Kyoto Protocol were the United States and Chi na. The United States rejected it as a result of a po werful fossil fuel
industry and China because of a concern it would sti fle the nation’s growth. Some goals for reduction in gr eenhouse gasses were
met and exceeded by individual countries, but worldwi de, the effort to limit greenhouse gas production is not succeeding. The
intended replacement for the Kyoto Protocol has not m aterialized because governments cannot agree on tim elines and benchmarks.
Meanwhile, climate scientists predict the resulting costs to human societies and biodiversity will be high.
The private non-profit sector plays a large role in the conservation effort both in North America and aro und the world. The
approaches range from species-specific organizations to the broadly focused IUCN and TRAFFIC. The Nature Conservancy takes
a novel approach. It purchases land and protects it in an attempt to set up preserves for ecosystems. Ultima tely, human behavior
will change when human values change. At present, the gr owing urbanization of the human population is a forc e that poses
challenges to the valuing of biodiversity.
Conservation in Preserves
The establishment of wildlife and ecosystem preserves is one of the key tools in conservation efforts. A preserve is an area of
land set aside with varying degrees of protection for the organisms that exist within the boundaries of the preserve. Preserves can
be effective in the short term for protecting both species and ecosystems, but they face challenges that scientists are still exploring
to strengthen their viability as long-term solutions.
How Much Area to Preserve?
Due to the way protected lands are allocated (they te nd to contain less economically valuable resources rather than being set aside
specifically for the species or ecosystems at risk) and the way biodiversity is distributed, determining a target percentage of land or
marine habitat that should be protected to maintain biodiversity levels is challenging. The IUCN World Pa rks Congress estimated
that 11.5 percent of Earth’s land surface was covered by preserves of various kinds in 2003. This area is grea ter than previous
goals; however, it only represents 9 out of 14 recogn ized major biomes. Research has shown that 12 percent of all species live only
outside preserves; these percentages are much highe r when only threatened species and high quality pres erves are considered. For
example, high quality preserves include only about 50 percent of threatened amphibian species. The con clusion must be that either
the percentage of area protected must increase, or t he percentage of high quality preserves must increas e, or preserves must be
targeted with greater attention to biodiversity protec tion. Researchers argue that more attention to the latter solution is required.
Preserve Design
There has been extensive research into optimal preser ve designs for maintaining biodiversity. The fundamen tal principle behind
much of the research has been the seminal theoretical work of Robert H. MacArthur and Edward O. Wilson published in 1967 on
island biogeography (MacArthur & Wilson, 1967). This wor k sought to understand the factors affecting biodiv ersity on islands.
The fundamental conclusion was that biodiversity on an island was a function of the origin of species throug h migration,
speciation, and extinction on that island. Islands fa rther from a mainland are harder to get to, so migr ation is lower and the
equilibrium number of species is lower. Within island populations, evidence suggests that the number of spe cies gradually increases
to a level similar to the numbers on the mainland fr om which the species is suspected to have migrated. In addition, smaller islands
are harder to find, so their immigration rates for new species are lower. Smaller islands are also less ge ographically diverse so there
are fewer niches to promote speciation. And finally, smaller islands support smaller populations, so the pro bability of extinction is
higher.

27.4.4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70928As islands get larger, the number of species accelerate s, although the effect of island area on species nu mbers is not a direct
correlation. Conservation preserves can be seen as “i slands” of habitat within “an ocean” of non-habitat. For a species to persist in
a preserve, the preserve must be large enough. The cr itical size depends, in part, on the home range that is characteristic of the
species. A preserve for wolves, which range hundreds o f kilometers, must be much larger than a preserve for butterflies, which
might range within ten kilometers during its lifetime. But larger preserves have more core area of optimal habitat for individual
species, they have more niches to support more specie s, and they attract more species because they can b e found and reached more
easily.
Preserves perform better when there are buffer zones around them of suboptimal habitat. The buffer allows organisms to exit the
boundaries of the preserve without immediate negativ e consequences from predation or lack of resources. On e large preserve is
better than the same area of several smaller preserv es because there is more core habitat unaffected by e dges. For this same reason,
preserves in the shape of a square or circle will be better than a preserve with many thin “arms.” If prese rves must be smaller, then
providing wildlife corridors between them so that ind ividuals and their genes can move between the preserve s, for example along
rivers and streams, will make the smaller preserves behav e more like a large one. All of these factors are tak en into consideration
when planning the nature of a preserve before the land is set aside.
In addition to the physical, biological, and ecologic al specifications of a preserve, there are a variety of policy, legislative, and
enforcement specifications related to uses of the pr eserve for functions other than the protection of s pecies. These can include
anything from timber extraction, mineral extraction, regulated hunting, human habitation, and nondestruct ive human recreation.
Many of these policy decisions are made based on poli tical pressures rather than conservation consideration s. In some cases,
wildlife protection policies have been so strict that subsistence-living indigenous populations have been fo rced from ancestral lands
that fell within a preserve. In other cases, even if a p reserve is designed to protect wildlife, if the protect ions are not or cannot be
enforced, the preserve status will have little meaning in the face of illegal poaching and timber extract ion. This is a widespread
problem with preserves in areas of the tropics.
Limitations on Preserves
Some of the limitations on preserves as conservation tools are evident from the discussion of preserve d esign. Political and
economic pressures typically make preserves smaller, n ever larger, so setting aside areas that are large en ough is difficult. If the
area set aside is sufficiently large, there may not be sufficient area to create a buffer around the p reserve. In this case, an area on the
outer edges of the preserve inevitably becomes a riski er suboptimal habitat for the species in the preserv e. Enforcement of
protections is also a significant issue in countries without the resources or political will to prevent poa ching and illegal resource
extraction.
Climate change will create inevitable problems with t he location of preserves. The species within them will migrate to higher
latitudes as the habitat of the preserve becomes le ss favorable. Scientists are planning for the effects of global warming on future
preserves and striving to predict the need for new pr eserves to accommodate anticipated changes to habita ts; however, the end
effectiveness is tenuous since these efforts are predictio n based.
Finally, an argument can be made that conservation pr eserves reinforce the cultural perception that huma ns are separate from
nature, that humans can exist outside of nature, and that humans can only operate in ways that damage bio diversity. There is
concern that creating wildlife preserves reduces the pressure on human activities outside the preserves to be sustainable and nondamaging to biodiversity. Ultimately, the political, ec onomic, and human demographic pressures will degrade a nd reduce the size
of conservation preserves if the activities outside th em are not altered to be less damaging to biodiversity.
Habitat Restoration
Habitat restoration holds considerable promise as a mechanism for rest oring and maintaining biodiversity. Of course, once a
species has become extinct, its restoration is impossib le. However, restoration can improve the biodiversity of degraded
ecosystems. Reintroducing wolves, a top predator, to Yellowstone Na tional Park in 1995 led to dramatic changes in the ec osystem
that increased biodiversity. The wolves (Figure) func tion to suppress elk and coyote populations and prov ide more abundant
resources to the guild of carrion eaters. Reducing elk populations has allowed revegetation of riparian ar eas, which has increased
the diversity of species in that habitat. Decreasing the coyote population has increased the populations of species that were
previously suppressed by this predator. The number of species of carrion eaters has increased because of t he predatory activities of
the wolves. In this habitat, the wolf is a keystone spec ies, meaning a species that is instrumental in maintai ning diversity in an

27.4.5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70928ecosystem. Removing a keystone species from an ecological community may cause a collapse in diversity. The results from the
Yellowstone experiment suggest that restoring a keystone species can have the effect of restoring biodiversity in the community.
Ecologists have argued for the identification of ke ystone species where possible and for focusing protec tion efforts on those
species; likewise, it also makes sense to attempt to return them to their ecosystem if they have been removed.
Figure: (a) The Gibbon wolf pack in Yellowstone National Pa rk, March 1, 2007, represents a keystone species. The
reintroduction of wolves into Yellowstone National Par k in 1995 led to a change in the grazing behavior o f (b) elk. To avoid
predation, the elk no longer grazed exposed stream an d riverbeds, such as (c) the Lamar Riverbed in Yellowst one. This allowed
willow and cottonwood seedlings to grow. The seedlings decreased erosion and provided shading to the creek, w hich improved fish
habitat. A new colony of (d) beaver may also have be nefited from the habitat change. (credit a: modific ation of work by Doug
Smith, NPS; credit c: modification of work by Jim Peaco, NPS; credit d: modification of work by “Shiny Thing s”/Flickr. “keystone
species” by OpenStax is licensed under CC BY 4.0)
Other large-scale restoration experiments underway inv olve dam removal. In the United States, since the mid-1980s, many aging
dams are being considered for removal rather than rep lacement because of shifting beliefs about the ecol ogical value of freeflowing rivers and because many dams no longer provide the benefit and functions that they did when they we re first built. The
measured benefits of dam removal include restoratio n of naturally fluctuating water levels (the purpose of dams is frequently to
reduce variation in river flows), which leads to incre ased fish diversity and improved water quality. In th e Pacific Northwest, dam
removal projects are expected to increase populatio ns of salmon, which is considered a keystone species b ecause it transports key
nutrients to inland ecosystems during its annual spawni ng migrations. In other regions such as the Atlantic c oast, dam removal has
allowed the return of spawning anadromous fish species (species that are born in fresh water, live most of t heir lives in salt water,
and return to fresh water to spawn). Some of the largest dam removal projects have yet to occur or have hap pened too recently for
the consequences to be measured. The large-scale ecolog ical experiments that these removal projects constit ute will provide
valuable data for other dam projects slated either for removal or construction.
The Role of Captive Breeding
Zoos have sought to play a role in conservation efforts b oth through captive breeding programs and education. The transformation
of the missions of zoos from collection and exhibitio n facilities to organizations that are dedicated to c onservation is ongoing. In
general, it has been recognized that, except in some specific targeted cases, captive breeding programs for endangered species are
inefficient and often prone to failure when the spec ies are reintroduced to the wild. Zoo facilities are far too limited to contemplate
captive breeding programs for the numbers of species that are now at risk. Education is another potential p ositive impact of zoos on
conservation efforts, particularly given the global trend to urbanization and the consequent reduction in contacts between people
and wildlife. A number of studies have been performed to look at the effectiveness of zoos on people’s atti tudes and actions
regarding conservation; at present, the results tend to be mixed.
Summary
New technological methods such as DNA barcoding and inf ormation processing and accessibility are facilitatin g the cataloging of
the planet’s biodiversity. There is also a legislativ e framework for biodiversity protection. Internationa l treaties such as CITES

27.4.6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/70928regulate the transportation of endangered species acros s international borders. Legislation within individua l countries protecting
species and agreements on global warming have had li mited success; there is at present no international a greement on targets for
greenhouse gas emissions. In the United States, the En dangered Species Act protects listed species but is ham pered by procedural
difficulties and a focus on individual species. The Mi gratory Bird Act is an agreement between Canada and t he United States to
protect migratory birds. The non-profit sector is also ve ry active in conservation efforts in a variety of ways.
Conservation preserves are a major tool in biodivers ity protection. Presently, 11 percent of Earth’s land su rface is protected in some
way. The science of island biogeography has informed t he optimal design of preserves; however, preserves hav e limitations
imposed by political and economic forces. In addition, climate change will limit the effectiveness of prese rves in the future. A
downside of preserves is that they may lessen the pressure on human societies to function more sustainably outside the preserves.
Habitat restoration has the potential to restore ecos ystems to previous biodiversity levels before specie s become extinct. Examples
of restoration include reintroduction of keystone spe cies and removal of dams on rivers. Zoos have attempt ed to take a more active
role in conservation and can have a limited role in capt ive breeding programs. Zoos also may have a useful role in edu cation.
References
MacArthur, R. and Wilson, E. O. 1967. The Theory of Island Biogeography (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press)
OpenStax, Biology. OpenStax CNX. June 26, 2020. https://cnx.org/contents/GFy_h8cu@10.137:noBcfThl@7/Unde rstandingEvolution.
IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Version 2020-3. [C ited Feb 22, 2021]. Available from
https://www.iucnredlist.org/resources/summary-statistics #Summary%20Tables
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531Index
A
A site
15.5: Translation
abiotic
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
ABO blood group
18.7: Multiple Alleles
19.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend
19.8: White spotting - when there's more than two
alleles
aboveground biomass
24.2: Biogeography
absorption spectrum
10.3: Light and Pigments
abyssal zone
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
acetyl CoA
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of
Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
acid
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
acid rain
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
acquired characteristics
21: Introduction to Evolution
acquired mutations
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
activation energy
8.5: Free and Activation Energy
active site
8.6: Enzymes
active transport
6.6: Active Transport
adaptation
21: Introduction to Evolution
adaptive evolution
21: Introduction to Evolution
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
adaptive radiation
21.2: Formation of New Species
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
adenosine triphosphate
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
8.3: Thermodynamics
adhesion
2.3: Water
adrenaline
7.5: Response to the signal
aerobic respiration
9.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of
Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
age structure
25.5: Human Population Growth
aggressive display
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
Alfred Russel Wallace
21: Introduction to Evolutionalgal bloom
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
allele
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
18.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the
Basics of Heredity
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
19.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait
allele frequency
22.1: Population Evolution
allopatric speciation
21.2: Formation of New Species
allopolyploid
21.2: Formation of New Species
allosteric inhibition
8.6: Enzymes
alternative RNA splicing
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
amino acid
3.3: Proteins
aminoacyl tRNA synthetase
15.5: Translation
amphipathic
3.2: Lipids
anabolic
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
9.3: Metabolism
anaerobic cellular respiration
9.8: Metabolism without Oxygen - Fermentation
9.10: Anaerobic Cellular Respiration in Prokaryotes
anaerobic respiration
9.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration
analogous structures
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
analogy
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
analytical model
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
anaphase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
aneuploid
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
aneuploidy
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or
Chromosomes
21.2: Formation of New Species
anion
2.2: Chemical Bonds
anneal
20.2: Cloning
antiparallel
12.1: DNA Structure
apex consumer
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
aphotic zone
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
apoptosis
7.5: Response to the signalAposematic Coloration
25.6: Community Ecology
applied science
1.1: The Nature of Science
arctic tundra
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
asexual reproduction
21.2: Formation of New Species
Asian carp
25.6: Community Ecology
assimilation
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
assortative mating
22.2: Population Genetics
atom
2: Chemistry for Biology
2.1: Atoms
4.2: Levels of Organization
atomic number
2.1: Atoms
ATP
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
8.3: Thermodynamics
9.1: Energy in Living Systems
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
ATP synthase
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative
Phosphorylation
autopolyploid
21.2: Formation of New Species
autosome
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder
autotroph
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
B
bar graph
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
basal taxon
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
base
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
base pair
3.4: Nucleic Acids
basic science
1.1: The Nature of Science
Batesian mimicry
25.6: Community Ecology
behavior
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
behavioral biology
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
behavioral isolation
21.2: Formation of New Species
benthic realm
24.4: Aquatic Biomes

2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531binary fission
11.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division
binomial nomenclature
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
biodiversity
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
biodiversity hotspot
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
bioenergetics
8.1: Energy
Biogeochemical cycle
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
biogeography
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
24.2: Biogeography
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
biological macromolecule
3: Biological Molecules
biological species concept
21.2: Formation of New Species
Biomagnification
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
biomarker
20.6: Proteomics
biomass
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
biome
24.2: Biogeography
biomes
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
biosphere
2: Chemistry for Biology
biotechnology
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR
biotic
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
biotic potential
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
birth rate
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
boreal forest
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
bottleneck effect
22.2: Population Genetics
branch point
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
brindle
19.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and epistasi s
19.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together
buffer
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
bush meat
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
C
Calvin cycle
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the
Calvin Cycle)
camouflage
25.6: Community Ecologycancer
11.6: Cancer and the cell cycle
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
canopy
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
caption
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
carbohydrate
3.1: Carbohydrates
carbon cycle
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
carbon dating
2.1: Atoms
carbon fixation
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the
Calvin Cycle)
carrier
18.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance
carrier protein
6.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport
carrying capacity
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
catabolic
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
9.3: Metabolism
catalysts
8.6: Enzymes
cation
2.2: Chemical Bonds
cDNA library
20.4: Mapping Genomes
cell
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
cell communication
7.1: A Summary of Cell Communication
cell cycle
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
cell cycle checkpoint
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
cell plate
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
cell theory
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
cell wall
5.13: The Cell Wall
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
cellular respiration
9.2: From Mouth to Molecule - Digestion
9.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration
cellulose
3.1: Carbohydrates
central dogma
15.1: The Genetic Code
central vacuole
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and
Peroxisomes
centriole
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
centromere
12.2: DNA organization inside a cellcentrosome
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
chain termination method
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
channel
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
channel protein
6.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport
chaparral
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
Charles Darwin
21: Introduction to Evolution
chemical bond
2.2: Chemical Bonds
chemical diversity
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
chemical energy
8.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy
chemiosmosis
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative
Phosphorylation
chemoautotroph
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
chlorophyll
5.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
chlorophyll a
10.3: Light and Pigments
chlorophyll b
10.3: Light and Pigments
chloroplast
5.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
cholesterol
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
chromatin
5.8: The Nucleus
chromosomal mosaicism
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or
Chromosomes
chromosome
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
chromosome inversion
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
chytridiomycosis
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
cilium
5.6: Flagella and Cilia
citations
1.5: Using Credible Sources
citric acid cycle
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of
Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
cladistics
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
class
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
classical conditioning
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior

3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531clathrates
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
climate
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
climate change
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
climax community
25.6: Community Ecology
cline
22.2: Population Genetics
cloning
20.2: Cloning
closed system
8.1: Energy
codominance
18.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance
19.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend
codon
14.1: How do genes direct the production of
proteins?
15.1: The Genetic Code
cognitive learning
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
cohesin
17.2: Meiosis I
cohesion
2.3: Water
color blindness
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder
commensalism
25.6: Community Ecology
community
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
competitive exclusion principle
25.6: Community Ecology
competitive inhibition
8.6: Enzymes
complementary
11.2: An Overview of DNA Replication
13: DNA Replication
complementary base pairs
12.1: DNA Structure
concentration gradient
6.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion
conceptual model
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
conditioned behavior
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
conspecifics
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
contig
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
continuous variation
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
control
1.2: The Scientific Processconvergence of form
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
convergent evolution
21: Introduction to Evolution
copy number variation
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or
Chromosomes
coral reef
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
courtship display
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
covalent bond
2.2: Chemical Bonds
3: Biological Molecules
3.4: Nucleic Acids
crossing over
17.2: Meiosis I
cryptofauna
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
cyclin
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
cytogenetic mapping
20.4: Mapping Genomes
cytokinesis
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
cytoplasm
5.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm
cytoskeleton
5.5: The Cytoskeleton
cytosol
5.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm
D
Darwinian fitness
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
daughter cells
11.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division
de novo mutations
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
dead zone
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
death rate
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
degeneracy
15.1: The Genetic Code
deletion mutation
14.5: Types of Mutations
demography
25.1: Population Demography
denaturation
3.3: Proteins
denature
8.6: Enzymes
deoxynucleotide
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
3.4: Nucleic Acids
12.1: DNA Structure
deoxyribose
12.1: DNA Structuredependent variable
1.2: The Scientific Process
desmosome
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular juncti ons
detrital food web
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
Dicer
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
dideoxynucleotide
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
diffusion
6.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion
dihybrid
18.5: Laws of Inheritance
diploid
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
directional selection
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
disaccharide
3.1: Carbohydrates
discontinuous variation
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
dispersal
21.2: Formation of New Species
distraction display
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
divergent evolution
21: Introduction to Evolution
diversification
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
diversifying selection
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
DNA
12.1: DNA Structure
DNA barcoding
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity
DNA ligase
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
DNA methylation
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
DNA microarray
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
DNA polymerase III
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
DNA replication
11.2: An Overview of DNA Replication
13: DNA Replication
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
DNA structure
12.1: DNA Structure
domain
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
dominant
18.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the
Basics of Heredity
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
19.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait
double helix
3.4: Nucleic Acids

4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531E
E site
15.5: Translation
ecological pyramid
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
ecology
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
ecosystem
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
ecosystem diversity
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
ecosystem dynamics
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
ecosystem services
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
27.2: The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
electrochemical gradient
6.6: Active Transport
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative
Phosphorylation
electromagnetic spectrum
10.3: Light and Pigments
electron
2.1: Atoms
electron microscope
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
electron transport chain
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative
Phosphorylation
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
element
2.1: Atoms
elongation
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
embryology
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
embryonic lethality
19.11: KIT - embryonic lethality
emergent vegetation
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
Emsleyan/Mertensian mimicry
25.6: Community Ecology
endemic
24.2: Biogeography
Endemic species
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
endergonic
8.5: Free and Activation Energy
endocytosis
6.6: Active Transport
endomembrane system
5.7: The Endomembrane System
endoplasmic reticulum
5.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum
endosymbiont theory
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
endosymbiosis
5.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplastsenergy
8.1: Energy
energy budget
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection
enhancer
16.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
environmental disturbance
25.6: Community Ecology
environmental factor
19.12: It's not all in the genes - the effect of
environment
enzyme
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
8.6: Enzymes
9.3: Metabolism
epidermal growth factor receptor
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
epigenetic
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
Epigenetic mechanisms
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
epigenetic regulation
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
Epigenome
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
epistasis
18.10: Epistasis
19.5: Epistasis - the relationship between black,
brown, and yellow fur
19.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and epistasi s
equilibrium
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
EST
20.4: Mapping Genomes
estuary
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
ethology
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
euchromatin
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
eukaryotes
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
eukaryotic cell
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
5.16: Summary Table of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic
Cells and Functions
euploid
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
eutrophication
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
evaporation
2.3: Water
evolution
4.3: The Diversity of Life
21: Introduction to Evolution
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
evolutionary fitness
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
evolutionary species concept
21.2: Formation of New Species
exergonic
8.5: Free and Activation Energyexocytosis
6.6: Active Transport
exon
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing
exotic species
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
exponential growth
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
expressed sequence tag
20.4: Mapping Genomes
extinction
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
extinction rate
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
extracellular matrix
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular juncti ons
F
F1
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
F2
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
facilitated transport
6.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport
facilitates chromatin transcription
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
FACT
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
fall and spring turnover
24.2: Biogeography
fallout
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
falsifiable
1.2: The Scientific Process
family
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
fat
3.2: Lipids
fecundity
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection
feedback inhibition
8.7: Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways
fermentation
9.8: Metabolism without Oxygen - Fermentation
fertilization
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
Fisherian runaway
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
fixed action pattern
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
flagellum
5.6: Flagella and Cilia
Fluid Mosaic Model
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
food chain
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
food energy
9.2: From Mouth to Molecule - Digestion
food web
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems

5 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531foraging
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
fossil
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
foundation species
25.6: Community Ecology
founder effect
22.1: Population Evolution
22.2: Population Genetics
frameshift mutation
14.5: Types of Mutations
free energy
8.5: Free and Activation Energy
furnishings
19.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together
G
G0 phase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
G1 phase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
G2 Phase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
G3P
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the
Calvin Cycle)
gamete
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
gametic barrier
21.2: Formation of New Species
gap junction
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular juncti ons
gel electrophoresis
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR
gene
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
14: Mutations
15: Protein Synthesis
gene duplication
14.5: Types of Mutations
gene expression
14.1: How do genes direct the production of
proteins?
16: Gene Regulation
16.1: Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene
Expression
gene flow
21.2: Formation of New Species
22.2: Population Genetics
gene pool
21.2: Formation of New Species
22.1: Population Evolution
gene regulation
16: Gene Regulation
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
gene therapy
20.3: Genetic Engineering
gene transfer agent
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
generalist
24.2: Biogeographygenetic code
15.1: The Genetic Code
genetic disorder
14.3: Introduction to Genetic Disorders
genetic diversity
21: Introduction to Evolution
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
genetic drift
22.1: Population Evolution
22.2: Population Genetics
genetic map
20.4: Mapping Genomes
genetic marker
20.4: Mapping Genomes
genetic predisposition
14.6: Multifactorial Disorders and Genetic
Predispositions
genetic recombination
20.4: Mapping Genomes
genetic species concept
21.2: Formation of New Species
genetic structure
22.1: Population Evolution
genetic testing
20.3: Genetic Engineering
genetic variance
22.2: Population Genetics
genetically modified organism (GMO)
20.3: Genetic Engineering
genome
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
15: Protein Synthesis
genome annotation
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
genome fusion
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
genome mapping
20.4: Mapping Genomes
genomic DNA
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR
genomic library
20.4: Mapping Genomes
genomics
20.4: Mapping Genomes
20.5: Applying Genomics
genotype
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
genus
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
geographic distribution
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
geographical variation
22.2: Population Genetics
germline mutations
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
global climate change
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
glucose
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysisglycogen
3.1: Carbohydrates
9.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose
glycolipid
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
glycolysis
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
glycoprotein
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
Golgi apparatus
5.10: The Golgi Apparatus
Gondwana
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
good genes hypothesis
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
gradual speciation model
21.3: Speciation
granum
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
grazing food web
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
greenhouse effect
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
greenhouse gases
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
gross primary productivity
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
growth factor
7.5: Response to the signal
growth hormone
15.6: Optional Section - Micropigs
GTA
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
H
habitat isolation
21.2: Formation of New Species
habitat loss
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
habituation
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
halophyte
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
handicap principle
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
haploid
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
heat energy
8.3: Thermodynamics
helicase
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
hemizygous
18.8: Sex-Linked Traits
hemophilia
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder
Herbivory
25.6: Community Ecology

6 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531hereditary mutations
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
heritability
22.2: Population Genetics
heritable trait
21.2: Formation of New Species
heterochromatin
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
heterogeneity
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
heterospecifics
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
heterozygous
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
hexokinase
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
HGT
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
hibernation
24.2: Biogeography
histone
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
histone acetylation
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
histone code hypothesis
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
histone methylation
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
holistic ecosystem model
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
holoenzyme
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
homeostasis
4.1: What makes something living?
homologous chromosomes
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
homologous structures
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
homoplasy
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
homozygous
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
honest signal
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
horizontal gene transfer
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
host
25.6: Community Ecology
hybrid
21.2: Formation of New Species
hybrid inviability
21.2: Formation of New Species
hybrid sterility
21.2: Formation of New Specieshybrid zone
21.3: Speciation
hybridization
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
hydrogen bond
2.2: Chemical Bonds
3.4: Nucleic Acids
12.1: DNA Structure
hydrophilic
2.3: Water
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
hydrophobic
2.3: Water
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
Hydrosphere
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
hypertonic
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
hypothesis
1.1: The Nature of Science
1.2: The Scientific Process
hypotonic
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
I
imprinting
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
inbreeding
22.2: Population Genetics
inbreeding depression
22.2: Population Genetics
incomplete dominance
18.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance
19.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend
independent assortment
17.2: Meiosis I
independent variable
1.2: The Scientific Process
induced fit
8.6: Enzymes
induced mutation
13.3: DNA Repair
infertile
21.2: Formation of New Species
initiation
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
initiation complex
16.5: Eukaryotic Translational and PostTranslational Regulation
innate behavior
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
inner mitochondrial membrane
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative
Phosphorylation
insertion mutation
14.5: Types of Mutations
insulin
5.15: The Production of a Protein
integral protein
6.1: The Plasma Membraneintermediate filament
5.5: The Cytoskeleton
intermembrane space
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative
Phosphorylation
internal receptor
7.2: Types of Receptors
interphase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
intersexual selection
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
interspecific competition
25.2: Population Dynamics and Regulation
intertidal zone
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
intracellular signaling
7.4: Propagation of the signal
intrasexual selection
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
intraspecific competition
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
intron
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing
invasive species
25.6: Community Ecology
ion
2.2: Chemical Bonds
ionic bond
2.2: Chemical Bonds
island biogeography
25.6: Community Ecology
isotonic
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
isotope
2.1: Atoms
iteroparity
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection
K
karyogram
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
karyotype
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
keystone species
25.6: Community Ecology
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity
kin selection
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
kinase
7.4: Propagation of the signal
kinesis
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
kinetic energy
8.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy
kingdom
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth

7 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531Krebs cycle
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of
Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
L
lactose
9.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose
lagging strand
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
law of dominance
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
Law of Independent Assortment
18.5: Laws of Inheritance
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares
law of segregation
18.5: Laws of Inheritance
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares
leading strand
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
learned behavior
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
life
4.1: What makes something living?
life history
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection
life table
25.1: Population Demography
ligand
7.2: Types of Receptors
7.3: Types of signaling molecules
light microscope
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
line graph
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
linkage
18.9: Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent
Assortment
linkage analysis
20.4: Mapping Genomes
linkage disequilibrium
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
lipids
3.2: Lipids
litmus paper
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
locus
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
logistic growth
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
lysosome
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and
Peroxisomes
M
Müllerian Mimicry
25.6: Community Ecology
macroevolution
22.1: Population Evolutionmacromolecule
2: Chemistry for Biology
3: Biological Molecules
4.2: Levels of Organization
magnification
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
mark and recapture
25.1: Population Demography
mass extinction
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
mass number
2.1: Atoms
maximum parsimony
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
MC1R
19.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one
trait
megafauna
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis
meiosis
17: Meiosis - Sexual Reproduction
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
meiosis I
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
17.2: Meiosis I
meiosis II
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
17.3: Meiosis II
Mendel
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
Mertensian mimicry
25.6: Community Ecology
mesocosm
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
metabolic pathways
8.2: Metabolic Pathways
9.3: Metabolism
metabolism
8.1: Energy
9.1: Energy in Living Systems
9.3: Metabolism
metagenomics
20.5: Applying Genomics
metaphase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
metaphase plate
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
methylation
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
microcosm
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
microevolution
22.1: Population Evolution
microfilament
5.5: The Cytoskeleton
microRNA
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
microsatellite polymorphism
20.4: Mapping Genomes
microscope
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
microtubule
5.5: The Cytoskeletonmicrovilli
5.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm
migration
24.2: Biogeography
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
Milankovitch cycles
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
miRNA
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
mismatch repair
13.3: DNA Repair
missense mutation
14.5: Types of Mutations
mitochondria
5.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts
mitochondrial matrix
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of
Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
mitosis
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
mitotic phase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
model organism
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
model system
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
modern synthesis
22.1: Population Evolution
molecular systematics
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
molecule
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
monogamy
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
monohybrid
18.4: Monohybrid Cross and the Punnett Square
monomer
3: Biological Molecules
monophyletic group
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
Monosaccharide
3.1: Carbohydrates
monosomy
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or
Chromosomes
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
morphological species concept
21.2: Formation of New Species
mortality rate
25.1: Population Demography
mosaicism
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
mRNA
14.1: How do genes direct the production of
proteins?
multifactorial disorders
14.6: Multifactorial Disorders and Genetic
Predispositions

8 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531multiple allele traits
19.8: White spotting - when there's more than two
alleles
mutagen
13.3: DNA Repair
mutation
14: Mutations
21: Introduction to Evolution
22.2: Population Genetics
mutualism
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
25.6: Community Ecology
N
NAD+
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
NADH
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
NADP+
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
NADPH
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
natural selection
21: Introduction to Evolution
neritic zone
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
net consumer productivity
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
net primary productivity
24.2: Biogeography
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
net production efficiency
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
neutral mutations
21: Introduction to Evolution
neutron
2.1: Atoms
nitric oxide
7.3: Types of signaling molecules
nitrogen cycle
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
nitrogenous base
12.1: DNA Structure
noncompetitive inhibition
8.6: Enzymes
nondisjunction
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
nonpolar covalent bond
2.2: Chemical Bonds
nonrandom mating
22.2: Population Genetics
nonsense mutation
14.5: Types of Mutations
nontemplate strand
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
nuclear envelope
5.8: The Nucleus
nucleic acid
3.4: Nucleic Acidsnucleoid
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
nucleolus
5.8: The Nucleus
nucleosome
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
nucleotide
3.4: Nucleic Acids
12.1: DNA Structure
nucleotide excision repair
13.3: DNA Repair
nucleus
2.1: Atoms
5.8: The Nucleus
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
O
objective data
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
ocean upwelling
24.2: Biogeography
oceanic zone
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
octet rule
2.2: Chemical Bonds
oil
3.2: Lipids
Okazaki fragment
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
oncogene
11.6: Cancer and the cell cycle
open system
8.1: Energy
operant conditioning
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
order
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
organ
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
organ system
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
organelle
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
organism
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
origin of life
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
origin of replication
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
osmolarity
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
osmosis
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosisoverharvesting
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity
oxidative phosphorylation
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative
Phosphorylation
P
P
18.1: Mendelian Genetics
P site
15.5: Translation
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
Pangaea
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
paraphyletic
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
parasite
25.6: Community Ecology
parent cell
11.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division
partial dominance
19.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and epistasis
passive transport
6.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion
pedigree
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares
pelagic realm
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
periodic table of elements
2.1: Atoms
peripheral protein
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
permafrost
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
peroxisome
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and
Peroxisomes
Peter and Rosemary Grant
21: Introduction to Evolution
pH scale
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases
phagocytosis
6.6: Active Transport
pharmacogenomics
20.5: Applying Genomics
phenotype
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
19.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together
phenylketonuria (PKU)
19.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one
trait
pheromone
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
Phosphatase
7.5: Response to the signal

9 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531phosphate group
12.1: DNA Structure
phosphodiester
12.1: DNA Structure
phosphodiesterase
7.5: Response to the signal
phospholipid
3.2: Lipids
phosphorus cycle
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
phosphorylation
7.4: Propagation of the signal
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
photic zone
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
photoautotroph
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
photon
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
photosynthesis
10.1: Putting photosynthesis into context
photosystem
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
photosystem II
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions
phylogenetic tree
4.3: The Diversity of Life
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
phylogeny
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
phylum
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
physical map
20.4: Mapping Genomes
pinocytosis
6.6: Active Transport
pioneer species
25.6: Community Ecology
plagiarism
1.5: Using Credible Sources
planktivore
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
plasma membrane
5.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
plasmid
20.2: Cloning
plasmids
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
plasmodesma
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular juncti ons
pleiotropy
19.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one
trait
ploidy
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or
Chromosomes
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
polar covalent bond
2.2: Chemical Bonds
2.3: Waterpolyandry
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
polygyny
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and PCR
polymorphic
22.2: Population Genetics
polymorphisms
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
22.2: Population Genetics
polyphyletic
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
polyploid
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
polyploidy
21.2: Formation of New Species
polysaccharide
3.1: Carbohydrates
polytomy
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
population
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
21: Introduction to Evolution
24.1: The Scope of Ecology
population density
25.1: Population Demography
population growth rate
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
population size
25.1: Population Demography
population variation
22.2: Population Genetics
postzygotic barrier
21.2: Formation of New Species
potential energy
8.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy
predator
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
25.6: Community Ecology
preservation
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity
prezygotic barrier
21.2: Formation of New Species
primary active transport
6.6: Active Transport
primary consumer
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
primary producer
25.6: Community Ecology
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
primary succession
25.6: Community Ecology
primer
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
productivity
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
prokaryote
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
10.6: Photosynthesis in Prokaryotesprokaryotic cell
5.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
5.16: Summary Table of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic
Cells and Functions
prometaphase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
promoter
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
promoter region
16.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
prophase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
protein
3.3: Proteins
5.15: The Production of a Protein
14: Mutations
15: Protein Synthesis
protein signature
20.6: Proteomics
protein synthesis
15.5: Translation
proteomics
20.6: Proteomics
proton
2.1: Atoms
punctuated equilibrium
21.3: Speciation
Punnett square
18.4: Monohybrid Cross and the Punnett Square
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares
purines
12.1: DNA Structure
pyrimidine
12.1: DNA Structure
pyruvate
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis
Pyruvate Oxidation
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of
Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
Q
quadrat
25.1: Population Demography
qualitative data
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
quantitative data
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
R
radiation hybrid mapping
20.4: Mapping Genomes
radioactive isotope
2.1: Atoms
Rb
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
reading frame
15.1: The Genetic Code
receptor
6.1: The Plasma Membrane
7.2: Types of Receptors

10 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531recessive
18.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the
Basics of Heredity
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color
19.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait
reciprocal cross
18.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the
Basics of Heredity
recombinant
17.2: Meiosis I
recombinant DNA
20.2: Cloning
recombinant protein
20.2: Cloning
recombination
18.9: Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent
Assortment
Red List
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity
reduced fitness
21: Introduction to Evolution
reduction
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the
Calvin Cycle)
reduction division
17.4: Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis
reflex action
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
reinforcement
21.3: Speciation
relative fitness
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
relative species abundance
25.6: Community Ecology
repeat expansion
14.5: Types of Mutations
replication fork
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
reproductive cloning
20.2: Cloning
reproductive isolation
21.2: Formation of New Species
residence time
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
resilience (ecological)
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
resistance (ecological)
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
resolving power
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
restriction enzyme
20.2: Cloning
restriction fragment length polymorphism
20.4: Mapping Genomes
retinoblastoma protein
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
RFLP
20.4: Mapping Genomes
Ribonucleic Acid (RNA)
3.4: Nucleic Acidsribosome
5.4: Ribosomes
14.1: How do genes direct the production of
proteins?
15.5: Translation
ring of life
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
rmax
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
RNA polymerase
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
RNA primase
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
RNA stability
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation
rooted
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
rough endoplasmic reticulum
5.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum
rubisco
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the
Calvin Cycle)
S
S phase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
Sargassum
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
savanna
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
scatter plot
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
scientific law
1.1: The Nature of Science
scientific method
1.1: The Nature of Science
1.2: The Scientific Process
scientific theory
1.1: The Nature of Science
second messenger
7.4: Propagation of the signal
secondary active transport
6.6: Active Transport
secondary consumer
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
secondary plant compound
27.2: The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
secondary succession
25.6: Community Ecology
selectively permeable
6.2: Transport Across Membranes
semelparity
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection
semiconservative replication
11.2: An Overview of DNA Replication
13: DNA Replication
sequence mapping
20.4: Mapping Genomes
sex chromosome
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disordersexual dimorphism
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
sexual reproduction
21: Introduction to Evolution
21.2: Formation of New Species
sexual selection
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
shared ancestral character
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
shared derived character
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships
shotgun sequencing
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing
signal
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
signal transduction
7.2: Types of Receptors
7.4: Propagation of the signal
signaling pathway
7.4: Propagation of the signal
silent mutation
13.3: DNA Repair
14.5: Types of Mutations
simulation model
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
single nucleotide polymorphism
20.4: Mapping Genomes
sister chromatids
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
sister taxa
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
sliding clamp
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
small nuclear RNA
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
smooth endoplasmic reticulum
5.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum
SNP
20.4: Mapping Genomes
sociobiology
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
solar intensity
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
solute
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
solvent
2.3: Water
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
somatic cell
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
17.1: Overview of Meiosis
somatic mutations
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur
speciation
21.2: Formation of New Species
species
21.2: Formation of New Species
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth

11 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531species concepts
21.2: Formation of New Species
species dispersion pattern
25.1: Population Demography
Species evenness
25.6: Community Ecology
species richness
25.6: Community Ecology
spliceosome
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing
splicing
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing
spontaneous mutation
13.3: DNA Repair
stability
21.3: Speciation
stabilizing selection
22.3: Adaptive Evolution
starch
3.1: Carbohydrates
start codon
15.1: The Genetic Code
steroid
3.2: Lipids
steroid hormone
7.3: Types of signaling molecules
stomata
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
stop codon
15.1: The Genetic Code
stroma
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
subduction
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
subjective data
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables
substrate
8.6: Enzymes
subtropical desert
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
sucrose
9.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose
sulfur cycle
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
supercoiling
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell
12.2: DNA organization inside a cell
surface tension
2.3: Water
survivorship curve
25.1: Population Demography
symbiosis
25.6: Community Ecology
sympatric speciation
21.2: Formation of New Species
synapsis
17.2: Meiosis IT
TALENs
15.6: Optional Section - Micropigs
taxis
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
taxon
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
taxonomy
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth
TCA cycle
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of
Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle
telomerase
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
telomere
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
telophase
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
temperate forest
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
temperate grassland
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
temperature
2.3: Water
24.2: Biogeography
template strand
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
temporal isolation
21.2: Formation of New Species
termination
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription
terrestrial biomes
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
tertiary consumer
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
test cross
18.5: Laws of Inheritance
tetrad
17.2: Meiosis I
theory
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
thermocline
24.2: Biogeography
thermodynamics
8.1: Energy
thylakoid
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast
tight junction
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular juncti ons
tissue
2: Chemistry for Biology
4.2: Levels of Organization
tonicity
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
topoisomerase
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
torpor
24.2: Biogeography
Tragedy of the Commons
27.3: Threats to Biodiversitytrait
18.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the
Basics of Heredity
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
transcription
14.1: How do genes direct the production of
proteins?
transcription factor
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation
16.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
transcriptional repressor
16.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
transgenic
20.3: Genetic Engineering
translation
14.1: How do genes direct the production of
proteins?
15.5: Translation
tree of life
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
triploid
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or
Chromosomes
trisomy
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or
Chromosomes
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
tRNA
14.1: How do genes direct the production of
proteins?
15.5: Translation
trophic level
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems
trophic level transfer efficiency
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems
tropical rainforest
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes
tumor suppressor gene
11.6: Cancer and the cell cycle
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation
tumor suppressors
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle
turgor pressure
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis
U
ubiquitin group
16.5: Eukaryotic Translational and PostTranslational Regulation
unified cell theory
5.1: How Cells Are Studied
V
vacuole
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and
Peroxisomes
van der Waals interaction
2.2: Chemical Bonds
variable
1.2: The Scientific Process
variable number of tandem repeats
20.4: Mapping Genomes

12 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64531variant of unknown significance
14.4: Do all mutations affect health and
development?
variation
21: Introduction to Evolution
vesicle
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and
Peroxisomes
vestigial structure
21.1: Evidence of Evolution
vicariance
21.2: Formation of New Species
VNTRs
20.4: Mapping GenomesW
water
2.3: Water
24.2: Biogeography
water cycle
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles
Watson and Crick
12.1: DNA Structure
wavelength
10.3: Light and Pigments
wax
3.2: Lipids
weather
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
web of life
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Treewetlands
24.4: Aquatic Biomes
wild type
18.7: Multiple Alleles
X
X inactivation
17.5: Errors in Meiosis
Z
zero population growth
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
zygote
19.1: Introduction to Genetics
21.2: Formation of New Species

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/64532Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/97932Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: Principles of Biology
Webpages: 203
All licenses found:
CC BY 4.0: 98% (199 pages)
Undeclared: 2% (4 pages)
By Page
Principles of Biology - CC BY 4.0
Front Matter - CC BY 4.0
TitlePage - CC BY 4.0
InfoPage - CC BY 4.0
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Class Descriptions - CC BY 4.0
Licensing - Undeclared
BIOLOGY 211: Cell Biology - CC BY 4.0
1: The Process of Science - CC BY 4.0
1.1: The Nature of Science - CC BY 4.0
1.2: The Scientific Process - CC BY 4.0
1.3: Presenting Data - Graphs and Tables - CC BY
4.0
1.4: Writing for Science - CC BY 4.0
1.5: Using Credible Sources - CC BY 4.0
2: Chemistry for Biology - CC BY 4.0
2.1: Atoms - CC BY 4.0
2.2: Chemical Bonds - CC BY 4.0
2.3: Water - CC BY 4.0
2.4: Buffers, pH, Acids, and Bases - CC BY 4.0
2.5: Absolutely Necessary Chemistry Summary CC BY 4.0
3: Biological Molecules - CC BY 4.0
3.1: Carbohydrates - CC BY 4.0
3.2: Lipids - CC BY 4.0
3.3: Proteins - CC BY 4.0
3.4: Nucleic Acids - CC BY 4.0
3.5: Biological Macromolecule Practice Questions
- CC BY 4.0
4: What is Life? - CC BY 4.0
4.1: What makes something living? - CC BY 4.0
4.2: Levels of Organization - CC BY 4.0
4.3: The Diversity of Life - CC BY 4.0
5: Cell Structure and Function - CC BY 4.0
5.1: How Cells Are Studied - CC BY 4.05.2: Comparing Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
- CC BY 4.0
5.3: The Plasma Membrane and The Cytoplasm CC BY 4.0
5.4: Ribosomes - CC BY 4.0
5.5: The Cytoskeleton - CC BY 4.0
5.6: Flagella and Cilia - CC BY 4.0
5.7: The Endomembrane System - CC BY 4.0
5.8: The Nucleus - CC BY 4.0
5.9: The Endoplasmic Reticulum - CC BY 4.0
5.10: The Golgi Apparatus - CC BY 4.0
5.11: Vesicles and Vacuoles, Lysosomes, and
Peroxisomes - CC BY 4.0
5.12: Mitochondria and Chloroplasts - CC BY 4.0
5.13: The Cell Wall - CC BY 4.0
5.14: Extracellular matrix and intercellular
junctions - CC BY 4.0
5.15: The Production of a Protein - CC BY 4.0
5.16: Summary Table of Prokaryotic and
Eukaryotic Cells and Functions - CC BY 4.0
6: The Cell Membrane and Transport - CC BY 4.0
6.1: The Plasma Membrane - CC BY 4.0
6.2: Transport Across Membranes - CC BY 4.0
6.3: Passive Transport - Diffusion - CC BY 4.0
6.4: Passive Transport - Facilitated Transport - CC
BY 4.0
6.5: Passive Transport - Osmosis - CC BY 4.0
6.6: Active Transport - CC BY 4.0
7: Cell Communication - CC BY 4.0
7.1: A Summary of Cell Communication - CC BY
4.0
7.2: Types of Receptors - CC BY 4.0
7.3: Types of signaling molecules - CC BY 4.0
7.4: Propagation of the signal - CC BY 4.0
7.5: Response to the signal - CC BY 4.0
8: Enzyme-catalyzed reactions - CC BY 4.0

2 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/979328.1: Energy - CC BY 4.0
8.2: Metabolic Pathways - CC BY 4.0
8.3: Thermodynamics - CC BY 4.0
8.4: Potential and Kinetic Energy - CC BY 4.0
8.5: Free and Activation Energy - CC BY 4.0
8.6: Enzymes - CC BY 4.0
8.7: Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways CC BY 4.0
9: How cells obtain energy - CC BY 4.0
9.1: Energy in Living Systems - CC BY 4.0
9.2: From Mouth to Molecule - Digestion - CC BY
4.0
9.3: Metabolism - CC BY 4.0
9.4: An overview of Cellular Respiration - CC BY
4.0
9.5: Aerobic Respiration, Part 1 - Glycolysis - CC
BY 4.0
9.6: Aerobic Respiration, Part 2 - Oxidation of
Pyruvate and The Citric Acid Cycle - CC BY 4.0
9.7: Aerobic Respiration, Part 3 - Oxidative
Phosphorylation - CC BY 4.0
9.8: Metabolism without Oxygen - Fermentation CC BY 4.0
9.9: Metabolism of molecules other than glucose CC BY 4.0
9.10: Anaerobic Cellular Respiration in
Prokaryotes - CC BY 4.0
10: Photosynthesis - CC BY 4.0
10.1: Putting photosynthesis into context - CC BY
4.0
10.2: The structure of the chloroplast - CC BY 4.0
10.3: Light and Pigments - CC BY 4.0
10.4: The Light-Dependent Reactions - CC BY 4.0
10.5: The Light Independent Reactions (aka the
Calvin Cycle) - CC BY 4.0
10.6: Photosynthesis in Prokaryotes - CC BY 4.0
11: Cell Division - Binary Fission and Mitosis - CC
BY 4.0
11.1: How DNA is arranged in a cell - CC BY 4.0
11.2: An Overview of DNA Replication - CC BY
4.0
11.3: Prokaryotic Cell Division - CC BY 4.0
11.4: The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle - CC BY 4.0
11.5: Control of the Cell Cycle - CC BY 4.0
11.6: Cancer and the cell cycle - CC BY 4.0
BIOLOGY 212: Genetics - CC BY 4.0
12: DNA and Chromosome Structure - CC BY 4.0
12.1: DNA Structure - CC BY 4.012.2: DNA organization inside a cell - CC BY 4.0
12.3: Homologous Chromosomes and Sexual
Reproduction - CC BY 4.0
13: DNA Replication - Undeclared
13.1: DNA Replication in Prokaryotes - CC BY
4.0
13.2: DNA Replication in Eukaryotes - CC BY 4.0
13.3: DNA Repair - CC BY 4.0
14: Mutations - CC BY 4.0
14.1: How do genes direct the production of
proteins? - CC BY 4.0
14.2: How Gene Mutations Occur - CC BY 4.0
14.3: Introduction to Genetic Disorders - CC BY
4.0
14.4: Do all mutations affect health and
development? - CC BY 4.0
14.5: Types of Mutations - CC BY 4.0
14.6: Multifactorial Disorders and Genetic
Predispositions - CC BY 4.0
14.7: Changes in Numbers of Genes or
Chromosomes - CC BY 4.0
15: Protein Synthesis - CC BY 4.0
15.1: The Genetic Code - CC BY 4.0
15.2: Prokaryotic Transcription - CC BY 4.0
15.3: Eukaryotic Transcription - CC BY 4.0
15.4: Eukaryotic RNA Processing - CC BY 4.0
15.5: Translation - CC BY 4.0
15.6: Optional Section - Micropigs - CC BY 4.0
16: Gene Regulation - CC BY 4.0
16.1: Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene
Expression - CC BY 4.0
16.2: Eukaryotic epigenetic regulation - CC BY
4.0
16.3: Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation - CC
BY 4.0
16.4: Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Regulation CC BY 4.0
16.5: Eukaryotic Translational and PostTranslational Regulation - CC BY 4.0
16.6: Cancer and Gene Regulation - CC BY 4.0
17: Meiosis - Sexual Reproduction - CC BY 4.0
17.1: Overview of Meiosis - CC BY 4.0
17.2: Meiosis I - CC BY 4.0
17.3: Meiosis II - CC BY 4.0
17.4: Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis - CC BY 4.0
17.5: Errors in Meiosis - CC BY 4.0
18: Patterns of Inheritance - CC BY 4.0
18.1: Mendelian Genetics - CC BY 4.0

3 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/9793218.2: Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the
Basics of Heredity - CC BY 4.0
18.3: Phenotypes and Genotypes - CC BY 4.0
18.4: Monohybrid Cross and the Punnett Square CC BY 4.0
18.5: Laws of Inheritance - CC BY 4.0
18.6: Extensions of the Laws of Inheritance - CC
BY 4.0
18.7: Multiple Alleles - CC BY 4.0
18.8: Sex-Linked Traits - CC BY 4.0
18.9: Linked Genes Violate the Law of
Independent Assortment - CC BY 4.0
18.10: Epistasis - CC BY 4.0
19: Genetics - Dog Coat Color - CC BY 4.0
19.1: Introduction to Genetics - CC BY 4.0
19.2: Pedigrees and Punnett Squares - CC BY 4.0
19.3: Black fur color - a dominant trait - CC BY
4.0
19.4: Yellow fur color - a recessive trait - CC BY
4.0
19.5: Epistasis - the relationship between black,
brown, and yellow fur - CC BY 4.0
19.6: Brindle color - partial dominance and
epistasis - CC BY 4.0
19.7: Incomplete dominance - when traits blend CC BY 4.0
19.8: White spotting - when there's more than two
alleles - CC BY 4.0
19.9: Hemophilia - a sex-linked disorder - CC BY
4.0
19.10: Overall phenotypes - putting it all together
- CC BY 4.0
19.11: KIT - embryonic lethality - CC BY 4.0
19.12: It's not all in the genes - the effect of
environment - CC BY 4.0
19.13: Pleiotropy - one gene affects more than one
trait - CC BY 4.0
20: Biotechnology - CC BY 4.0
20.1: DNA Isolation, Gel Electrophoresis, and
PCR - CC BY 4.0
20.2: Cloning - CC BY 4.0
20.3: Genetic Engineering - CC BY 4.0
20.4: Mapping Genomes - CC BY 4.0
20.5: Applying Genomics - CC BY 4.0
20.6: Proteomics - CC BY 4.0
20.7: Whole Genome Sequencing - CC BY 4.0
BIOLOGY 213: Ecology and Evolution - CC BY 4.0
21: Introduction to Evolution - CC BY 4.0
21.1: Evidence of Evolution - CC BY 4.021.2: Formation of New Species - CC BY 4.0
21.3: Speciation - CC BY 4.0
22: Evolution in Action - CC BY 4.0
22.1: Population Evolution - CC BY 4.0
22.2: Population Genetics - CC BY 4.0
22.3: Adaptive Evolution - CC BY 4.0
23: Evolutionary Relationships - CC BY 4.0
23.1: Organizing Life on Earth - CC BY 4.0
23.2: Determining Evolutionary Relationships CC BY 4.0
23.3: Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree - CC
BY 4.0
24: Ecology and the Biosphere - CC BY 4.0
24.1: The Scope of Ecology - CC BY 4.0
24.2: Biogeography - CC BY 4.0
24.3: Terrestrial Biomes - CC BY 4.0
24.4: Aquatic Biomes - CC BY 4.0
24.5: Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change - CC BY 4.0
25: Population and Community Ecology - CC BY 4.0
25.1: Population Demography - CC BY 4.0
25.2: Population Dynamics and Regulation - CC
BY 4.0
25.3: Life Histories and Natural Selection - CC
BY 4.0
25.4: Environmental Limits to Population Growth
- CC BY 4.0
25.5: Human Population Growth - CC BY 4.0
25.6: Community Ecology - CC BY 4.0
25.7: Behavioral Biology - Proximate and
Ultimate Causes of Behavior - CC BY 4.0
26: Ecosystems - CC BY 4.0
26.1: Ecology of Ecosystems - CC BY 4.0
26.2: Energy Flow through Ecosystems - CC BY
4.0
26.3: Biogeochemical Cycles - CC BY 4.0
27: Conservation Biology and Biodiversity - CC BY
4.0
27.1: The Biodiversity Crisis - CC BY 4.0
27.2: The Importance of Biodiversity to Human
Life - CC BY 4.0
27.3: Threats to Biodiversity - CC BY 4.0
27.4: Preserving Biodiversity - CC BY 4.0
Back Matter - CC BY 4.0
Index - CC BY 4.0
Glossary - CC BY 4.0
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared

4 https://bio.libretexts.org/@go/page/97932